Adopting Ordinance
Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE. [New]
This book shall be known and may be cited as the "The Revised General
Ordinances of the Town of Kearny, 1997," and is herein referred to as the
"Revision" or "Code."
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS. [New]
For the purpose of this Revision and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require:
ADMINISTRATOR — Shall mean the Administrator duly appointed pursuant
to Chapter 2, Administration, subsection 2-6.2 or any assistant or acting
administrator serving in place of the Administrator.
CLERK OR TOWN CLERK — Shall mean the Municipal Clerk duly appointed
pursuant to law.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organizational unit of the Town
government established or designated by ordinance or this revision as
a department, together with any agency or instrumentality of the Town
government assigned to such organizational unit by the Town Council.
DIRECTOR AND/OR SUPERINTENDENT — Shall mean the administrative
head of a department.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or chapter of this revision.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation where an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath. In such cases, the words swear and sworn
shall be construed to be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed.
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL — And the title of the officer or official shall be
construed as if the words "of the Town of Kearny" followed it.
AO:1
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, and including this revision, so long as it shall have been
adopted by the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so
long as it shall remain in force and effect pursuant to law.
OWNER — When applied to a building or land shall include any part owner,
any corporation, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint
tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity, acting
either for himself/herself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARES, PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC
PLACES — Shall severally be construed to mean any and every public
ground, public square, public park or other public place within the Town.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and
the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding
parkways.
STREET — Shall include a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk and crosswalk, and every
class of road, square, place or Municipal parking field used by the general
public.
TOWN — Shall mean the Town of Kearny in the County of Hudson and the
State of New Jersey.
TOWN COUNCIL OR COUNCIL — Shall mean the duly elected members of
Council of the Town of Kearny.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [New]
For the purpose of this Code and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day and if the last day be a Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the offices of the Town are closed, that day shall
be excluded.
§ 1-2 KEARNY CODE § 1-3
AO:2
"Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any other
mode of communication using paper or similar material which is in general
use, as well as legible hand-writing.
Whenever a specific time is used in this Revision, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during
any day in any year.
"Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions of the revision identified by
Arabic numbers and divided by subject matter.
"Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
"Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
"Paragraph" shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter or Arabic number.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY. [1973 Code § 1-10]
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Code shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this Code.
§ 1-5. PENALTY.
§ 1-5.1. Maximum Penalty. [New]
For violation of any provision of this chapter, and any other chapter of
this revision, or any other ordinance of the Town where no specific penalty
is provided regarding the section violated, the maximum penalty shall,
on conviction of a violation, be one or more of the following: a fine not
exceeding $1,250 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days; or
a period of community service for a period not exceeding 90 days. (N.J.S.A.
40:49-5)
§ 1-5.2. Separate Violations. [New]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this chapter or any other ordinance of the Town exists shall
constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-5.3. Application. [New]
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. Any lesser penalty,
§ 1-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-5.3
AO:3
including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a
particular case or violation.
§ 1-5.4. Minimum Penalty. [New]
The Town Council may prescribe that, for the violation of any particular
Code provision or ordinance, at least a minimum penalty shall be imposed
which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed at an amount not exceeding
$100. (N.J.S.A. 40:49-5)
§ 1-5.5. Repeat Offenses. [New]
Any person who is convicted of violating an ordinance within one year of the
date of a previous violation of the same ordinance and who was fined for
the previous violation, shall be sentenced to an additional fine as a repeat
offender. The additional fine as imposed upon a person for repeated offense
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine imposed for
a violation of the ordinance, but shall be calculated separately from the fine
imposed for the initial conviction of violating the ordinance.
§ 1-5.6. Default of Payment of Fine. [New]
Any person convicted of the violation of any provision of this Code or any
ordinance may, in the discretion of the Court by which he was convicted,
and in default of the payment of any fine imposed therefor, be imprisoned
by the County jail or place of detention provided by the Town, for any term
not exceeding 90 days, or be required to perform community service for a
period not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-6. MAINTENANCE AND SALE OF CODE BOOK.
§ 1-6.1. Code Book to Be Kept Up-to-Date. [1973 Code § 1-7]
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk, or someone authorized and directed
by him, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the Code
required to be filed in his office for the use of the public. All changes in
the Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective date of this
codification, which shall be adopted specifically as part of the Code, shall,
when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to the Code book, at which
time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-6.2. Sale of Code Book. [1973 Code § 1-8]
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from
the Town Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the
Town Council, who may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-5.3 KEARNY CODE § 1-6.3
AO:4
§ 1-6.3. Altering or Tampering with Code; Penalties for Violation.
[1973 Code § 1-9; New]
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Town of
Kearny to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to the penalty stated in Section
1-5, Penalty, of this chapter.
§ 1-7. SEAL OF THE TOWN OF KEARNY.
§ 1-7.1. Description. [1973 Code § 42-1]
The seal of the Town of Kearny shall be engraved on silver and shall be
round, of 1 3/4 inches in diameter and 1/4 of an inch thick, and said seal
is described as follows: In the center, the figure of Major General Philip
Kearny is mounted on a horse with both on a pedestal inscribed "Major
General Philip Kearny, 1814-1862"; above the General, in a semicircle, are
the words "Named for a Gallant Leader"; above said words and also in a
semicircle are the words "Incorporated as a Township 1867"; below the
pedestal, in a semicircle, are the words "Incorporated as a Town 1899."
Encircling the whole are the words "Town of Kearny" at the top of the seal
and the words "Hudson County, New Jersey" at the bottom, and two stars
on each side.
§ 1-7.2. Seal Established; Availability for Inspection. [1973 Code
§ 42-2]
The aforesaid described seal, a picture or facsimile of which is annexed
hereto and is available for inspection in the Town Clerk's office of the Town
of Kearny, shall be and is hereby established and declared to be the common
seal of the Town of Kearny.
§ 1-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-7.3
AO:5
§ 1-7.3. Authorized to Use Town Seal. [Ord. No. 2001-O-45]
The Mayor, members of the Council, the Town Clerk, the Business
Administrator, the Chief Financial Officer, the Town Attorney, the Tax
Assessor, the Tax Collector, the Town Engineer, the Police Chief, the Fire
Chief, all department heads, and others who may hereafter be designated by
resolution of the Mayor and Council, are hereby authorized to use, exhibit
or display a replica or facsimile of the Town Seal on their business cards
and stationary, but only when the same are used for official Town business.
§ 1-7.4. Other Use of Town Seal Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2001-O-45]
No other person or entity is authorized to use the Town Seal and no other
use of the Seal is authorized.
§ 1-7.5. Use for Political Purposes Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2001-O-45]
Neither the Town Seal, or a replica or facsimile of it, may be used on
any political document, newsletter or journal or in connection with any
document, newsletter or journal the preparation or reproduction of which is
paid for with political funds, or the distribution or promulgation of which is
paid for with the political funds.
§ 1-7.6. Penalty for Violation. [Ord. No. 2001-O-45]
Any person or entity not authorized to use, exhibit or display the Town Seal,
who uses, exhibits or displays the Seal, in whole or in part, or, any person
or entity who is authorized to use the Seal, but uses it in violation of the
provisions of this section, shall be subject to a fine of $500 for each day the
violation occurs.
§ 1-7.7. Permitted Use of Town Seal. [Ord. No. 2001-O-45]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the Town Clerk is
hereby authorized to give written consent on behalf of the Town to the use
of reproductions of the Town Seal in the preparation of commemorative
items for historical, civic and educational purposes. Each such consent shall
be in writing and shall specify the extent of each such use to prevent
inappropriate or misleading use of the Seal and to assure a high quality
reproduction thereof. The Town Clerk shall require that every application
for such consent be accompanied by such information and specifications as
shall be deemed necessary to assure compliance. Each application shall be
a $10 filing fee and shall be valid for no longer than one year from the date
of issuance.
§ 1-7.3 KEARNY CODE § 1-7.7
AO:6
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
Kearny is governed under the Town form of government outlined
in Chapter 62 of Title 40A of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated.
The administrative chapter has been drafted in conformity with the
Statutes and in many instances provisions have been restated. Other
enabling laws relevant to this chapter are N.J.S.A. 2A:9-7, et seq.,
Municipal Court; N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69, Zoning Board of Adjustment;
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23, Planning Board; N.J.S.A. 26:3-1, Board of Health;
and N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, Police Department and N.J.S.A. 40A:14-7,
118, Fire Department.
For Statutes requiring the taking of oaths of office and requiring
bond for certain officers and employees, see Local Fiscal Affairs Law,
N.J.S.A. 490A:5-33 et seq.
For salary grades and ranges, wages, compensation and fees of all
officers and employees of the Town, see annual Salary Ordinances
of the Town. Such ordinances are not included in these Revised
Ordinances, but are saved from repeal. See Adopting Ordinance.
§ 1-7.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-7.7
AO:7

ARTICLE I
Government of the Town
§ 2-1. MAYOR AND TOWN COUNCIL.
§ 2-1.1. Form of Government. [New]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:62-1, the Town of Kearny is organized under the
Town form of government, which consists of eight members of Council and
the Mayor, who is also the Councilman-at-large.
§ 2-1.2. Election of Council. [New; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-04]
The Council shall consist of eight members, two of which are elected from
each of four wards. Council Members shall be elected for a term of four
years. The election for Council Members shall be held in the year in which
their respective terms expire. No person shall be permitted to vote at any
such election unless he is an actual resident of the election district in which
he offers his vote.
§ 2-1.3. Election of the Mayor. [New; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-04]
The Mayor shall be elected by the voters of the Town of Kearny and shall be
known as the Councilman-at-large. He shall serve for a term of four years.
§ 2-1.4. Powers of the Mayor. [New]
a. The Councilman-at-large shall be officially known and designated as the
Mayor of the Town of Kearny. He shall be so designated in all official
documents and instruments of every kind, and shall sign all ordinances,
warrants, bonds, notes, contracts and all other official documents and
instruments by that title.
b. The Mayor shall be the head of the municipal government.
c. The Mayor shall have all those powers placed in the Mayor by general
law.
d. The Mayor shall be known as the Chairman of the Council, preside at all
its meetings and possess all the powers of a member of Council.
e. Every ordinance adopted by the Town Council shall be presented to the
Mayor within five days after its passage, Sundays excepted, by the
Town Clerk. The Mayor shall, within 10 days after receiving the
ordinance, either approve it by affixing his signature thereto or return it
to the Council by delivering it to the Clerk together with a statement
setting forth his objections thereto. No ordinance shall take effect
without the Mayor's approval, unless the Mayor fails to return the
ordinance to the Council, as prescribed above, or unless the Council,
upon consideration of the ordinance following its return, shall, by a vote
of 2/3 of all members of the Council, resolve to override the veto.
§ 2-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-1.4
AO:9
§ 2-1.5. Powers of the Council. [New]
§ 2-1.6. Organization; Officers. [New]
f. No ordinance shall be passed except by a vote of a majority of the
members of the Council present at the meeting, provided that at least
four affirmative votes shall be required for such purpose.
a. The Council shall be the legislative body of the municipality.
b. The Council may, subject to general law and the provisions of this act:
1. Pass, adopt, amend and repeal any ordinance or, where permitted,
any resolution for any purpose required for the government of the
Town or for the accomplishment of any public purpose for which
the municipality is authorized to act under general law;
2. Control and regulate the finances of the Town and raise money by
borrowing and taxation;
3. Create such offices and positions as it may deem necessary. The
officers appointed thereto shall perform the duties required by law
and the ordinances of the Council. Other than the Town Attorney,
Engineer, Construction Official, Borough Clerk, Tax Collector and
Tax Assessor, these officers shall serve at the pleasure of the
Council. The Town Attorney, Engineer, Clerk, Tax Collector and Tax
Assessor shall serve for terms as provided in chapter 9 of Title 40A
of the New Jersey Statutes;
4. Investigate any activity of the Town;
5. Remove any officer of the Town, other than those officers except by
law, for cause; and
6. Override a veto of the Mayor by a 2/3 majority of all the members of
the Council.
c. The Council shall have all the executive responsibilities of the Town not
placed, by general law or this act, in the office of the Mayor.
d. The Council may, by ordinance, appoint such subordinate officers as it
may deem necessary, except that the Town Clerk, the Tax Assessor and
the Tax Collector shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council.
e. Every officer appointed pursuant to this section shall hold office during
his official term and until his successor shall have been duly appointed
and qualified.
f. The Town Council may, by ordinance, delegate all or a portion of the
executive responsibilities of the municipality to an Administrator.
a. The Mayor and Council Members of the Town of Kearny shall constitute
the Council thereof. They shall hold an annual meeting on the first day
§ 2-1.4 KEARNY CODE § 2-1.6
AO:10
§ 2-1.7. Council Liaison Members. [1973 Code § 44-1; Ord. No.
2-23-83]
On January 1 of each year, the Governing Body shall, by resolution, appoint
one of its members as liaison to the following Boards and Agencies in the
Town, which liaison member shall serve in that function for a period of one
year.
§ 2-2. through § 2-3. (RESERVED)
of January at 12:00 noon, or during the first seven days of January in
any year.
b. The Mayor, heretofore known as the Councilman-at-large, shall be
Chairman of the Council and preside at all meetings of the Council. In
his absence, the Council may elect one of its own as Chairman for the
time being.
c. The Council shall appoint the times of meetings and determine and
establish the rules of its own proceedings.
d. A majority of the Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction
of business, but a smaller number may meet and adjourn from day to
day.
e. The Mayor or any two Councilmen may call for a special meeting by
written notice to each of the members, served personally or left at the
member's usual place of residence at least 24 hours before the time
appointed for the meeting. No other business than that specified in the
call for the meeting shall be discussed or transacted.
f. The Council may, at its annual meeting, establish for its members such
committees of the Council as will assist it for the ensuing year. (N.J.S.A.
40A:62-3)
a. Board of Health.
b. Industrial Commission.
c. United Veteran's Organizations.
d. Senior Citizen.
e. Museum.
f. Library.
g. Civil Rights Commission.
§ 2-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2
AO:11

ARTICLE II
Council Meetings
§ 2-4. MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL.
§ 2-4.1. Regular Meetings. [1973 Code § 44-2; Ord. No. 1997-29]
The Mayor and Town Council shall, at its annual meeting in January of
each year, adopt a resolution setting forth the schedule for regular Council
meetings, as provided by N.J.S.A. 40A:62-3c.
§ 2-4.2. Committee of the Whole Meeting. [1973 Code § 44-3; Ord.
No. 2-23-83]
The Town Council may also meet as a Committee of the whole on the day
next preceding the regular meeting day.
§ 2-4.3. Presiding Officer. [1973 Code § 44-4; Ord. No. 2-23-83]
The Presiding Officer of the Council shall be the Mayor who shall preserve
strict order and decorum at all meetings of the Council. He shall state every
question coming before the Council, announce the decision of the Council
on all subjects and decide all questions of order, subject, however, to an
appeal to the Council, in which a majority vote of the Council shall govern
and conclusively determine such question of order. The Mayor shall vote
on all questions, his name being called last. He shall sign all ordinance
and resolutions adopted by Council during his presence. In the event of the
absence of the Mayor, the acting Mayor chosen from the Council shall sign
all ordinances or resolutions as then adopted.
§ 2-4.4. Call to Order. [1973 Code § 44-5; Ord. No. 2-23-83]
The Mayor, or in his absence the Acting Mayor, or Presiding Officer, shall
call the Council to order.
§ 2-4.5. Order of Business. [1973 Code § 44-6; Ord. No. 2-23-83]
a. All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the
public. The business of the Council at all regular or special meetings
shall be in the following order:
1. Open Public Meeting Act Statement.
2. Roll call.
3. Salute to flag.
4. Public hearings and bids, if any.
5. Communications.
6. Reports of officers.
§ 2-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-4.5
AO:13
§ 2-4.6. Reading of Minutes; Bills and Payrolls. [1973 Code § 44-7;
Ord. No. 2-23-83]
Unless a reading of the minutes, bills and payrolls is requested by a member
of the Council, such minutes, bills or payrolls may be approved as typed
without reading.
§ 2-4.7. Rules of Debate. [1973 Code § 44-8; Ord. No. 2-23-83]
7. Reports of committee.
8. Unfinished business.
9. New business.
10. Special resolutions.
11. Miscellaneous.
12. Adjournment.
b. Whenever the Council meets as a Committee of the whole, the business
shall be in the following order:
1. Open Public Meetings Act Statement.
2. Roll call.
3. Salute to flag.
4. Communications.
5. Reports of committees.
6. Questions for the department heads, or the Mayor and Council.
7. Adjournment.
a. Mayor. The Mayor or Presiding Officer, as the case may be, may move,
second and debate from the chair, subject only to such limitations of
debate as are by these rules imposed on all members of the Council,
and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a
Councilman by reason of his acting as Presiding Officer.
b. Recognition. Every member of the Council desiring to speak shall
address the chair, and upon recognition by the Presiding Officer, shall
confine himself to the questions under debate, avoiding all personalities
and indecorous language.
c. Interruptions. A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted
when speaking unless it be to call him to order by the Mayor or another
member of the Council, or as herein otherwise provided. If a member,
while speaking, be called to order by the Mayor or Presiding Officer, he
§ 2-4.5 KEARNY CODE § 2-4.7
AO:14
§ 2-4.8. Addressing the Council. [1973 Code § 44-9; Ord. No.
2-23-83; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-60 § 1]
Any person desiring to address the Council at a meeting of the Committee
of the whole or at a public hearing shall first secure the recognition of the
Mayor or Presiding Officer to do so.
§ 2-4.9. Manner of Addressing the Council; Time Limit. [1973 Code
§ 44-10; Ord. No. 2-23-83; Ord. No. 1997-30 § 1]
Each person addressing the Council at a meeting shall step up to the rail
or microphone as the case may be and shall give his or her name and
address in an audible tone of voice for the record. All remarks shall be
addressed to the Council or Department Head as a body through the Mayor
or Presiding Officer and not to any member thereof. No person other than
the Council or Department Head and the person having the floor, shall be
permitted to enter into any discussion, either directly or through a member
of the Council, without the permission of the Mayor or Presiding Officer.
shall cease speaking until the question of order be determined, and if
in order, he shall be permitted to proceed.
d. Closing Debate. Either the Mayor or Presiding Officer or the
Councilman moving adoption of an ordinance or resolution shall have
the privilege of closing debate.
e. Motion to Reconsider. A motion to reconsider any action taken by the
Council may be made only on the day such action was taken. It may be
either immediately during the same session or at a recessed or
adjourned session thereof. Such motion must be made by a member
who is on the prevailing side of the vote taken, but may be seconded by
any member, and may be made at any time and shall have precedence
over all other motions or while a member has the floor; it shall be
debatable. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any member of
the Council from making or remaking the same or any other motion at a
subsequent meeting of the Council.
a. Written Communications. Interested parties or their authorized
representatives may address the Council by a written communication
on any matter concerning the Town's business. All communications are
to be received by 4:00 p.m. Monday preceding the second and fourth
Wednesday of each month.
b. Oral Communications. Interested parties or their authorized
representatives may address the Council by oral communications on
any matter concerning the Town's business, or on any matter over
which the Council has control; provided, however, that preference shall
be given to those persons who may have notified the Town Clerk at least
24 hours in advance of their desire to speak in order that the same may
appear on the agenda of the Council.
§ 2-4.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-4.9
AO:15
No question shall be asked of a Council Person or Department Head except
through the Mayor or Presiding Officer.
The Mayor and Council may by resolution set a fair and reasonable limit on
the time which each person shall speak to the Mayor and Council at each
meeting.
§ 2-4.10. Adjournments. [1973 Code § 44-11; Ord. No. 2-23-83]
At a regular or special meeting of the Council, a motion to adjourn shall
always be in order and decided without debate.
§ 2-4.11. Decorum. [1973 Code § 44-12; Ord. No. 2-23-83]
While the Council is in session at any regular or special meeting, public
hearing or meeting as a Committee of the whole, no person shall by
conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings of the peace
of the Council, nor disturb any member or refuse to obey the rulings of the
Mayor or Presiding Officer on the conduct of such meeting.
a. No person shall, at any regular or special meeting of the Council or
meeting of the Council as a Committee of the whole:
1. Make or utter any personal, impertinent, slanderous, or insulting
remarks, or use any offensive language or otherwise become
boisterous or disorderly.
2. Speak before being duly recognized by the Mayor or Presiding
Officer.
3. Continue speaking beyond the time limit or when declared out of
order by the Presiding Officer in accordance with the terms of this
chapter.
4. Use loud, offensive, disorderly, threatening, abusive or insulting
language, or conduct himself or behave in any offensive disorderly,
threatening, abusing or insulting manner.
5. Remain standing or stand within the rail, when there are seats
available, except when addressing the Council and after being duly
recognized.
b. Endorsement of Decorum. The Chief of Police, or such member or
members of the Police Department as he may designate, shall be the
Sergeant-at-Arms of all Council meetings and meetings of the Council
as a Committee of the whole. It shall be the duty of the Sergeant-at-
Arms to maintain order and decorum as provided in this Article, and
any person violating such order and decorum shall be prosecuted under
the provisions hereof, the complaint to be signed by the Sergeant-at-
Arms.
§ 2-4.9 KEARNY CODE § 2-4.11
AO:16
§ 2-4.12. Minutes from March 28, 2006 to Date of Enactment of this
Code Section. [Ord. No. 2016-45]
§ 2-4.13. Minutes after the Date of the Enactment of this Code
Section. [Ord. No. 2016-45]
§ 2-4.14. Approval. [Ord. No. 2016-45]
So that the provisions of subsection 2-4.6 of the Town Code may be complied
with, the Town Clerk shall promptly after each meeting transmit a notice to
the Mayor and each member of the Council that an audio-video recording
of the minutes has been posted on the Town's website and that the minutes
will be offered for approval at the next meeting.
§ 2-4.15. Audibility. [Ord. No. 2016-45]
If for some reason any portion of any recording covered by the provisions of
subsections 2-14.12 or 2-14.13 are inaudible, the gap shall be filled by the
Town Clerk from the Clerk's short or long-hand notes taken at the meeting.
c. Penalty. Any person violating the provisions of this Article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalties stated in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5.
a. Since March 28, 2006 all open meetings of the Mayor and Council,
including special meetings, have been audio-videotaped and unaltered,
unedited recordings thereof are in the custody of the Town Clerk.
b. All of those recordings are hereby designated as the official minutes of
those meetings pursuant to N.J.S.A. 10:4-14 and are approved.
c. The original copies of those recordings in the custody of the Clerk may
never be erased or altered and the Clerk be and hereby is directed, on
an ongoing basis, to implement the most advanced technology available
to insure their integrity and preservation.
a. All open meetings of the Mayor and Council, including special
meetings, shall hereafter be audio-videotaped and an unaltered,
unedited recording of that meeting shall be filed with the Town Clerk on
the day following each meeting.
b. Each of those recordings are hereby declared and designated to be the
official minutes of that meeting pursuant to N.J.S.A. 10:4-14.
c. The original copy of each recording filed with the Clerk may never be
erased or altered and the Clerk be and hereby is directed, on an
ongoing basis, to implement the most advanced technology available to
insure the integrity and preservation of each.
d. The audio-videotape of each meeting shall be posted on the Town's
website promptly after each meeting and remain there for as long as
required by law or regulation.
§ 2-4.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-5
AO:17
§ 2-5. (RESERVED)
§ 2-5 KEARNY CODE § 2-5
AO:18
ARTICLE III
Administrative and Statutory Offices
§ 2-6. ADMINISTRATOR.
§ 2-6.1. Position Created. [1973 Code § 4-1; Ord. No. 2-7-95]
There is hereby created the position of Town Administrator pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-136 and 40A:62-7.
§ 2-6.2. Appointment and Term of Office. [1973 Code § 4-2; Ord. No.
2-7-95]
The Town Administrator shall be appointed by the Mayor and Town Council
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-137. The term of office of the Town Administrator
shall be at the pleasure of the Town Council.
§ 2-6.3. Removal from Office. [1973 Code § 4-3; Ord. No. 2-7-95]
The Town Administrator may be removed by a 2/3 vote of the Town Council.
The resolution of removal shall become effective three months after its
adoption by the Town Council, which may provide that the resolution shall
have immediate effect; provided, however, that the Governing Body shall
cause to be paid to the Administrator forthwith any unpaid balance of
his salary for the next three calendar months following adoption of the
resolution.
§ 2-6.4. Acting Administrator. [1973 Code § 4-4; Ord. No. 2-7-95]
§ 2-6.5. Compensation. [1973 Code § 4-5; Ord. No. 2-7-95]
a. The Administrator, with the consent of the Council, may designate a
Town officer or employee as Acting Administrator to perform the duties
of the office during his absence or disability of less than 10 days. Should
the Administrator not do so, or should the Mayor and Council disagree
with the designated appointment, then the appointment of the Acting
Administrator shall be made pursuant to subsection 2-6.2.
b. On removal or resignation of the Administrator, the Mayor and Council
shall appoint an Acting Administrator to serve for 90 days or until an
Administrator is appointed, pursuant to subsection 2-6.2 above,
whichever is sooner.
a. The Administrator shall receive such salary as may be fixed and
adopted by the Salary Ordinance of the Town of Kearny. He shall
receive no additional compensation for other positions whose titles he
may hold, but shall be reimbursed for all necessary expenses incurred
in the performance of his office.
b. Unless otherwise provided, no Acting Administrator shall be paid more
than his regular salary while serving in that capacity, but he shall be
§ 2-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-6.5
AO:19
§ 2-6.6. Qualifications; Residency. [1973 Code § 4-6; Ord. No.
2-7-95]
§ 2-6.7. Powers and Duties. [1973 Code § 4-7; Ord. No. 2-7-95]
The Administrator shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the Town,
responsible to the Council for the administration of all Town affairs and with
the following powers and duties. The Administrator shall:
reimbursed for all necessary expenses incurred in the performance
of his office. If the Mayor and Council, by resolution, increases the
compensation of the Acting Administrator during his term, such
increased compensation shall not exceed the minimum established in
the Salary Ordinance for the position of Administrator.
a. The Administrator shall be appointed on the basis of executive and
administrative abilities and qualifications. Previous responsible,
successful experience in local government is required, and possession
of a B.A. or B.S. degree in government, public or business
administration or municipal management or a related field of study
from an accredited institution of higher education is required.
b. At the time of appointment, the Administrator need not be a resident of
the Town, but shall, within two years of the date of appointment,
become a resident of the Town, unless the residence outside of the
Town shall be approved by the Council.
a. Attend all meetings of the Mayor and Council and such other meetings
as directed by the Mayor and Council.
b. Provide a liaison between the Mayor and Council and various municipal
boards, agencies and departments of the Town and its professional
advisors.
c. Keep the Mayor and Council currently informed on all matters assigned
to him or otherwise within his jurisdiction.
d. Be responsible for the coordination of interdepartmental operations
and manage the day-to-day operations of the Town Hall by coordinating
and supervising the activities of all employees.
e. Make studies and surveys of the municipal problems of the Town as
shall be assigned by the Mayor and Council, and prepare and submit
written reports of his findings and determinations to the Mayor and
Council for its consideration and action.
f. Have direct responsibility for policy formulation on overall problems
and shall study continually present and future budgets, purchasing
procedures and personnel organization and policies, making
appropriate changes when necessary. He also shall make
recommendations to the Mayor and Council relating thereto as he
deems necessary.
§ 2-6.5 KEARNY CODE § 2-6.7
AO:20
g. Be responsible for continually improving communications between the
various Town personnel, departments, agencies, boards and the Mayor
and Council.
h. See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the Town or its
inhabitants in any Statute or contract are faithfully kept and performed
and, upon knowledge of any violation, call the same to the attention of
the Town Council.
i. Have the authority to recommend the removal, discipline and
appointment of all department heads and all employees, subject to the
personnel policies of the Town and subject to all rules and regulations
of the New Jersey Department of Personnel as presently exists or as
may be promulgated in the future and, pursuant to the rules and
regulations of the Department of Personnel of the State of New Jersey,
serve as the Appointing Authority. In addition, he shall have the
authority to suspend any and all Town employees immediately. In cases
of suspension, it shall be his responsibility to notify 2/3 of the Governing
Body within 24 hours.
j. Continually review and supervise the Town's insurance program.
k. Be responsible for the overall supervision and maintenance of the real
property owned by the Town of Kearny.
l. Aid and assist any Town official employed to procure funds for the Town
from various County, State and Federal agencies. If such official is no
longer employed by the Town, he shall assume those responsibilities
and act as liaison between the Town and the various County, State and
Federal agencies, with respect to all applications for fund and/or
services needed or required by the Town of Kearny.
m. Review daily any complaints concerning the function and obligations of
the Town of Kearny made by any of its residents and he shall have a
permanent record of all complaints and the disposition made.
n. Make any recommendations which he may believe will increase the
efficiency of the operation of the Town.
o. Prepare and present to the Mayor and Council an annual report of the
Town affairs, which shall include a report from each department head.
p. Be responsible for preparation of the operating and capital
improvement budgets for presentation to the Mayor and Council and
for administration of the budget approved by the Governing Body. In
preparing the proposed budget, he shall alert department heads to the
submission of their portion thereof with supporting data he deems
necessary and shall assist the individual Councilpersons and
department heads in contributing their share of the responsibility for
the municipal budget. He shall thoroughly review these requests and
submit his recommendations with respect thereto to the Governing
Body in a timely fashion.
§ 2-6.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-6.7
AO:21
§ 2-6.8. Outside Employment and Activities. [1973 Code § 4-8; Ord.
No. 2-7-95]
The Administrator shall devote full time to the interests of the Town and
shall not hold any other employment, except that nothing herein shall
prevent the Administrator from being appointed as another Town Officer.
The Administrator shall not engage in any political activities, nor make
any financial or other contributions to any local political campaign, lobby
effort or issue pending before the Governing Body, provided, however, that
nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit the Administrator
from appearing before another Governmental Body on behalf of the Town of
Kearny when authorized or directed to do so.
§ 2-6.9. Repealer. [Ord. No. 2-7-95]
Any ordinance or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
q. Review all requisitions from departments for materials, equipment,
supplies and proof of purchase for the Council. He shall require the
various departments to furnish an adequate inventory of all equipment,
materials and supplies in stock and to recommend sale of any surplus,
obsolete or unused equipment when authorized by the Mayor and
Council.
r. Develop and administer a comprehensive personnel program, as
provided by the Council or as provided under department or personnel,
rules and regulations.
s. Implement and enforce the policies of the Mayor and Council with
respect to the compiling and release of public information.
t. Supervise the disbursement of all Town funds and approve all vouchers
and bills before submitting same to the Mayor and Council for final
approval.
u. Act as purchasing agent if required, subject to the provisions of Section
2-15.
v. Conduct annual evaluations of department heads and oversee
evaluation of personnel.
w. Perform such other duties as may be assigned to him from time to time
by the Mayor and Council, which duties may be modified from time to
time by resolution or the Mayor and Council.
x. The Administrator, at the request of the Mayor and Council, shall also
serve as Town Clerk when, and if, the current Town Clerk shall resign or
the position otherwise becomes vacant. Service by the Administrator as
the Town Clerk shall become effective only upon appointment by the
Mayor and Council pursuant to Statute.
§ 2-6.7 KEARNY CODE § 2-7
AO:22
§ 2-7. TOWN CLERK.1
§ 2-7.1. Appointment; Term. [New]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133, there shall be a Town Clerk appointed by
the Mayor and Council. The Clerk's term of office shall be three years.
§ 2-7.2. Qualifications. [New]
No person shall be reappointed as Town Clerk unless he shall have a
Registered Municipal Clerk Certificate issued pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-133 et seq.
§ 2-7.3. General Powers and Duties. [New]
The Town Clerk shall:
§ 2-7.4. Tenure; Removal. [New]
Any person who shall be reappointed Town Clerk subsequent to having
received a registered Municipal Clerk Certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:9-133 et seq. and having served as Town Clerk or performed the duties
a. Perform all of the functions required of Municipal Clerks by the General
Election Law (Title 19 of the New Jersey Statutes) and any other State
law or other Town ordinance, and receive the fees prescribed therefor
for the use of the Town.
b. Until such time as a separate Alcoholic Beverage Control Board may be
established pursuant to law, issue such licenses as may be authorized
by the Mayor and Council pursuant to the State Alcoholic Beverage
Control Law (N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.) and ordinances of the Town.
c. Keep all records, resolutions, ordinances and minutes of the meetings
of the Mayor and Council.
d. Issue all licenses required by law or ordinance, faithfully make all
reports required by law or ordinance to the Mayor and Council and
monthly account for all fees received by him or her.
e. See to it that all ordinances and notices of the Town of Kearny are
properly advertised.
f. Take care of all correspondence of the municipality and of the Mayor
and the Council.
g. Administer oaths.
h. Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and duties
as may be prescribed by law, or ordinance or regulation.
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ordinance No. 2010-9, the position of Town Clerk is established
as a part-time position effective February 23, 2010.
§ 2-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-7.4
AO:23
of Town Clerk for not less than three consecutive years immediately prior
to such reappointment and shall hold his or her office during good behavior
and efficiency, notwithstanding that such reappointment was for a fixed
term of years; and he shall not be removed therefrom for political reasons
but only for good cause shown and in accordance with the provisions set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133.7. No Town Clerk shall acquire tenure of office
unless he or she holds a Municipal Clerk Certificate issued pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 et seq.
§ 2-7.5. Deputy Town Clerk. [Ord. No. 2010-38]
a. Position Created. There hereby is created the position of Deputy Town
Clerk, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-135. (In this ordinance, the term
Deputy Town Clerk shall be interchangeable with the term Deputy
Municipal Clerk and the term Town Clerk shall be interchangeable with
the term Municipal Clerk.)
b. Appointment and Term of Office. The Deputy Town Clerk shall be
appointed by the Mayor and Council pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-135.
The Deputy Town Clerk shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and
Council.
c. Powers. As provided for in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-135a, during the absence or
disability of the Town Clerk, the Deputy Town Clerk shall have all the
powers of the Town Clerk and shall perform the functions and duties of
the Town Clerk.
d. Compensation. The Deputy Town Clerk shall receive such salary as may
be fixed and adopted by the Salary Ordinance of the Town of Kearny
which is in the process of being amended effective July 1, 2010 and as it
may thereafter by amended.
e. Powers and Duties. The Deputy Town Clerk shall have the following
power and duties:
1. The Deputy Town Clerk shall assist the Town Clerk in planning,
organizing, managing, and coordinating the various activities of the
office in the accordance with the State and local laws, rules,
regulations, and policies, and
2. The Deputy Town Clerk shall perform such services as may be
assigned to her from time to time by the Town Clerk, including, but
not by way of limitation, coordinating activities of the clerical staff,
analyzing, evaluating and organizing office operations and
procedures, revising office procedures and devising new forms to
improve efficiency of workflow, establishing uniform
correspondence and filing procedures, coordinating and
implementing procedures for systematic retention, protection,
retrieval, transfer and disposal of records, reviewing records and
correspondence to ensure completeness, accuracy and timelines,
purchasing supplies and equipment, receiving license and permit
§ 2-7.4 KEARNY CODE § 2-7.5
AO:24
§ 2-7.6. through § 2-7.10. (Reserved)
§ 2-7.11. Assistant Town Clerk. [1973 Code § 31-8; Ord. No.
1996-0-36; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-60 § 2]
applications/fees, issuing licenses and permits, registering and
transferring voters, recording oaths of office, directing
correspondence and inquiries to various municipal departments for
appropriate action, preparing official reports for the purpose of
the public record, and establishing and maintaining an extensive
record and filing system.
a. Position Created. The position of Assistant Municipal Clerk in the Town
of Kearny is hereby created.
b. 1. Duties. Under direction, assists the Municipal Clerk in planning,
organizing, managing, and coordinating the various activities of the
office in accordance with the state and local laws, rules,
regulations, and policies; does related work as required.
2. Typical Tasks. Assists the Municipal Clerk on a regular and
recurring basis in:
Coordinating the activities of the clerical staff and analyzing,
evaluating, and organizing the office operations and procedures;
revising office procedures and devising new forms to improve
efficiency of workflow; establishing uniform correspondence and
filing procedures; formulating procedures for the systematic
retention, protection, retrieval, transfer and disposal of records;
reviewing records and correspondence to insure completeness,
accuracy and timeliness; preparing agendas for the meetings of
the Governing Body; preparing the office budget and assisting in
purchasing supplies and equipment; receiving license applications
and fees and issues certain licenses; registering and transferring
voters, giving suitable assignments and instructions to
subordinates and supervising their work; reviewing and verifying
payrolls and claims, and preparing checks; making searches and
issuing search certificates; at elections, preparing and distributing
election equipment, materials, and supplies; swearing in election
officers; giving instructions to election officers; receiving election
returns; keeping election personnel record, and preparing
necessary checks; recording and filing the municipal budget;
recording bids for the purchase of equipment and supplies;
administering and recording oaths of office; directing
correspondence and inquiries to various municipal departments for
appropriate action; preparing reports dealing with licenses issued
and money received, and other pertinent matters; assisting in the
preparation and recording of resolutions, ordinances, vouchers,
and other municipal forms; assisting in the preparation of the
minutes of the meetings of the Governing Body; preparing suitable
§ 2-7.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-7.11
AO:25
§ 2-8. (RESERVED)
official reports for purpose of public record; preparing periodic
reports of cash receipts and accounts for same; assisting in
arranging for and conducting public elections; assisting in the
establishment and maintenance of an extensive record and filing
system.
c. Absence of Clerk. In the absence of the Municipal Clerk assumes his/
her duties, responsibilities and authority and may be authorized to act
as the Municipal Clerk when the Municipal Clerk is not present.
d. Minimum Qualifications.
1. Experience. Five years of clerical experience involving
responsibility for maintaining records of business transactions and
office activities requiring a knowledge of office systems and
procedures or five years of experience in managing and directing
the operations of an organization or program is required. Two years
of the above stated experience shall have been in a supervisory
capacity.
(Applicants may substitute college credits for the nonsupervisory
work experience on the basis of 30 college credits from an
accredited college or university being equal to one year of
experience.)
2. Knowledge. Wide knowledge is required of: The State and local
laws, rules, regulations, policies, and procedures that apply to the
administration of municipal affairs; the procedures used in
preparing a municipality for an election; the proper methods of
checking and verifying payrolls, and of establishing and
maintaining needed records and files.
3. Ability. The ability to: read, write, speak, understand or
communicate in English sufficiently to perform the duties of the
position; give suitable assignments and instructions to
subordinates and supervise their work; answer inquiries and give
detailed information to citizens and others courteously and
pleasantly, and to prepare clear, sound, accurate and informative
reports; maintain a record of all ordinances; keep the minutes of
the governing body; have custody of the seal of the municipality
and all papers and records thereof; process, record and file all
resolutions; record and file the municipal budget; record bids for
municipal equipment; administer and record oaths of office; issue
licenses; furnish data to the public media; purchase supplies and
equipment when required; receive and file bonds and insurance
policies; handle personnel records; direct correspondence and
inquiries for action to various municipal departments; conduct
business with other municipal departments as directed by the
Governing Body is required.
§ 2-7.11 KEARNY CODE § 2-9
AO:26
§ 2-9. TAX ASSESSOR.
§ 2-9.1. Tax Assessor; Appointment. [New]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146, the Mayor and Council shall provide for the
appointment of a Tax Assessor and such Deputy Tax Assessors as they may
determine necessary.
§ 2-9.2. Tax Assessor and Deputy Assessors; Qualifications and
Duties. [1973 Code § 31-39; New]
The Tax Assessor shall hold the Tax Assessor's Certificate provided for in
N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.25 et seq. and shall have the duty of assessing property
for the purpose of general taxation. A Deputy Tax Assessor shall hold a Tax
Assessor's Certificate and shall act under the direct supervision of the Tax
Assessor. Nothing in this section shall affect adversely the salary or tenure
rights acquired pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.31 or any other law.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 54:3-16, the Assessor, when
making assessments, shall be governed by directions by the Hudson County
Tax Administrator. These directions shall be pursuant to rules adopted by
the Hudson County Tax Board.
§ 2-9.3. Salaries. [New]
The Mayor and Council shall by ordinance determine the amount of
compensation for the Tax Assessor and any Deputy Tax Assessors appointed
under this section.
§ 2-9.4. Terms of Office. [New]
The Tax Assessor and any Deputy Tax Assessor appointed under this section
shall hold office for a term of four years from July 1 next following his
appointment. Vacancies other than due to expiration of term shall be filled
by appointment for the unexpired term.
§ 2-9.5. Assistant Assessor. [1973 Code §§ 31-274 through 31-276;
Ord. No. 2-13-74; Ord. No. 3-28-90; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-60 § 3]
a. Establishment of Position. There is hereby established in and for the
Town of Kearny, the position of Assistant Assessor.
b. Duties, Qualifications and Examples of Work. The duties, qualifications
and examples of work are as follows:
1. Duties. The Assistant Assessor shall generally, under direction,
assist in establishing a system of valuations for real property in the
Town and to perform related work as required.
2. Examples of Work.
(a) Assists in determining the valuation of real property.
§ 2-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-9.5
AO:27
(b) Makes inspection of old and partly constructed buildings for
the purpose of determining alteration valuation and building
values.
(c) Measures building to compute their areas or content.
(d) Estimates the values of buildings under construction.
(e) Keeps assessment maps up to date.
(f) Assists the preparation of information for appeals and gives
testimony before County and State tax boards.
(g) Supervises the maintenance and balancing of tax books
including changes, the preparation of reports on building
permits, and the review of real and personal property tax
returns.
(h) Receives visitors and gives detailed information relating to
assessments.
(i) Prepares suitable reports.
(j) Establishes and maintains needed records and files.
3. Requirements.
(a) Experience. One year of experience in assessing or appraising
residential, commercial and/or industrial real property.
(b) Knowledge. Considerable knowledge of the State and
municipal laws, rules, regulations, policies and procedures
applying to assessments for tax purposes; of the accepted
methods of appraising property, and of the form content of
building plans.
(c) Ability.
(1) Ability to read, write, speak, understand or communicate
in English sufficiently to perform the duties of the position.
Communication may include such forms as American Sign
Language or Braille.
(2) Ability to analyze and interpret applicable laws and
regulations and apply them to specific cases.
(3) To make accurate appraisals of real property.
(4) To give testimony before County and State tax boards.
(5) To work harmoniously with citizens and others.
(6) To take and maintain a firm and correct stand when
controversies arise.
§ 2-9.5 KEARNY CODE § 2-9.5
AO:28
§ 2-10. TAX COLLECTOR.
§ 2-10.1. Tax Collector; Appointment. [New]
The Mayor and Council shall provide for the appointment of a Tax Collector.
§ 2-10.2. Qualifications. [New]
No person shall be appointed or reappointed as Tax Collector unless he shall
hold a Tax Collector's Certificate issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:9-145.3.
Any Tax Collector appointed pursuant to this section may obtain tenure
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-144 or 40A:9-145. Any person
who shall be reappointed Tax Collector subsequent to having received a Tax
Collector's Certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-144.3 and having served
as Tax Collector or who has performed the duties of Tax Collector for not
less than four consecutive years immediately prior to such reappointment
shall have acquired tenure and shall hold his or her office during good
behavior and efficiency and shall be removed only for good cause shown and
after a proper hearing before the Director of the Division of Taxation or his
designee in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:9-145.8.
§ 2-10.3. Term of Office; Tenure. [New]
Every Tax Collector appointed under this section shall hold his office for a
term of four years from January 1 next following his appointment. Vacancies
other than due to the expiration of term shall be filled by appointment for
the unexpired term.
§ 2-10.4. Salary. [New]
The Mayor and Council shall by ordinance determine the amount of
compensation for the Tax Collector and any Deputy Tax Collectors
appointed under this section.
§ 2-10.5. Deputy Tax Collector. [New]
§ 2-11. CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER/TREASURER.
(7) To prepare clear, sound, accurate and informative reports
and to establish and maintain suitable records and files.
e. Compensation. The salary for this position shall be as set forth in the
annual salary ordinance of the Town of Kearny.
a. There is hereby created the Office of Deputy Tax Collector of the Town
of Kearny.
b. The Deputy Tax Collector shall serve during the absence or incapacity
of the Tax Collector and shall have the same duties and obligations as
defined by Statute.
§ 2-9.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-11.1
AO:29
§ 2-11.1. Establishment of Position. [1973 Code § 31-372; Ord. No.
6-28-89; Ord. No. 2007-(O)-64 § 1]
There is hereby established in and for the Town of Kearny the position of
Chief Financial Officer (CFO) on accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A9-140.11.
§ 2-11.2. Duties and Qualifications. [1973 Code § 31-273; Ord. No.
6-38-89; Ord. No. 9-9-92; Ord. No. 2007-(O)-64 § 1]
§ 2-11.3. Compensation. [1973 Code § 31-273; Ord. No. 6-28-89;
Ord. No. 9-9-92; Ord. No. 2007-(O)-64 § 1]
The annual salary for the position of CFO shall be as fixed in the Annual
Salary Ordinance of the Town of Kearny.
§ 2-12. TREASURER.2
a. The duties of the CFO shall be generally but not limited to the following:
1. Reconciliation of all funds and bank accounts.
2. Statutory payments for school taxes, county taxes, debt services,
etc.
3. Cash flow monitoring and projections.
4. Reviews quarterly financial reports for Payroll and Pensions.
5. Reviews payroll calculations; salary ordinances, retroactive
payments, etc.
6. Grants management and reporting, including receivables.
7. Maintain General Ledger for all funds.
8. Prepares annual municipal budget.
9. Assists in preparation of Annual Financial Statement, Debt
Statement and Audit process.
10. Monitor and review revenues and appropriations.
11. Monitor Capital Fund and Improvement Authorizations.
12. Transfer of Funds between accounts as needed.
13. Applies accounting principles and ensures compliance to
respective New Jersey Statutes.
b. The qualifications for the position shall be established in N.J.S.A.
40A:9-140.2.
2. Editor's Note: Former Section 2-12, Assistant Municipal Treasurer, previously codified
herein and containing portions of 1973 Code §§ 31-264 through 31-267 and Ordinance No.
1-11-89, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2007-(O)-64.
§ 2-11.1 KEARNY CODE § 2-12.1
AO:30
§ 2-12.1. Establishment of Position. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-64 § 2]
There is hereby established in and for the Town of Kearny the position of
Treasurer.
§ 2-12.2. Duties and Examples of Work. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-64 § 2]
§ 2-12.3. Compensation. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-64 § 2]
The annual salary for the position of Treasurer shall be as fixed in the
Annual Salary Ordinance of the Town of Kearny.
§ 2-13. TOWN ENGINEER.
§ 2-13.1. Appointment; Compensation; Term. [New]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:9-140, the Mayor and Council, shall by ordinance
provide for the appointment of a Town Engineer and fix his compensation
on an annual salary or fixed fee basis or at an hourly rate and based upon
actual time and expenses agreed on prior to the rendering of the services.
The Town Engineer's term of office shall be three years.
a. The duties of the Treasurer shall be to assist the Chief Financial Officer
in supervising and performing the work involved in the disbursement,
accounting and auditing of funds received and disbursed, the
negotiations of loans and the sale of bonds and related work as
required.
b. Examples of Work.
1. Grants Management and Reporting, including Receivables.
2. Financial Analysis as needed/requested by the Administrator, CFO,
or the Mayor and Council.
3. Deposit and post non-tax revenues collected through finance, from
various departments.
4. Monitor and post revenues from other municipal, County, and/or
State agencies.
5. Revenues, appropriations, general ledger posting and
reconciliation as requested by CFO.
6. Supervises Purchasing and Accounts Payable.
7. Assists in preparation of Cash Flow Projections and Analysis.
8. Assists in preparation of the Municipal Budget and year-end
closing.
§ 2-12.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-13.2
AO:31
§ 2-13.2. Duties. [New]
The Town Engineer shall perform such duties as are prescribed by general
law and ordinance and in addition shall:
§ 2-13.3. Consulting Engineers. [New]
Whenever the Mayor and Council determine that the interest of the Town
requires additional engineer services, consulting engineers may be retained
for one or more projects, or to render assistance to the Town Engineer.
§ 2-14. LOCAL HISTORIAN.
§ 2-14.1. Establishment. [1973 Code § 31-137; Ord. No. 12-12-79]
The position of Local Historian in and for the Town of Kearny is hereby
established.
§ 2-14.2. Compensation; Reimbursement of Expenses. [1973 Code
§ 31-138; Ord. No. 12-12-79]
The Local Historian shall serve without compensation but the Mayor and
Council may appropriate such funds as may be necessary to reimburse the
Local Historian for expenses actually incurred.
§ 2-14.3. Term. [1973 Code § 31-139; Ord. No. 12-12-79]
The Local Historian shall serve without a fixed term and at the pleasure of
the Governing Body.
a. Prepare or cause to be prepared plans, designs and specifications for
public works and improvements undertaken by the Town.
b. Provide and maintain surveys, maps, plans, specifications, estimates
and control records with respect to public works and facilities owned or
operated by the Town, or to be acquired or built.
c. Provide technical and engineering advice, estimates and review of
plans and assistance to other Town departments as needed.
d. Attend meetings of the Town Council, Planning Board and Zoning Board
of Adjustment as needed.
e. Report to the Administrator on a monthly basis as to the status of all
duties he or she is undertaking on behalf of the Town.
All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials
relating to the administration of engineering duties of the Town
Engineer shall be and remain the property of the Town. Upon the
termination of his services with the Town, the Town Engineer shall
forth-with surrender to any successor all such property.
§ 2-13.2 KEARNY CODE § 2-14.4
AO:32
§ 2-14.4. Duties and Responsibilities. [1973 Code § 31-140; Ord. No.
12-12-79]
The Local Historian shall have the following powers and responsibilities,
except as otherwise provided:
§ 2-15. PURCHASING AGENT.
§ 2-15.1. Position Established. [Ord. No. 1996-20 § 1]
The position of Purchasing Agent in the Town of Kearny is hereby created.
§ 2-15.2. Duties, Tasks and Qualifications. [Ord. No. 1996-20 § 2]
The following is a list of the duties, typical tasks, and minimum
qualifications of the position:
a. To carry out a historical program, including but not restricted to
collecting, preserving and making available materials relating to the
history of the local unit. The Historian shall store such materials in such
manner as to insure their preservation, and shall notify the State
Archivist, New Jersey Historical Commission, County Historian and
local Governing Body of any materials which should be acquired for
preservation. Upon leaving the position, the Local Historian shall turn
over all materials and records and reports into the possession of the
successor, if then appointed, or to the Governing Body until a successor
shall be appointed.
b. The Local Historian shall make an annual report to the Chief Executive
Officer and Governing Body of the local unit stating all the work
performed and accomplished during that year. The Local Historian shall
transmit a copy of such report to the New Jersey Historical
Commission. The New Jersey Historical Commission may advise each
County Historian and Municipal Historian of general guidelines along
which their historical program may be implemented.
c. The Local Historian may research, write and cause to have published a
County or municipal history, and may recommend appropriate historical
materials for publication.
d. The Local Historian may assist a landmark commission, as well as
advise the Governing Body, concerning the acquisition, administration,
use and disposition of any landmark, or historic site, including such
places in his jurisdiction included on the New Jersey Register of
Historic Places. Such advice may be furnished to the Historic Sites
Section, Department of Environmental Protection.
e. The Local Historian shall assist in projects of commemoration,
including the erection of monuments, historic markers and guide signs.
§ 2-14.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-15.2
AO:33
a. Duties. Under the direction of the Town Administrator, plans, organizes
and directs the activities of the purchasing unit; prepares purchasing
procedures; does related tasks.
b. Tasks. Establishes and develops accepted purchasing methods and
records in accordance with prescribed laws, rules, regulations,
standards, policies and procedures; reviews requisitions for operating
and maintenance equipment, materials and supplies; locates and
investigates suitable reputable sources of supply; prepares
specifications; reviews recommendations for the acceptance or
rejection of bids; communicates directly with vendors by telephone or
correspondence; interviews vendors to determine product line and
usefulness; handles complaints by taking the proper action; develops
and implements a centralized purchasing system including all
necessary procedures, forms and files; records the claims of vendors for
materials and services; prepares periodic reports and statements;
maintains bidders lists; prepares all purchase contracts; prepares
purchasing procedures and bill payments; assigns, supervises and
reviews the work of subordinates; prepares the temporary and final
appropriation budgets and appropriate transfers; confers with other
departmental representatives on the standardization of supplies used
and the need for specialized equipment; establishes and maintains
needed records and files; responsible for obtaining professional,
consulting and other services on a contractual basis, pursuant to
procedures contained within respective State laws and municipal laws
and regulations; and may be responsible for the management of a
central storeroom.
c. Minimum Qualifications.
1. Education. Graduation from a four year course at an accredited
college or university.
NOTE: Applicants who do not meet the above educational
requirements may substitute additional work experience as
described below on a year to year basis.
2. Experience. Five years of experience in the writing of purchase
specifications and in the purchase of equipment, materials and
supplies on a large scale.
3. License. Possession of a valid New Jersey driver's license is
required.
4. Certification. Must complete official State Certification course for
Purchasing Agent of the State of New Jersey within one year of
appointment to position.
5. Knowledge. Thorough knowledge of the accepted procedures used
in making large scale purchases. More specifically, knowledge of
the State and municipal laws, rules and regulations affecting
purchasing, accepted preparation of specifications of commodity
§ 2-15.2 KEARNY CODE § 2-15.2
AO:34
§ 2-15.3. Compensation. [Ord. No. 1996-20 § 3]
The salary for Purchasing Agent is as established in the Annual Salary
Ordinance.
§ 2-16. PERMIT CLERK.
§ 2-16.1. Position Created. [Ord. No. 2010-44]
There hereby is created in the Town of Kearny the position of Permit Clerk
in accordance with New Jersey Civil Service Commission Job Specification
02640.
§ 2-16.2. Duties. [Ord. No. 2010-44]
The Permit Clerk shall, but not by way of limitation, perform the following
duties: under direction, the Permit Clerk shall perform responsible clerical
work involved in the issuance of permits for construction, repair, alteration
and demolition operations and other related duties as required.
§ 2-16.3. Compensation. [Ord. No. 2010-44]
The Permit Clerk shall receive such salary as may be fixed and adopted by
the Salary Ordinance of the Town of Kearny.
§ 2-17. FIRE OFFICIAL.
§ 2-17.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2015-33]
The position of "Fire Official" (06350) be and is hereby established as a
position in and for the Town of Kearny.
§ 2-17.2. Duties and Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 2015-33]
Without intending to limit the duties and responsibilities of the Fire Official,
those appointed shall, under direction, administer and direct the
markets, marketing practices and commodity pricing methods and
knowledge of the application of bookkeeping methods to
procurement practices.
6. Ability. Ability to read, write, speak and understand English
sufficiently to perform the duties of this position; ability to interpret
market prices and trends and apply such interpretations to
procurement problems; to establish and maintain harmonious
working relationships; to review and prepare specifications; to
recommend suitable action to bids and to establish and maintain
adequate purchasing and other records; good health and freedom
from disabling physical and mental defects which would impair the
proper performance of the required duties or which might
endanger the health and safety of oneself or others.
§ 2-15.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-17.2
AO:35
enforcement of provisions of relevant fire safety codes and related
regulations, establish day-to-day operating routines of the code
enforcement agency, and coordinate and supervise activities of any fire
safety specialists or other staff employed by the agency; do related work as
required as provided for in the NJ Civil Service Job Description 06350.
§ 2-17.3. Salary. [Ord. No. 2015-33]
The ordinance entitled "An Ordinance Concerning Civil Service in the Town
of Kearny, in the County of Hudson," adopted April 14, 2015, be and hereby
is amended and supplemented to provide for the salary compensation rate
for Fire Official.
The salary set forth within this ordinance shall become effective on the
date indicated and shall be subject to available appropriation of funds in
existence on the date of final passage.
§ 2-18. through § 2-24. (RESERVED)
§ 2-17.2 KEARNY CODE § 2-18
AO:36
ARTICLE IV
Departments Established
§ 2-25. LAW DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-25.1. Preamble. [1973 Code § 29-1; Ord. No. 8-9-78]
The Council finds and determines that the creation of a Town Law
Department has certain advantages, economies and efficiencies in the
public interest, through determining predictable and fixed costs for the
complex legal needs of the Town.
§ 2-25.2. Appointment. [New]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-139, the Mayor and Council shall appoint a Town
Attorney for a term of one year unless otherwise provided by law.
§ 2-25.3. Duties of the Town Attorney. [1973 Code § 25-3; Ord. No.
8-7-78]
a. The Town Attorney shall be the chief legal advisor of the Town
government and of all its officers and departments.
b. Except as hereinafter set forth, the Town Attorney shall prosecute or
defend any and all suits or actions in law or equity, to which the Town
may be a party or in which it may be interested or which may be
brought against or by any officer of the Town on behalf of the Town, or
in the capacity of such person as an officer of the Town. He shall
perform other special services as directed by the Mayor and Council.
c. The Town Attorney shall render advice on all legal questions affecting
the Town whenever requested to do so by any Town Officer. Upon
request by the Mayor or Council, he shall reduce any such opinion to
writing.
d. The Town Attorney will see to the full enforcement of all judgments or
decrees rendered or entered in favor of the Town and of all similar
interlocutory orders.
e. The Town Attorney will see to the completion of all condemnation
proceedings, and all tax appeals and foreclosure of tax lien titles.
f. The Town Attorney will draft or supervise the preparations of any
contract, lease, deed, regulation, resolution or other document or
instrument to which the Town may be a party; and upon request by the
Mayor and Council, will draft ordinances covering any subject within
the power of the Town.
g. The Town Attorney shall prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions
at law or equity to which the Town may be a party or in which it may be
interested, or which may be brought against it.
§ 2-25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-25.4
AO:37
§ 2-25.4. Assistant Town Attorney. [1973 Code § 29-2; 29-4; Ord. No.
8-9-78; Ord. No. 2002-O-51]
§ 2-25.5. Special Counsel. [1973 Code § 29-5; Ord. No. 8-9-78]
§ 2-25.6. Administrative and Salary. [1973 Code § 29-6; Ord. No.
8-9-78; Ord. No. 8-12-81; Ord. No. 8-28-81; Ord. No. 2002-O-51]
a. Appointment and Term of Office. In addition to the office of Town
Attorney, there is hereby created the office of Assistant Town Attorney.
The Assistant Town Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor and
Council for a term of one year.
b. Duties.
1. The Assistant Town Attorney will serve as the Town Attorney during
the temporary absence or disability of the Town Attorney.
2. The Assistant Town Attorney will represent the Town in all labor
negotiations by the Town and its employees and any and all
litigations arising therefrom.
3. The Assistant Town Attorney shall perform other special services as
directed by the Mayor and Council.
a. Whenever the Town Attorney and Assistant Town Attorney deem the
interests of the Town so required, they shall select special counsel to
represent the interests of the Town in specialized and complex litigation
and proceedings, subject to the approval of a majority of the Mayor and
Town Council, and they shall supervise the activities of such special
counsel.
b. If the Town Attorney and Assistant Town Attorney should be disqualified
with respect to any legal matter, they shall select special counsel to
represent the Town, subject to the approval of a majority of the Mayor
and Town Council and they shall supervise the activities of such special
counsel.
a. Each Attorney shall maintain records of all actions, suits, proceedings
and matters which relate to the Town's legal interest and will report
periodically thereon to the Mayor and Council, when so requested.
b. The powers and duties of the Town Attorney and Assistant Town
Attorney shall not be amended to include functions not ordinarily
performed by an attorney-at-law.
c. The Town Attorney shall be paid an annual salary as established in the
Salary Ordinance and per contract, which shall not be reduced during
his term. Such retainer shall include attendance at all regular and
special meetings of the Mayor and Council except those called in
connection with a specific matter of litigation; the drafting of
ordinances and resolutions, and general legal advice to the Mayor,
§ 2-25.4 KEARNY CODE § 2-25.6
AO:38
§ 2-26. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS.
§ 2-26.1. Establishment of Department of Public Works. [1973 Code
§ 114A-1; Ord. No. 12-12-95; Ord. No. 1997-27 § 1; Ord. No.
2003-(O)-07 § 1; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-33 § 1]
Council and all Department Heads. He shall also receive such
reasonable compensation as may be authorized or approved by the
Mayor and Council.
d. The Assistant Town Attorney shall be paid an annual retainer as
established in the Salary Ordinance per contract. Such retainer shall
include general legal advice to the Mayor, Council and all Department
Heads during the temporary absence or disability of the Town Attorney;
and such other duties to be determined by a future amendatory
ordinance. He shall also receive such reasonable compensation as may
be authorized or approved by the Mayor and Council.
a. There is hereby created in and for the Town of Kearny, a Department of
Public Works, which shall consist of four divisions.
b. The four divisions shall be known as:
1. Division of Streets and Recycling;
2. (a) Division of Shade Trees;
(b) Division of Park Maintenance;
3. Division of Buildings and Grounds; and
4. Division of Vehicle Maintenance.
c. The Department of Public Works and its four divisions, shall have
charge of and supervision over the care, maintenance, cleanliness,
repairs and construction of all public ways; the construction, operation
and maintenance of all storm and sanitary sewers and all streets; and
the construction, operation and maintenance of all physical properties
of the Town of Kearny. The Division of Vehicle Maintenance shall have
the responsibility for the repair of all Town-owned vehicles.
d. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the contracting
out for any such service or responsibility set forth herein when
determined by the Mayor and Council to be in the interests of economy
and efficiency to governmental operations, and to the extent permitted
by law.
e. The Superintendent of Public Works shall have ultimate responsibility
for all tools, equipment and other personal property belonging to the
Town and assigned to the custody or care of any other Department
Head or Public Officer.
§ 2-25.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-26.2
AO:39
§ 2-26.2. Superintendent of Public Works. [1973 Code § 114A-2;
Ord. No. 12-12-95; New; Ord. No. 1999-0-12 §§ 1, 4]
§ 2-27. DEPARTMENT OF WATER UTILITY.3
§ 2-27.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 1996-0-34]
The Town of Kearny has been operating a self-liquidating water utility
pursuant to New Jersey law; and it is necessary to better define the utility,
in regard to organization and personnel. A Department of Water Utility shall
be established.
§ 2-27.2. Established. [Ord. No. 1996-0-34 § 1]
There shall be a Department of Water, the head of which shall be the
Superintendent of Water. The Department of Water shall include all titles as
established by the Code of the Town of Kearny and Salary Ordinance of the
Town of Kearny, which titles are assigned to personnel currently employed
by the water utility of the Town of Kearny.
a. Duties. The Superintendent of Public Works shall manage and supervise
the Department of Public Works to ensure the effectiveness and
efficiency in installing and maintaining the various public facilities of
the Town and in performing related tasks as assigned to the
Department. The Superintendent shall prepare plans and recommend
improvements in departmental operations. The Superintendent shall
supervise all departmental personnel and shall have the responsibility
and authority to institute minor disciplinary action, consistent with
policies established by the Town of Kearny and the New Jersey
Department of Personnel. The Town Administrator or his/her designee
shall serve as hearing officer for major disciplinary action. The
Superintendent of Public Works shall report to the Town Administrator.
b. Minimum Qualifications. Five years of supervisory experience in the
construction, maintenance and repair of streets, sewer, sanitation or
other public works facilities or similar heavy construction or
maintenance work are required. Ability to read, write, and
communicate in English sufficiently to perform the duties of the
position is required. (College level credits in engineering courses at an
accredited college or university may be substituted for up to two years
of supervisory experience, at the rate of 15 credits for year of
experience.) Certification as Public Works Manager by the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs is desired.
c. Compensation. Compensation for the Superintendent of Public Works
shall be established by ordinance.
3. Editor's Note: The Town entered into an Interlocal Agreement with the East Orange Water
Commission, to take over the management, operation and maintenance of the Kearny
Water Utility.
§ 2-26.2 KEARNY CODE § 2-27.3
AO:40
§ 2-27.3. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 1996-0-34 § 2]
The powers and duties of the Department are:
§ 2-28. POLICE DEPARTMENT.
See Chapter 3, Section 3-1.
§ 2-29. FIRE DEPARTMENT.
See Chapter 3, Section 3-41.
§ 2-30. EMERGENCY RESCUE SQUAD.
§ 2-30.1. Establishment. [1973 Code § 19-1; Ord. No. 9-9-81]
There is hereby established an organization known as the "Kearny Volunteer
Emergency Rescue Squad," hereinafter referred to as the "Rescue Squad."
§ 2-30.2. Function. [1973 Code § 19-2; Ord. No. 9-9-81]
The functions of the Rescue Squad shall be as follows:
§ 2-30.3. Rules and Regulations. [1973 Code § 19-3; Ord. No.
9-9-81]
The Rescue Squad shall have its own charter and make its own by-laws
governing the elections of members, officers, their duties, and other matters
affecting the welfare or operation of the Rescue Squad, which by-laws
and charter shall not become effective until approved by Resolution of the
Mayor and Council.
a. To operate, control and maintain the Town's water supply and
distribution system, and all equipment and appurtenances for
distribution, conservation and protection of the public water supply and
water services;
b. To provide for the reading of all meters;
c. To maintain and service all fire hydrants of the Town; and
d. To collect all fees.
a. To render emergency medical service where necessary within the Town
of Kearny and to transport such cases to area hospitals.
b. To participate in area mutual aid services, which function may require
the Rescue Squad to assist other municipalities in emergency rescue
services.
c. To provide transportation service where personnel and equipment are
available.
§ 2-27.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-30.4
AO:41
§ 2-30.4. Membership. [1973 Code § 19-4; Ord. No. 9-9-81]
All applications for membership shall be first submitted to the Mayor and
Town Council for approval. All applicants shall be at least 18 years of age
and have an acceptable driving record and no criminal record. Certification
as to driving records and/or criminal records shall be furnished by the Office
of the Chief of Police, upon request from the Mayor and Town Council.
In addition, each member shall be in good condition of physical fitness with
a certificate to that effect signed by a duly licensed physician of the State of
New Jersey.
§ 2-30.5. Training. [1973 Code § 19-5; Ord. No. 9-9-81]
The Rescue Squad shall, by rules and regulations, adopt training programs,
guidelines and standards to insure that its members possess the requisite
emergency medical training and each member shall comply with the
uniform standards prescribed by the "U.S. Highway Safety Act of 1966" and
the "New Jersey Highway Safety Act of 1971" and any other regulations
promulgated by the State of New Jersey governing Emergency Medical
Services.
§ 2-30.6. Council Liaison. [1973 Code § 19-6; Ord. No. 9-9-81]
That member of the Town Council who is appointed as Chairman of the
Police Committee shall also serve as Liaison to the Rescue Squad. The
Liaison shall serve for a one-year term commencing the first day of January
and expiring the last day of December.
§ 2-30.7. Expenses. [1973 Code § 19-7; Ord. No. 9-9-81]
§ 2-30.8. Report. [1973 Code § 19-8; Ord. No. 9-9-81]
The Rescue Squad shall report monthly to the Town Council as to the
condition of all apparatus, the number of calls attended during the month,
expenses for the preceding month and any other matters as may be required
by the Town Council.
§ 2-31. through § 2-36. (RESERVED)
§ 2-37. DEPARTMENT OF PARKS AND RECREATION.
a. No property, furnishing or supplies for which the Town may be
responsible, shall be purchased by the Rescue Squad without first
having submitted a requisition form to the Town Council Liaison and
receiving approval of the proposed purchase.
b. The Council Liaison to the Rescue Squad shall cause all bills for any
approved expenses of the Rescue Squad, to be presented monthly to the
Town Council for consideration, approval and passage.
§ 2-30.4 KEARNY CODE § 2-37.1
AO:42
§ 2-37.1. Organization; Appointments and Terms. [1973 Code
§ 39-1; Ord. No. 7-12-94; Ord. No. 12-12-95]
There shall be a Department of Parks and Recreation and a Board of
Recreation Commissioners who shall oversee and monitor the Department
of Parks and Recreation. The Board shall consist of seven citizens and
residents of the Town, all of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor, for
a term of five years. The members of the Commission shall receive no
compensation for their duties.
§ 2-37.1.1. Alternate Members. [Ord. No. 2011-20]
§ 2-37.2. Duties. [1973 Code § 39-2; Ord. No. 7-12-94; Ord. No.
12-12-95]
The Department of Parks and Recreation together with the Recreation
Commissioners shall control and manage any community center building
which may be constructed by the Town. The Department shall develop,
sponsor, and operate public recreational programs, sports, games, outdoor
exhibitions, contests, and concerts, and may charge and collect, for the use
of the Town, a reasonable fee for admission or for the use of recreational
facilities subject to such limitations as are established by law. The
Department of Parks and Recreation shall have the duty of supervising and
maintaining all recreational facilities within the Town of Kearny.
§ 2-37.2A. Director of Parks and Recreation. [Ord. No. 2012-61]
a. In addition to the seven members of the Board of Recreation
Commissioners provided for in subsection 2-37.1, there shall be, as
authorized by N.J.S.A. 40:12-1.1, two alternate members who shall be
appointed by the Mayor.
b. The two alternate members shall be designated as "Alternate No. 1"
and "Alternate No. 2."
c. The first appointment of "Alternate No. 1" shall be for a term four years.
The first appointment of "Alternate No. 2" shall be for a term of five
years. Thereafter the terms of both and of any successors shall be for a
term of five years.
d. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member of the Board. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a
choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate
No. 1 shall vote.
e. Both alternates shall serve without compensation.
f. All of the other provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:12-1.1 are incorporated herein
by reference.
§ 2-37.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-37.2A
AO:43
§ 2-37.3. Seasonal and Program Employees. [1973 Code § 39-3; Ord.
No. 7-12-94; Ord. No. 2012-61]
The Recreation Commissioners shall interview, evaluate and recommend
the appointment of all seasonal employees and program employees.
§ 2-37.3A. Criminal History Background Checks. [Ord. No. 2012-32]
a. Position Created. There is created hereby the position of Director of
Parks and Recreation in the unclassified service who shall be appointed
by the Mayor and Council. The Director need not be a resident of the
Town.
b. Duties of the Director. Under the direction of the Mayor and Council,
the Board of Recreation Commissioners and the Administrator, the
Director's duties shall be to plan, organize, promote, coordinate and
direct parks and recreation programs and other related works. Such
duties and responsibilities shall include, but are not limited to,
managing and overseeing the Recreation Department programs,
including registrations and schedules, volunteer personnel such as
coaches, referees and umpires, maintaining records of personnel,
equipment, materials and work, overseeing the annual capital
improvements budget, maintaining records of expenditures, developing
work schedules and procedures and generally implementing the
policies of the Board of Recreation Commissioners. The duties of the
Director shall not include any duties or responsibilities assigned by
other existing ordinances to the Department of Public Works.
c. Compensation. The salary for the position shall be paid as set forth in
the Salary Ordinance of the Town.
a. All prospective and current employees of the Recreation Department
and all prospective and current volunteers participating or desiring to
participate in Recreation Department programs shall undergo
background checks as hereinafter set forth.
b. Every current and prospective employee or volunteer shall complete
and execute two application and consent forms to be made available at
the Recreation office: (i) New Jersey State Police Form entitled "Name
Check Only, Request for Criminal History Information for a Noncriminal
Justice Purpose," No. SBI 212B (Rev. 02/08), or the latest version of that
form and (ii) Federal Form 1-783 entitled "Applicant Information
Form,": No. 1-783 (Rev. 5-5-2011), or the latest version of that form.
Each employee or volunteer shall also agree to be fingerprinted by an
entity retained by the Town at a time and place in Kearny designated by
the Town unless that person has previously been fingerprinted for
employment or other service with the Town and those fingerprint
records are available in the Kearny Police Department.
c. The form mandated by paragraph b (i), when completed, shall be
transmitted promptly together with a Recreation Department check for
§ 2-37.2A KEARNY CODE § 2-37.3A
AO:44
the requisite State fee by the Recreation Department to the Chief of
Police who shall forward it to the State Police Bureau of Investigation
with a request that the criminal history record be sent to him.
d. All fees for the process provided for in paragraph b, (i) and (ii) shall be
paid by the Department of Recreation.
e. If an application has been submitted, but no response has been received
and the Director of Parks and Recreation declares that a particular
recreation program may not proceed without the services of the
applicant, and there is no reasonable basis to believe that the applicant
has a criminal history background, the applicant shall be permitted to
participate conditionally until the results of the background checks are
received, but for no longer than 30 days.
f. Under no circumstance may a person serve as an employee or volunteer
if the background check reveals that he or she is an excluded sex
offender as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:7-22.
g. A person shall also be disqualified from serving as an employee or
volunteer in the Recreation Department if that person's criminal history
background check reveals a record of conviction in New Jersey or in any
other state or jurisdiction of any of the following crimes and offenses:
1. In New Jersey:
(a) Of any crime or disorderly persons offense:
(1) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1,
et seq., such as criminal homicide; N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1, et
seq., such as assault, reckless endangerment, threats,
stalking; N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1, et seq., such as kidnapping;
N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1, et seq., such as sexual assault; or, N.J.S.A.
2C:15-1, et seq., such as robbery;
(2) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning
those crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in
N.J.S.A. 2C:24-1, et seq., such as endangering the welfare
of a child;
(3) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes;
(4) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or
controlled substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of
Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes except paragraph (4) of
subsection (a) of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10.
2. In Any Other State or Jurisdiction:
§ 2-37.3A ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-37.3A
AO:45
§ 2-37.4. Annual Budget Report. [1973 Code § 39-4; Ord. No.
7-12-94; Ord. No. 2012-61]
The Recreation Commissioners shall, together with the Director of Parks
and Recreation, prepare and submit to the Governing Body for approval an
annual budget supported by a detailed plan or programs with estimated
costs and revenues from each, together with any capital expenditures
required.
§ 2-37.5. (Reserved)
Former subsection 2-37.5, Superintendent to Report to Administrator,
previously codified herein and containing portions of 1973 Code § 39-5 and
Ordinance 7-12-94, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2012-61.
(a) Of any conduct which, if committed in New Jersey, would
constitute any of the crimes or disorderly persons offenses
described above.
h. If the background check disqualifies the individual from employment or
volunteering, he or she shall be so notified by the Chief of Police, or the
Chief's designee, and such information shall be kept confidential by the
Police Department. There shall be no communication of the
disqualifying information to the Department of Recreation or to anyone
else.
i. In accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:59-1.6, if the background check
disqualifies an individual from employment or volunteering, the Chief of
Police shall provide the disqualified person with adequate notice and
opportunity to confirm or deny in writing the accuracy of any
information contained in the criminal history record. The individual
shall be afforded a reasonable period of time to correct or complete the
record before a final determination or decision concerning the person's
eligibility is made. A person shall be presumed innocent of any pending
charges or arrests for which there are no final dispositions indicated on
the record.
j. Background checks which disclose that the applicant is not disqualified
shall be reported by the Chief of Police to the Superintendent of
Recreation, who shall maintain a list of all individuals who are qualified
to serve as employees or volunteers by reason of their having
successfully completed the background check. All appointments shall
be made from that list.
k. This subsection shall not apply to persons or groups who receive no
funding from the Town or the Department of Recreation or who merely
use facilities owned by the Town but are not associated with the Town
or Department of Recreation programs.
l. This subsection shall apply to umpires and referees.
§ 2-37.3A KEARNY CODE § 2-37.6
AO:46
§ 2-37.6. Revenue. [1973 Code § 39-6; Ord. No. 5-23-95]
All money received by the Recreation Commission shall be paid over to
the C.F.O./Treasurer, and shall be kept by him in a special fund which
shall be under the control of the Commission and used exclusively for the
purposes of defraying the expense of improving, maintaining or policing the
playgrounds and recreational facilities within the Town.
§ 2-38. (RESERVED)
§ 2-39. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH AND ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION.4
§ 2-39.1. Sanitarian in the Board of Health. [1973 Code §§ 31-76,
31-77]
a. Creation. The position of Sanitarian in the Board of Health of the Town
of Kearny is hereby created.
b. Duties, Qualifications, Salary. The duties, typical tasks, minimum
qualifications and salary for the position shall be as follows:
1. Duties. Make inspections to enforce the sanitary and health laws;
do related work as required.
2. Typical Tasks. Inspect homes to note violations of the sanitary and
health laws; when violations are found, determine the cause and
take proper corrective action; periodically inspect restaurants and
other eating places; investigate nuisances and violations of the
sanitary code; fumigate homes of contagiously ill persons; institute
proceedings against violators of the laws; take census of dogs to
assure that all dogs are registered; give testimony in court cases;
assist physicians in the inoculation of children; keep needed
records.
c. Minimum Qualifications.
1. Formal and other education and training showing attainment of the
level represented by graduation from high school.
2. One year of experience in work involving human contacts.
3. Possession of a valid New Jersey first-class sanitary inspector's
license.
4. Considerable knowledge of the problems encountered and the
procedures used in the enforcement of the sanitary rules, laws,
regulations, policies and procedures; of the principles of sanitary
science; of the symptoms and effects of common contagious
diseases and of keeping records.
4. Editor's Note: See Section 2-47, Board of Health.
§ 2-37.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-39.1
AO:47
§ 2-39.2. Public Health Investigator/Registrar of Vital Statistics.
[Ord. No. 1996-(O)-33; Ord. No. 2002-(O)-83; Ord. No. 2003-(O)-3;
Ord. No. 2012-22]
5. Ability to analyze sanitary health laws and apply them to specific
cases; to work harmoniously with citizens and others but to take
and maintain a firm and correct stand when needed; to establish
and maintain proper relationships with physicians, business
proprietors, housekeepers and others interested in the
maintenance of public health standards; to prepare clear, sound,
accurate and informative reports of investigations containing
findings, conclusions and recommendations; and to act as a
convincing witness in court.
6. Good health and freedom from disabling physical and mental
defects.
d. Salary. The salary for the position shall be as set forth in the Annual
Salary Ordinance.
a. Position Created. The position of Public Health Investigator/Registrar of
Vital Statistics in the Town of Kearny is hereby created.
b. Duties, Tasks and Qualifications. The following is a list of the duties,
typical tasks, and qualifications for the two elements of this position:
1. Public Health Investigator.
(a) Duties. Under direction of the Health Officer and Assistant
Health Officer, assists in making routine inspections and
investigations of complaints received by the health agency;
does related work as required.
(b) Tasks. Investigates complaints of alleged violations of the
sanitary code and local health ordinances; inspects alleyways
for trash and litter so as to determine compliance with local
ordinances; investigates complaints of inadequate heat in
apartments and homes in order to determine if there is any
violation of local ordinances; checks on any visible health
violations for referral to the sanitary inspectors; inspects
buildings for the presence of rodents and other health
nuisances; distributes literature concerning public health
campaigns within the community; assists in taking dog census;
prepares case histories and reports of investigations; answers
inquiries and gives information relative to the health laws; and
maintains needed records and files.
(c) Minimum Qualifications.
(1) Experience. One year of experience in field investigations
which shall have included the gathering of significant
§ 2-39.1 KEARNY CODE § 2-39.2
AO:48
health data and the compiling of data into meaningful
reports.
(2) Knowledge. Some knowledge of local and State health
laws and standards; of the problems and procedures
involved in investigating sanitary conditions; and of the
philosophy of maintaining public health standards.
(3) Ability. Ability to read, write, speak, and understand
English sufficiently to perform the duties of this position;
to comprehend established rules and regulations; to
interview persons of varying backgrounds; to use tact and
courtesy in making investigations; to observe and analyze
significant public health nuisances; to prepare suitable
reports and to maintain suitable records and files; and
good health and freedom from disabling physical and
mental defects which would impair the proper
performance of the required duties or which might
endanger the health and safety of oneself or others.
2. Registrar of Vital Statistics.
(a) Duties. Responsible for all work involved in obtaining reports
of, and recording, births, marriages and deaths in the
municipality; does related work as required.
(b) Tasks. Develops the procedures for obtaining prompt and
accurate reports of births, marriages and deaths; passes upon
the certificates and other forms used in reporting births,
marriages and deaths; makes needed statistical compilations
and organizes such calculations in the form of the tables;
studies the reporting of births, marriages and deaths for the
purpose of checking the completeness and accuracy of the
reports and the means of improving registrations; issues
certified copies of birth, marriages and death records; collects
fees therefor and accounts for the money collected; determines
the manner in which records and files are to be kept; and
addresses groups interested in the reporting and compilation
of births, marriages, and deaths.
(c) Minimum qualifications.
(1) Experience. Three years of clerical experience; and one
year of experience as Deputy Registrar of Vital Statistics.
(2) Knowledge. Thorough knowledge of the laws relating to
the reporting and registration of births, marriages and
deaths; of giving correct information to varied types of
inquiries; of the statistical methods to be used in compiling
sound and informative reports from the data collected; and
of the establishment and maintenance of a needed system
§ 2-39.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-39.2
AO:49
§ 2-39.3. Transportation of Senior Citizens, Responsibilities. [Ord.
No. 2001-0-23]
The position occupied by the person discharging the responsibilities for
transportation of senior citizens pursuant to the Dial-a-Ride Program and
other senior citizen programs shall be a position in the Department of Public
Health and Environmental Protection, subject to supervision by the Board
of Health.
§ 2-40. DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE.
§ 2-40.1. Department of Finance Established. [Ord. No. 1998-(O)-42
§ II]
There is hereby created the Department of Finance in the Town of Kearny.
§ 2-40.2. Organization. [Ord. No. 1998-(O)-42 § III; Ord. No.
2001-0-24 § 1]
of reports and records and general files over a long period
years.
(3) Ability. Ability to read, write, speak, understand or
communicate in English sufficiently to perform the duties
of the position; to analyze the laws relating to the
reporting and registration of births, marriages and deaths
and apply them to specific cases; to establish a simple and
effective system of records of births, marriages and
deaths; to handle correspondence with numerous and
varied types of inquiries and to devise suitable forms;
persons with mental or physical disabilities are eligible as
long as they can perform the essential functions of the job
after reasonable accommodation is made to their known
limitations. If the accommodation cannot be made because
it would cause the employer undue hardship such person
may not be eligible.
c. The salary for Public Health Investigator/Registrar of Vital Statistics is
established in the Annual Salary Ordinance.
d. Fees. The fee for certified copies of birth and marriage records shall be
$20 and for death certificates shall be $10.
a. The Chief Financial Officer/Treasurer shall be the head of the
Department of Finance.
b. The Department of Finance shall consist of four divisions as follows:
1. Division of Treasury;
2. Division of Revenue;
§ 2-39.2 KEARNY CODE § 2-40.2
AO:50
§ 2-41. URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-41.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2010-1]
There is hereby established a Department of Urban Enterprise Zone
Development.
§ 2-41.2. Department Head. [Ord. No. 2010-1]
The head of the Department shall be the Urban Enterprise Director
appointed pursuant to subsection 26-1.6 of the Town Code and his duties
and responsibilities shall be as defined in that section of the Code.
3. Division of Property Assessment; and
4. Division of Purchasing.
c. The head of the Division of Treasury shall be the Chief Financial Officer/
Treasurer.
d. The head of the Division of Revenue Collection shall be the Tax
Collector.
e. The head of the Division of Property Assessment shall be the Tax
Assessor.
f. The head of the Division of Purchasing shall be the Purchasing Agent.
§ 2-40.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-41.2
AO:51

ARTICLE V
Municipal Court
§ 2-42. MUNICIPAL COURT ESTABLISHED.
§ 2-42.1. Creation. [1973 Code § 13-1; Ord. No. 8-12-81; Ord. No.
10-28-81]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. and the amendments thereof and the supplements
thereto, there is created in the Town of Kearny, County of Hudson, a
Municipal Court, with all the powers, rights, duties and privileges thereto
pertaining.
§ 2-42.2. Judge of the Municipal Court. [1973 Code § 13-3]
§ 2-42.3. Court Administrator. [1973 Code §§ 13-10; 13-11]
a. Appointment; Compensation. The Court shall be presiding over by the
Judge of the Municipal Court. The Judge of the Municipal Court and
other personnel shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council as
provided in the Act, and the compensation of the Judge shall be as
established in the Annual Salary Ordinance.
a. Creation. The position of Court Administrator in the Town of Kearny is
hereby created.
b. Duties; Qualifications; Salary. The following is a list of the duties,
typical tasks, minimum qualifications and salary range of the position:
1. Duties. Under direction, in a Municipal Court, the Court
Administrator shall supervise and/or perform the specialized
clerical work requiring thorough knowledge of the laws,
ordinances, rules, regulations and procedures relating to the
operations of the Municipal Court; he may also serve as the
Violations Clerk; and he shall do related work as required.
2. Typical Tasks. The Court Administrator shall analyze all facts and
circumstances to determine whether any laws or ordinances within
the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court have been violated and
determine whether a formal complaint should be entertained; draft
and prepare all complaints and take all oaths thereunder; attest to
Court writs, processes, commitments, search warrants, bench
warrants and subpoenas; prepare the Court calendar, arrange for
Court sessions; assist the Judge of the Municipal Court in
arraignment of defendants; call and swear witnesses at trials of
cases; receive and disburse bail, fines, costs and other moneys paid
into Court and account therefor; maintain and/or supervise the
filing of complaints, processes and other Court records, cash books,
Court dockets, traffic control sheets, statistical records, reports
and files; supervise and direct the disposition of correspondence;
superintend the physical condition of the Court premises and
§ 2-42 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-42.3
AO:53
§ 2-43. MUNICIPAL COURT PROSECUTOR.
maintain decorum therein; if serving as the Violations Clerk,
supervise and/or perform all relevant duties and related tasks;
prepare correspondence; when applicable, give suitable
assignments and instructions to assigned employees; and supervise
and/or perform the work involved in the establishment and
maintenance of relevant records and files.
3. Minimum Qualifications.
(a) Graduation from high school or vocational high school or
possession of an approved high-school-equivalent certificate.
(b) Two years of experience in clerical work.
(c) Thorough knowledge of the laws, ordinances, rules,
regulations and procedures relating to the operations of the
Municipal Court; of Court proceedings, including the taking of
minutes of trials and entering them in dockets; of the form and
use of trial calendars, writs, decisions, orders, rules and other
matters pertaining to the Court; of the making of entries in
ledgers and disbursement journals; of the preparation of clear,
sound, accurate and informative reports and of the
establishment and maintenance of needed records and files.
(d) Ability to analyze and interpret the laws, ordinances, rules,
regulations and procedures relating to the operation of the
Municipal Court; to give suitable assignments and instructions
to others and supervise their work; to attend Court and take
minutes of the trials and enter them in the docket; to prepare
and supervise the preparation of correspondence; to dispense
information relating to Court matters; to prepare trial
calendars, make out return cards and to sign letters, checks,
writs, decisions, orders, rules and other matters pertaining to
the Court; to maintain financial records; to obtain, store,
record, distribute and supervise the use of needed equipment,
materials and supplies; to prepare clear, sound, accurate and
informative reports and to establish and maintain records and
files.
(e) Good health and freedom from disabling physical and mental
defects which would impair the proper performance of the
required duties or which might endanger the health and safety
of oneself or others.
4. Salary. The Court Administrator shall receive an annual salary as
set forth in the annual Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-42.3 KEARNY CODE § 2-43.1
AO:54
§ 2-43.1. Creation. [1972 Code § 13-5]
The position of Municipal Court Prosecutor for the Town of Kearny is hereby
created.
§ 2-43.2. Appointment; Term of Office. [1973 Code § 13-6; Ord. No.
2-23-83; Ord. No. 1997-8 § 1]
The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall be appointed by resolution of the
Governing Body of the Town of Kearny, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
2B:12-27, for a term of one year beginning on January 1, and until his or her
successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 2-43.3. Function; Duties. [1973 Code § 13-7]
The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall prosecute, on behalf of the State or
the Town of Kearny, as the case may be, in the Municipal Court of the
Town of Kearny, defendants charged with violations of the laws of the State
of New Jersey or ordinances of the Town of Kearny whom the Judge of
the Municipal Court of the Town of Kearny requests or directs that he so
prosecute. The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall also represent the State
or the Town of Kearny, as the case may be, in appeals by defendants
convicted in the Municipal Court of the Town of Kearny of violations of Town
ordinances, and shall perform such other duties on behalf of the State or
the Town as provided by law or the rules governing the courts of the State
of New Jersey.
§ 2-43.4. Qualifications. [1973 Code § 13-8]
The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall be a resident and attorney-at-law of
the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-43.5. Salary. [1973 Code § 13-9; Ord. No. 12-14-77; Ord. No.
8-12-81; Ord. No. 10-28-81]
The salary of the Municipal Court Prosecutor shall be as established in the
annual Salary Ordinance, together with such reasonable compensation as
shall be authorized by the Mayor and Council.
§ 2-44. MUNICIPAL PUBLIC DEFENDER.
§ 2-44.1. Position Created. [1973 Code § 13-12; Ord. No. 3-27-74]
The position of Municipal Public Defender for the Town of Kearny is hereby
created.
§ 2-43.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-44.2
AO:55
§ 2-44.2. Appointment; Term of Office. [1973 Code § 13-13; Ord. No.
2-23-83]
The Municipal Public Defender shall be appointed by resolution of the
Governing Body for a term of one year, beginning January 1 and until his
successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 2-44.3. Function; Duties. [1973 Code § 13-14]
The Municipal Public Defender shall defend individuals charged with
nonindictable offenses when assigned to do so by the Judge of the Municipal
Court, and shall perform such other duties on behalf of the defendants as
provided by law and the rules governing the courts of the State of New
Jersey.
§ 2-44.4. Qualifications. [1973 Code § 13-15]
The Municipal Public Defender shall be a resident and attorney-at-law of the
State of New Jersey.
§ 2-44.5. Salary. [1973 Code § 13-16]
The Municipal Public Defender shall receive such annual salary set forth in
the Salary Ordinance of the Town of Kearny, to be paid in the same manner
as the salaries of other municipal employees are paid.
§ 2-44.6. Fee for Application for Services. [1973 Code § 13-17; Ord.
No. 2-22-94; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-60 § 4]
Any person who shall apply for the services of the Municipal Public
Defender shall be obligated to pay the sum of not more than $200 as
an application fee. This fee may be waived in whole or in part in the
discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court in accordance with applicable
guidelines.
§ 2-45. through § 2-46. (RESERVED)
§ 2-44.2 KEARNY CODE § 2-45
AO:56
ARTICLE VI
Boards, Committees and Commissions
§ 2-47. BOARD OF HEALTH.5
§ 2-47.1. Establishment; Composition. [1973 Code § 25-1; Ord. No.
7-13-77]
A local Board of Health is hereby established, which shall consist of seven
members who are residents of the Town of Kearny. The Board shall be
known as the "Department of Public Health and Environmental Protection."
§ 2-47.2. Terms of Office. [1973 Code § 25-2]
Annually at the first regular meeting of the Town Council in the month of
April, the Council shall appoint two or more persons for the term of three
years. Any vacancy or vacancies occurring in the Board shall be filled by the
Council for the unexpired term or terms.
§ 2-47.3. Oath of Office. [1973 Code § 25-3]
Within 10 days after their appointment, the members of the Board of
Health shall take and subscribe, before some person authorized by law to
administer oaths, an oath or affirmation, faithfully, fairly and impartially to
execute the duties of his or their office according to the best of his or their
knowledge, skill and ability, and shall file such oath or affirmation with the
Town Clerk. In case any person appointed as aforesaid shall neglect to take
such oath or affirmation within 10 days after his appointment and file the
same with the Town Clerk, he shall be considered as having declined such
office and the office shall be deemed vacant, and the Town Council shall fill
the vacancy.
§ 2-47.4. Organization. [1973 Code § 25-4]
The members of the Board of Health shall meet and organize within 10 days
after their appointment and qualification.
§ 2-48. ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE ENVIRONMENT AND
SUSTAINABILITY. [Prior history: 1973 Code §§ 7-1 — 7-5; Ord. No.
2007-O-05 § 1]
§ 2-48.1. Creation. [Ord. No. 2019-14]
A Municipal Advisory Committee, which shall be known and designated as
the Kearny "Advisory Committee on the Environment and Sustainability"
consisting of nine members, is hereby created and established. For
avoidance of doubt, the Committee established by this Ordinance is not, and
5. Editor's Note: The Board of Health was established by ordinance adopted on March 21,
1899. The first members of the Board of Health were appointed by the Council in April
1899.
§ 2-47 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-48.1
AO:57
is not intended to be, an Environmental Commission under N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1
et seq.
§ 2-48.2. Membership. [Ord. No. 2019-14]
§ 2-48.3. Service without Commission. [Ord. No. 2019-14]
The members of the Committee shall receive no compensation for their
services.
§ 2-48.4. Functions and Duties. [Ord. No. 2019-14]
The Committee shall foster the education, coordination and dissemination
of information and the development and implementation of community
projects which promote Kearny's environment through green and
sustainability initiatives. Said initiatives include, but are not limited to,
educational programs and community projects which focus on
environmental conservation, stormwater run-off, climate change, recycling,
clean air and clean water, anti-littering and pollution. In furtherance of
said programs and community projects, the Committee may also provide
for assistance and coordination with Kearny Awake, the Kearny Community
Garden, any Earth Day celebrations and any other community organized
effort which furthers the purposes set forth herein. The Committee shall
from time to time report its findings and recommendations to the Town
Council for its consideration and action. The findings and recommendations
shall not bind the Town Council.
a. The members of the Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor and
shall serve for terms of two years.
b. The nine members provided for in subsection 2-48.1 shall consist of, at
a minimum, one core member of the Kearny Community Garden and
one member of Kearny Awake ("Association of Water, Agriculture and
Kearny's Environment") as long as either or both are active
organizations within the Town of Kearny.
c. In addition to the nine members provided for in subsection 2-48.1, the
Mayor shall appoint a member of the Town Council to serve as liaison
between the Committee and the Town Council. The Councilmember
appointed to serve as liaison shall have no voting privileges in the
deliberations of the Committee.
d. In addition to the nine members provided for in subsection 2-48.1 and
the Councilmember designated to serve as liaison, the Mayor shall be
ex officio, a member of the Committee. The Mayor shall have no voting
privileges in the deliberations of the Committee.
§ 2-48.1 KEARNY CODE § 2-48.5
AO:58
§ 2-48.5. Rules and Procedures of Meetings and Activities. [Ord. No.
2019-14]
The Committee may, in its discretion, adopt rules and procedures governing
the conduct of its meetings and activities and shall elect such officers from
among its membership as it may deem necessary.
§ 2-49. (RESERVED)
§ 2-50. CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION.
§ 2-50.1. Creation. [1973 Code § 10-1]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 18:25-10 and the amendments thereof
and supplements thereto, the Civil Rights Commission of the Town of
Kearny (hereinafter referred to as the "Civil Rights Commission"),
consisting of 10 members, is hereby created.
§ 2-50.2. Appointment; Qualifications. [1973 Code § 10-2; Ord. No.
3-14-73]
The members of the Civil Rights Commission shall be appointed by the
Mayor and shall serve for such period of time as may be fixed at the time of
their appointment, in accordance with the terms and provisions of N.J.S.A.
18:25-10, and they shall be United States citizens and shall reside in the
Town of Kearny.
§ 2-50.3. Organization. [1973 Code § 10-3]
The Civil Rights Commission shall organize itself and conduct its business
in accordance with the terms and provisions of N.J.S.A. 18:25-10, excepting
that no committee, corporation or other person, agency, or employee shall
be appointed or employed by the Civil Rights Commission without the
formal consent of the Mayor.
§ 2-50.4. Powers and Duties. [1973 Code § 10-4]
The Civil Rights Commission shall have the powers and duties and be
subject to the same limitations as set forth in the New Jersey Statutes
aforesaid.
§ 2-50.5. Recommendations to Council. [1973 Code § 10-5]
The Civil Rights Commission shall make recommendations to the Council
of the Town of Kearny for the development of policies and procedures in
general and for programs for formal and informal education that will aid in
eliminating all types of discrimination based on race, creed, color, national
origin or ancestry.
§ 2-51. through § 2-55. (RESERVED)
§ 2-48.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-56
AO:59
§ 2-56. INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION.
§ 2-56.1. Commission Created. [1973 Code § 28-1; Ord. No. 7-13-74]
There is hereby created in and for the Town of Kearny an Industrial
Commission, known as the "Industrial Commission of the Town of Kearny,"
which shall be a body corporate having the powers hereinafter conferred
and also such powers as may now be conferred by Statute.
§ 2-56.2. Membership; Compensation; Quorum. [1973 Code § 28-2;
Ord. No. 2-13-74]
§ 2-56.3. Additional Employees. [1973 Code § 28-3; Ord. No.
2-13-74]
To the extent that the Commission shall consider the services of existing
officers and employees of the Town insufficient for its purposes, it may
employ such additional employees or services and at such compensation as
may be approved by resolution of the Governing Body.
§ 2-56.4. Powers. [1973 Code § 28-4; Ord. No. 2-13-74]
a. The Commission shall consist of seven members and the Mayor who
shall be an ex officio member.
b. Each member shall be, for the last five years preceding his
appointment, a citizen of the United States and a qualified voter of the
State of New Jersey.
c. Members shall be appointed for a term of five years.
d. Vacancies in the membership of any Commission, occurring for
whatever cause, shall be promptly filled by appointment by the Mayor
for the unexpired term thereof. Members shall serve for their
respective terms and until their successors are appointed and qualified.
e. No member, officer or employee of any Commission shall be interested
directly or indirectly in any contracts for work or materials used by the
Commission, or in any sales, leases or agreements in connection with
lands, buildings or other property owned or controlled by it, or in any
fees or compensation of any kind paid to any broker, architect,
engineer, merchant or other person doing business with the
Commission or in any other transaction of or with the Commission, or
the benefits or profits thereof.
f. The members and officers of the Commission shall serve without
compensation, but each shall receive his actual disbursements for
expenses in performing his duties.
g. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum of the
Commission.
§ 2-56 KEARNY CODE § 2-56.4
AO:60
§ 2-57. MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AUTHORITY.
§ 2-57.1. Created. [1973 Code § 30A-1; Ord. No. 5-25-88; Ord. No.
2003-(O)-13 §§ 1, 2]
§ 2-57.2. Copies Filed. [1973 Code § 30A-2; Ord. No. 5-25-88]
A copy of this section, duly certified by the Town Clerk, shall forthwith be
filed by the Town Clerk in the office of the Secretary of State of the State of
New Jersey, in the office of the Director of the Division of Local Government
Services in the Department of Community Affairs of the State, and in the
office of the Town Clerk.
a. The Commission shall have the general powers enumerated in N.J.S.A.
40:55B-7 and shall have the purposes, functions and additional powers
enumerated in N.J.S.A. 40:55B-8, 40:55B-9, 40:55B-10, and shall be
generally charged with the duty of promoting the expansion and growth
of industry in the Town.
b. The Commission shall not exercise any power of condemnation or
eminent domain, and shall not be authorized to pledge the credit of the
Town or to create any debt against the Town.
a. Pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal and County Utilities
Authorities Law, N.J.S.A. 40:14B-1 et seq., of the State of New Jersey,
there is hereby created a public body corporate and politic under the
name and style of the Kearny Municipal Utilities Authority.
b. The Kearny Municipal Utilities Authority hereby created is a municipal
utilities authority as contemplated and provided for by the law, and
shall have and exercise all of the powers and perform all of the duties
provided for by the Municipal Utilities Authorities Law and any other
statutes heretofore or hereafter enacted and applicable thereto,
including without limitation the power to acquire, construct, maintain,
operate, improve or lease facilities for sewage collection, treatment and
disposal, in or around the Kearny Municipal Utilities Authority Service
District (as hereinafter defined).
c. The Kearny Municipal Utilities Authority Service District, as used
herein, shall mean and refer to, and only to, the South Kearny area,
which shall be the area described in Schedule A6 attached hereto and
made a part hereof.
d. Members of the Kearny Municipal Utilities Authority shall not receive
compensation for their services as members of the Authority.
e. There shall be five members of the Authority and up to two alternate
members, as provided by the law.
6. Editor's Note: A copy of Schedule A, referred to herein, can be found on file in the office of
the Town Clerk.
§ 2-56.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-57.3
AO:61
§ 2-57.3. Approval. [1973 Code § 30A-3; Ord. No. 5-25-88]
It shall be a condition to final adoption and effectiveness of this chapter
that the Local Finance Board in the Division of Local Government Services,
Department of Community Affairs of the State of New Jersey shall have
given the approval required by N.J.S.A. 40A:5A-4.
§ 2-58. through § 2-69. (RESERVED)
§ 2-57.3 KEARNY CODE § 2-58
AO:62
ARTICLE VII
Policies and Procedures
§ 2-70. PAYMENT OF TAXES AND LIENS PRIOR TO DISTRIBUTION
OF FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS.
§ 2-70.1. Payment of Taxes and Liens Required Prior to Payment of
Fire Insurance Claims. [1973 Code § 22A-1; Ord. No. 8-13-80]
No insurance company authorized to issue fire insurance policies in the
State of New Jersey shall pay any claims in excess of $2,500 on any real
property located in the Town of Kearny unless the Town issues to the
insured an official certificate of search for municipal liens pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:5-12 certifying that all taxes, assessments and other municipal
liens and charges, levied and assessed and due and payable against the
property covered by such insurance policy have been paid; and which
certificate is submitted to the insurance company by the insured.
§ 2-70.2. Fire Insurance Policy Proceeds; Payment to Town. [1973
Code § 22A-2; Ord. No. 8-13-80]
§ 2-70.3. Claim on Proceeds of Fire Insurance Policy; Priority. [1973
Code § 22A-3; Ord. No. 8-13-80]
A claim of the Town upon the proceeds of a fire insurance policy made by
the Town pursuant to N.J.S.A. 17:36-8, et seq. and of this section shall be
paramount to any other claims on the proceeds except the claim of the
holder of a mortgage on the fire damaged property where the policy lists
the mortgagee as a named insured. The claim of such mortgage shall be
paramount to the Town's lien only to the extent of the amount due and
owing on the mortgage.
a. In the event the insurance company does not receive an official
certificate of search showing that all taxes, assessments and other
municipal liens and charges have been fully paid, the insurance
company is hereby authorized and required, prior to the payment of any
claims for fire damages which are in excess of $2,500 to the owner of
property in this Town, to pay to the Town the amount of the liens
appearing on the official certificate and such other recorded liens and
related charges as may be certified to the insurance company.
b. In the event an appeal is taken on the amount of any lien or charge,
other than an appeal on the assessed valuation of the realty involved
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:3-21, the insurance company shall withhold 75%
of the full amount of the lien or charge being contested pending
termination of all proceedings, at which time such monies and all
interest accruing thereon at the rate paid on interest bearing accounts
in banking institutions or savings and loan associations in this State
shall be disbursed in accordance with the final order of judgment of the
Court.
§ 2-70 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-70.4
AO:63
§ 2-70.4. Fire Insurance; Limitation of Liability. [1973 Code § 22A-4;
Ord. No. 8-13-80]
§ 2-70.5. Fire Insurance Policies, Subject to Provisions of Section.
[1973 Code § 22A-5; Ord. No. 8-13-80]
All fire insurance policies covering real property in the Town of Kearny shall
be subject to the provisions of the article as though fully set forth in each
such policy of fire insurance.
§ 2-70.6. Administrative. [1973 Code § 22A-6; Ord. No. 8-13-80]
The Town Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this section with
the New Jersey Commissioner or Insurance immediately upon adoption.
§ 2-71. SELF-INSURANCE TRUST FUND.7
§ 2-71.1. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-08 § 1]
There is established in the Town an insurance fund for the purposes set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:10-6. It is and shall be known as the "Self Insurance
Trust Fund."
§ 2-71.2. Appropriation. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-08 § 1]
The Mayor and Council shall appropriate the monies necessary for the
purposes of the statute and this section.
§ 2-71.3. Maximum and Minimum Amount of Fund. [Ord. No.
2004-(O)-08 § 1]
The Mayor and Council shall designate the maximum or minimum amount of
the fund and from time to time provide for the disposition of any excess over
and above the maximum amount fixed, or of the interest or profits arising
therefrom when the fund shall have reached the maximum limit.
a. Nothing in this section shall be construed to obligate the insurance
company for any amount in excess of the value of the policy. Nor, shall
the company be liable for payment of any liens not appearing on the
official certificate of search or any changes made thereon which had
been submitted to the company.
b. Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to affect the authority of
the Town to enforce the payment of a municipal lien under any other
law of this State but shall be in addition to such other remedies.
7. Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1973 Code §§ 42A-1-42A-6 and
Ordinance 12-12-95.
§ 2-70.4 KEARNY CODE § 2-71.4
AO:64
§ 2-71.4. Insurance Fund Commissioners; Secretary; Appointment;
Term; Vacancies; Compensation. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-08 § 1]
The Mayor and Council shall appoint three officials of the Towns, who
may be members of the Governing Body, to serve as Insurance Fund
Commissioners and shall appoint a person to serve as Secretary to the
Insurance Fund Commission. The Commissioners shall hold office for two
years or for the remainder of their term of office as officials, whichever
shall be less, and until their successors shall have been duly appointed and
qualified. The Secretary shall serve at the pleasure of the Commissioners.
The Commissioners shall serve without compensation. The salary of the
Secretary shall be set by the Governing Body.
The Mayor and Council shall also appoint two officials of the Town who
may serve as Alternate Commissioners in the absence of any of the
Commissioners. They also shall serve without compensation.
Vacancies in the office of Insurance Fund Commissioners caused by any
reason other than expiration of term as an official shall be filled for the
unexpired term. Vacancies in the position of Secretary shall be filled in the
manner of the original appointment.
§ 2-71.5. Organization; Powers. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-08 § 1]
The provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:10-9 and 10 insofar as they apply to
municipalities are incorporated herein.
§ 2-72. MINIMUM EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS FOR EMPLOYERS
PROVIDING SERVICES TO TOWN OF KEARNY.
§ 2-72.1. Living Wage and Health Benefit Requirement. [Ord. No.
2007-(O)-41 § 1]
The following minimum pay and benefit requirements must be complied
with by contractors, subcontractors and vendors who provide work or
services under a contract awarded by the Town of Kearny.
§ 2-72.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-41 § 2]
For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COMPANY — Shall mean any natural person, corporation, partnership,
limited liability company, joint venture, sole proprietorship, associations,
trust or any other entity.
CONTRACTOR — Shall mean any company that performs work or services
under a contract awarded by the Town of Kearny, including but not limited
to janitorial or security services, on premises owned, occupied, used, or
controlled by the Town of Kearny.
EMPLOYEE — Shall mean any person who performs work at least 20 hours
of work per week for a contractor, subcontractor or vendor, including full-
§ 2-71.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-72.2
AO:65
time, part-time, temporary, or seasonal workers, independent contractors,
contracted workers, contingent workers, and persons made available to
work through the services of a temporary services, staffing or employment
agency or similar entity.
LIVING WAGE — Shall mean an amount equal to 150% of the Federal
Minimum Wage at the time a contract is awarded or renewed.
SUBCONTRACTOR — See definition of Contractor.
TOWN — Shall mean Town of Kearny.
VENDOR — See definition of Contractor.
§ 2-72.3. Living Wage and Benefits Rate. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-41 § 3;
Ord. No. 2008-(O)-08 § 1]
Employees who work at least 20 hours per week for any contractors,
subcontractors and vendors providing services under a contract awarded
the Town to be performed at various Town work sites and/or on the site of
the contractor, subcontractor or vendor shall receive the following minimum
pay and benefits:
§ 2-72.4. Applicability and Compliance. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-41 § 4]
a. An hourly rate of pay 150% of the Federal minimum wage at the time
the contract is awarded or renewed; and
b. Medical benefits shall be provided by the employer at the employer's
expense for each employee within 60 days of hiring. At a minimum, the
benefits provided shall be basic medical insurance coverage, which may
include a Health Maintenance Organization Plan with no deductible; a
hospital indemnity benefit and a doctor's office indemnity benefit.
a. The terms and conditions of this section shall not apply to any contract
authorized prior to or during the period of any contract renewal
included in a contract authorized prior to the effective date of this
section. Application of the terms and conditions of this section shall be
prospective only.
b. Compliance with the requirements of this section shall be waived for
any contractor, subcontractor and vendor currently under contract with
the Town of Kearny, if the section provisions vary with the terms of an
existing bona fide collective bargaining agreement in place at the date
of the enactment of this section, provided that all parties to the existing
bona fide collective bargaining agreement in place at the date of the
enactment of this section agree to a waiver of the application of this
section. However upon expiration of the term of the collective
bargaining agreement, all provisions of this section shall apply.
c. Contractors, subcontractors or venders employing 10 or less employees
shall be exempt from compliance with this section, providing that the
contract with Town is not in excess of $500,000 annually.
§ 2-72.2 KEARNY CODE § 2-72.5
AO:66
§ 2-72.5. Notice and Payroll Records. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-41 § 5]
§ 2-72.6. Implementation and Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-41
§ 5]
a. The Town shall advise all contractors, subcontractors and vendors of
the requirements of this section prior to the award of a contract.
b. Contractors, subcontractors and vendors who enter into contract with
the Town shall allow the Town access to payroll and benefits records to
monitor compliance with the requirements of this section, and shall
permit an employee or an employee's designated representative to
inspect the employer's payroll and benefits pertaining to that employee.
Where a contractor, subcontractor or vendor does not maintain or
retain adequate records documenting wages paid or benefits, or does
not allow the Town reasonable access to such records, there shall be a
rebuttable presumption that the contractor, subcontractor or vendor
has not paid the requisite hourly compensation. This presumption may
be overcome if the contractor, subcontractor or vendor has paid the
requisite hourly compensation.
a. The Town may interpret, implement and enforce this section, including
issuing regulations and administrative findings of violations and
instituting legal actions to enforce administrative findings. Any
regulations promulgated by the Town shall have the force and effect of
law and may be relied on by employers, employees and other parties to
determine their rights and responsibilities under this section.
b. No contractor, subcontractor or vendor or other person shall discharge
or take any other adverse action against any person in retaliation for
asserting any claim or right under this section, for assisting any other
person in doing so, or for informing any person about their rights.
Taking adverse action against a person within 90 days of a person's
engaging in any of the foregoing activities shall raise a presumption
that such action was retaliation, which may be rebutted by clear and
convincing evidence that such action was taken for other permissible
reasons.
c. Any employee harmed by a contract, subcontractor or vendor's
violation of this section may bring an action against the contractor,
subcontractor and/or vendor in any court of competent jurisdiction and,
upon prevailing, shall be awarded any appropriate legal or equitable
relief, including any compensation required under this section that was
not timely paid and an additional and amount equal amount as
liquidated damages, and shall be awarded reasonable attorney's fees
and costs of suit. Any investigation of an employer by the Town or other
law enforcement officer shall not bar an employee from bringing an
action.
d. A contractor, subcontractor or vendor that violates this section may also
be required to pay a civil penalty of an amount set by the Town or a
§ 2-72.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-72.6
AO:67
§ 2-73. THE DEFINED CONTRIBUTION RETIREMENT PROGRAM.
§ 2-73.1. Eligible Positions. [Ord. No. 2008-(O)-49 § 1]
Pursuant to N.J.S. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
§ 2-73.2. Exemption Positions. [Ord. No. 2008-(O)-49 § 2]
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S. 43:15C-2:
court sufficient to deter future violations, but not less than $200 per
violation. Each employee and each week that a contractor,
subcontractor or vendor fails to pay the total hourly compensation
required by this section or retaliates against an employee or other
person in violation of this section shall constitute a separate violation.
Civil penalties shall be retained by the Town and used to finance
activities to enforce this section.
e. The Town shall make information regarding all contractor,
subcontractor and vendor compliance with this section publicly
available during the term of any contract with the Town.
a. Town Administrator.
b. Judge of the Municipal Court.
c. Urban Enterprise Zone Director.
a. Health Officer.
b. Tax Collector.
c. Chief Financial Officer.
d. Construction Official.
e. Qualified Purchasing Agent.
f. Tax Assessor.
g. Town Clerk.
h. Building Subcode Officials.
i. Superintendent of Public Works.
j. Superintendent of Recreation.
k. Superintendent of Water.
§ 2-72.6 KEARNY CODE § 2-73.3
AO:68
§ 2-73.3. Implementation of Program. [Ord. No. 2008-(O)-49 § 3]
This section shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.43:15C-1 et seq.) as amended from
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 2-74. (RESERVED) [Ord. No. 2014-13; repealed by Ord. No.
2017-5]
§ 2-75. through § 2-85. (RESERVED)
§ 2-73.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-75
AO:69

ARTICLE VIII
Fees and Charges
§ 2-86. FEE CHARGED.
§ 2-86.1. Fee for Returned Checks. [Ord. No. 1996-0-15; Ord. No.
2012-22]
§ 2-86.2. Fees and Surcharges to Be Collected by the Tax Collector.
[Ord. No. 1996-0-14; Ord. No. 2012-22]
§ 2-86.3. Interest Rate for Nonpayment of Taxes or Assessments on
or before Due Date. [Ord. No. 2003-(O)-2 §§ 1 — 4]
a. Findings. Various departments within the Town have reason to collect
monies from residents, businesses, and other entities; and payment of
these monies is often made via a check or other written instrument.
b. Service Charge Established. Any municipal department shall impose a
$20 service charge for any check or other written instrument returned
for insufficient funds. (N.J.S.A. 40:5-18)
c. Manner of Collection. Any service charge authorized herein shall be
collected in the same manner prescribed by law for the collection of the
account for which the check or other written instrument was tendered
in cash or by certified or cashier's check.
a. Returned Check Charges.
1. The Tax Collector shall impose a $20 service charge for any check
or other written instrument returned for insufficient funds. (N.J.S.A.
40:5-18)
2. If the payment for which a check or other written instrument has
been returned is for a tax or special assessment, the $20 service
charge shall be included on any list of delinquent accounts
prepared for the enforcement of liens.
b. (Reserved)
c. Any service charge authorized herein shall be collected in the same
manner prescribed by law for the collection of the account for which the
check or other written instrument was tendered in cash or by certified
or cashier's check.
a. The interest rate to be charged for nonpayment of taxes or assessments
on or before the date when the same becomes delinquent be and hereby
is established as 8% per annum on the first $1,500 of the delinquency
and 18% per annum on any amount in excess of $1,500.
§ 2-86 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-86.3
AO:71
§ 2-86.4. Fees for Marriage and Civil Union Ceremonies Performed
by Mayor. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-16 §§ 1 — 3]
§ 2-87. OPEN PUBLIC RECORDS ACT — RATES FOR COPIES WHEN
SPECIAL CHARGES ARE AUTHORIZED BY STATUTE. [Ord. No.
2002-O-49 §§ 1 — 7; Ord. No. 2002-O-74 §§ 1 — 3; Ord. No. 2009-6;
Ord. No. 2012-22]
b. No such interest shall be charged if payment of any quarterly
installment is made within the first 10 days after which such payment
became due.
c. In accordance with Chapter 75, P.L. 1991, a penalty of 6% per annum
shall be charged to any taxpayer with a delinquency in excess of
$10,000 who fails to pay that delinquency prior to the end of the fiscal
year.
d. If the amount of any sewer user charge shall not have been paid within
30 days, there shall be a late fee charged in the amount of 8% per
annum, together with all other applicable fees and charges.
a. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, the following fees are hereby established
for the performance of marriages and civil union ceremonies by the
Mayor.
1. For ceremonies performed in the Town Hall, $50.
2. For ceremonies performed elsewhere, $100.
b. The said fees shall be payable to the Town of Kearny and shall be
deposited in the current fund as Municipal Revenue-Not Anticipated.
c. An ordinance enacted December 26, 1984 is hereby amended to
provide that the Mayor shall receive as additional salary during each
pay period the total amount of fees collected pursuant to paragraph 1
during the next preceding pay period.
a. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5b, whenever the nature, format, manner of
collation or volume of a government record embodied in the form of
printed matter to be inspected, examined or copied is such that the
record can be reproduced by ordinary document copying equipment in
ordinary business size and does not, in the discretionary judgment of
the custodian, involve an extraordinary expenditure of time and effort
to accommodate a request for copying, the fee for the requested
duplication shall be:
per page
1. Letter size (8 1/2 x 11) and smaller $0.05
2. Legal size (8 1/2 x 14) or larger $0.07
§ 2-86.3 KEARNY CODE § 2-87
AO:72
3. The same fee schedule shall apply if the request is for inspection or
examination only, but redaction is required.
4. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-131, when the request is for a motor
vehicle accident report and the request is made other than in
person, an additional fee of up to $5 may be added.
b. Whenever the nature, format, manner of collation or volume of a
government record embodied in the form of printed matter to be
inspected, examined or copied is such that the record cannot be
reproduced by ordinary document copying equipment in ordinary
business size, and, in the discretionary judgment of the custodian, an
extraordinary expenditure of time and effort is required to
accommodate the request whether the request is for inspection and
examination or for copying, a fee of $50 per hour shall be imposed
based upon the amount of time required to produce the document for
production. If copying is requested, the fee provided for in Section 1
shall also be charged.
c. When the anticipated cost of reproduction exceeds $5, the requestor
shall pay a deposit equal to the anticipated cost before any
reproduction or copying shall be made.
d. Any provision of any existing ordinance which prescribes fees for copies
of documents or reports which is inconsistent with this section is
hereby repealed.
e. This section shall not apply to the copying of any documents, reports or
records of the Kearny Municipal Court which is within the exclusive
jurisdiction of the New Jersey Supreme Court.
f. The term "meaningful medium" shall mean the medium in which a
record is maintained by the Town.
g. There shall be no charge for the inspection, examination or copying of a
document requested by the Mayor or a member of the Council or by the
Town Attorney, the Town Administrator, or other Town official, if the
request is related to and in connection with the performance of their
official duties. However, no official shall be entitled to inspect, examine
or copy any document which is protected from disclosure by OPRA, the
Federal or State constitutions, Federal or State statutes or regulations,
or decisional law.
h. Police Chief Designated as Subcustodian of Police Records.
1. The Chief of Police ex officio, without additional compensation, is
hereby designated Subcustodian of Police Records pursuant to the
Open Public Records Act.
2. The Subcustodian of Police Records is authorized to perform all of
the duties prescribed under the Act as they apply to police records.
§ 2-87 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-87
AO:73
3. The Town Clerk shall have no further obligation, responsibility or
liability with regard to the production of police records under the
Act.
§ 2-87 KEARNY CODE § 2-87
AO:74
Chapter 3
POLICE DEPARTMENT AND FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 2-87 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-87
AO:75

ARTICLE I
Establishment of Police Department
§ 3-1. COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT; ASSIGNMENT OF
OFFICERS.
§ 3-1.1. Composition. [1973 Code § 36-1; Ord. No. 7-14-76; Ord. No.
10-12-77; Ord. No. 8-8-79; Ord. No. 12-10-80; Ord. No. 10-28-81;
Ord. No. 4-12-89; Ord. No. 12-9-92; Ord. No. 1-10-92; Ord. No.
9-26-95; Ord. No. 1996-(0)-5; Ord. No. 1998-(O)-1; Ord. No.
2001-0-10; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-15 § 1; Ord. No. 2005-(O)-07 § 1; Ord.
No. 2007-(O)-74 § 1; Ord. No. 2016-5; Ord. No. 2018-28]
The Kearny Police Department shall consist of the following officers: one
Chief of Police; no more than one Deputy Chief; no more than five Captains;
no more than seven Lieutenants; no more than 17 Sergeants and no more
than 70 Patrolmen. The composition shall be implemented through attrition.
§ 3-1.2. Assignments of Superior Officers. [1973 Code § 36-2; Ord.
No. 8-8-79]
All superior officers shall be assigned to duties as directed by the Chief of
Police.
§ 3-1.3. Detective Assignments. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-15 § 2]
Within the Kearny Police Department there shall be in the aggregate a
maximum of 23 detective designations permitted.
§ 3-2. WORK PERIOD DEFINED. [1973 Code § 36-3; Ord. No.
2016-5]
The work period for uniformed members of the Police Department shall be
14 days, during which officers shall have 84 regularly scheduled hours of
work.
§ 3-3. TRAINING PRIOR TO PERMANENT APPOINTMENT.
§ 3-3.1. Prerequisite to Permanent Appointment. [1973 Code
§ 36-10]
No person shall hereafter be given or accept a permanent appointment as
Police Officer in the Town unless such person has successfully completed
a police training course at a school approved and authorized by the Police
Training Commission in the Department of Law and Public Safety of the
State of New Jersey, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
§ 3-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-3.2
AO:77
§ 3-3.2. Probationary or Temporary Appointments Permitted. [1973
Code § 36-11]
This section shall not prohibit the giving or accepting of a probationary or
temporary appointment as a Police Officer for a period not to exceed one
year, to enable a person seeking a permanent appointment to complete a
police training course as prescribed by the Police Training Commission.
§ 3-3.3. Prerequisite to Taking Police Training Course. [1973 Code
§ 36-12]
No person shall be permitted to take a police training course unless he
holds a probationary or temporary appointment as a Police Officer in the
Town of Kearny, and such appointee shall be entitled to a leave of absence
with pay during the period of the police training course.
§ 3-4. (RESERVED)
§ 3-5. FEES FOR POLICE DEPARTMENT SERVICES.8
§ 3-5.1. Fees Established. [1973 Code § 36-15; Ord. No. 4-13-93;
Ord. No. 1998-(O)-14 § II; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-27 § 1; Ord. No.
2012-22]
The following fees are hereby established for certain services provided by
the Police Department.
a. Copy of a noncriminal report: $5 for up to three pages, $1 for each
subsequent page.
b. Copy of accident report: $5 for the first page, $1 for each subsequent
page.
c. Copy of any police document not otherwise set forth in this subsection:
one per page.
d. Fingerprints for permits where fingerprints are required: $10.
e. Alcoholic Beverages Control License: $25.
f. For letters of good conduct: $20.
g. Permits to purchase a handgun: $25.
h. Copies of discovery for Municipal Court: $1 per page.
i. Reprint of a photograph: $10.
j. To view a videotape: $25.
k. For a copy of a videotape: $50.
8. Editor's Note: See also Section 2-87 pertaining to fees covered by the Open Public Records
Act.
§ 3-3.2 KEARNY CODE § 3-5.2
AO:78
§ 3-5.2. Requests for Services; Hours. [1973 Code § 36-16]
All requests for the services provided herein shall be made to the Records
Bureau at Police Headquarters, Town Hall, Kearny, New Jersey, between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excepting legal
holidays.
§ 3-5.3. No Fees Required in Certain Instances. [1973 Code § 36-17]
No fee will be charged if a report is not on file or if formally requested
by any local, County, State or Federal law-enforcement agency. The same
exception will be made in the case of request to view photographs of
accidents.
§ 3-5.4. Disposition of Moneys Collected. [1973 Code § 36-18]
A receipt shall be issued for all fees received by the Police Department for
the services provided herein and all moneys collected shall be transmitted
daily to the Town Treasurer, except on Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays,
when moneys shall be transmitted on the next succeeding business day.
§ 3-5.5. Nonapplicability. [1973 Code § 36-19]
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to compel the Kearny Police
Department to issue a copy of any record, report, photograph, writing or
document, or to permit the viewing of any of the aforementioned, unless
authorized by the Chief of Police of the Town of Kearny, or unless they are
public records that are required by law to be open to public inspection and
copying.
§ 3-6. OFF-DUTY POLICE EMPLOYMENT.
§ 3-6.1. Application. [Ord. No. 2010-19; Ord. No. 2016-40]
The off-duty employment authorized is limited to that employment which
shall be performed within the Town. This Section 3-6 also does not apply
to off-duty employment which does not involve police related services, e.g.
house painter, carpentry, electrician, and the like.
§ 3-6.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2010-19]
For the convenience of those persons and entities who utilize the services of
off-duty Law Enforcement Officers of the Kearny Police Department and to
authorize the outside employment of Kearny Police while off-duty, the Town
of Kearny hereby establishes a police regarding the use of said Officers in
compliance with the Attorney General Formal Opinion 1997-No. 23.
a. Members of the Kearny Police Department shall be permitted to accept
police related employment within the boundaries of the Town of Kearny
for private employers, nonprofit organizations, or School Board, only
during off-duty hours and at such time as will not interfere with the
§ 3-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-6.2
AO:79
§ 3-6.3. Escrow Accounts. [Ord. No. 2010-19]
efficient performance of regularly scheduled or emergency duty for the
Town.
b. Any person or entity wishing to employ off-duty Police, within the
boundaries of the Town of Kearny shall first obtain the approval of the
Chief of Police or his designee which approval shall be granted if in the
opinion of the Chief or his designee, such employment would not be
inconsistent with the efficient functioning and good reputation of the
Police Department, and would not unreasonably endanger or threaten
the safety of the Officer or Officers who are to perform the work.
a. To assure the timely payment of wages to Police Officers who perform
off-duty services and to meet the requirements of the Fair Labor
Standards Act, the Town hereby establishes a trust fund to be known as
the "Off-Duty Employment Escrow Account" which trust fund shall be
dedicated for the receipt of fees collected from private persons or
entities for the payment of wages to Police Officers for off-duty or
outside employment services.
b. Any person or entity requesting the services of an off-duty Law
Enforcement Officer in the Police Department shall estimate the
number of hours such law enforcement services will be required, which
estimate shall be approved in writing by the Chief of Police or his
designee, and shall establish an escrow account with Town Treasurer
by depositing an amount sufficient to cover the rates of compensation
and administrative fees set forth in subsection 3-6.5 for the total
estimated hours of service.
c. In any instance where the number of hours required is unknown and
cannot be reasonably estimated, or are anticipated to be in excess of 10
days, the person or entity requesting the services of an off-duty Law
Enforcement Officer shall deposit an amount sufficient to cover the rate
of compensation and administrative fees set forth in subsection 3-6.5
for the equivalent of 10 days, prior to the commencement of any work.
Any unused portion of the deposit shall be returned or credited against
the final amount owed.
d. Prior to posting any request for service of off-duty Law Enforcement
Officers, the Chief of Police or his designee, shall verify that the balance
in the escrow account of the person or entity requesting services is
sufficient to cover the compensation and fees for the number of hours
specified in the request for services. The Chief of Police or his designee
shall not post a request for services from any person or entity unless all
fees and compensation required in the manner described above have
been deposited with the Town Treasurer. All payments must be remitted
directly to the Town of Kearny. No officer shall provide any such
services for more hours than are specified in the request for services.
§ 3-6.2 KEARNY CODE § 3-6.3
AO:80
§ 3-6.4. Request for Services. [Ord. No. 2010-19]
e. In the event the funds in such an escrow account should become
depleted, services of the off-duty Law Enforcement Officer shall cease
and requests for further or future services shall not be performed or
posted until additional funds have been deposited in the escrow
account in the manner prescribed above. In the event of an unforeseen
emergent situation that would require an officer to remain beyond the
time for which funds have been deposited, the Police Chief or his or her
designee may waive the requirement for depositing additional funds
after the first 10 hours for any person or entity exhibiting a previous
satisfactory payment history. However, payment for the additional
hours shall be made by the person or entity requiring the extended
service within 48 hours.
f. The person or entity requesting such services shall be responsible for
ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the escrow account in order to
avoid any interruption of services.
a. All requests to the Town for the services of off-duty Law Enforcement
Officer in the Police Department for a period of one week or longer shall
be forwarded to the Chief of Police or his designee for posting at least
10 days before such services are required. Any Law Enforcement
Officer, when so employed by the Town, shall be compensated at the
rates established herein and treated as an employee of the Town
provided, however, the wages earned for outside employment shall not
be applied toward the pension benefits of Law Enforcement Officers so
employed.
b. All requests to the Town for the services of off-duty Law Enforcement
Officers in the Police Department for a period of less than one week
shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police or his designee for posting as
soon as practicable, but in no event less than 72 hours before such
services are required, except in emergent situations. Any Law
Enforcement Officer, when so employed by the Town, shall be
compensated at the rates established herein and treated as an
employee of the Town provided, however, the wages earned for outside
employment shall not be applied toward the pension benefits of Law
Enforcement Officers so employed.
c. In emergent situations, requests to the Town for the services of off-duty
Law Enforcement Officer in the Police Department shall be made as
necessary to the Chief of Police or his designee who shall make every
effort to accommodate such request in a reasonable manner in his
discretion. However, no Law Enforcement Officer shall be ordered to
accept off-duty assignments. Any Law Enforcement Officer when so
employed by the Town, shall be compensated at the rate as established
herein and treated as an employee of the Town, provided, however, that
the wages earned for outside employment shall not be applied toward
the pension benefits of the Law Enforcement Officers so employed.
§ 3-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-6.5
AO:81
§ 3-6.5. Rates of Compensation; Administrative Fee; Payment for
Services. [Ord. No. 2010-19; Ord. No. 2012-58; Ord. No. 2014-43;
Ord. No. 2016-40]
§ 3-6.5A. Privately Funded Repetitive Security Jobs. [Ord. No.
2016-40; Ord. No. 2017-16]
$45 per hour (four hour minimum), $5 per hour of which is an
administrative fee retained by the Town.
a. Rates of compensation for contracting the services of off-duty Law
Enforcement Officer are established as follows:
1. Town Funded Projects: Rate of compensation per hour:
Mondays to Friday
First 8 hours $55 per hour (4 hr.
min.)
Per hour after first 8 hours $60 per hour
Saturdays/Sundays/Holidays9 $65 per hour (4 hr.
min.)
2. Privately Funded Traffic, Construction Jobs:
First 8 hours paid at the top senior patrol officer o/t
rate
Per hour after first 8
hours
paid at the top senior patrol officer o/t
rate plus additional $5/hour
3. Kearny Board of Education rate:
$55/hour with a 3 hour minimum for home events
$55/hour for away events with a 5 hour minimum
3A. Kearny Non-Profit Organization Rate:
$25/hour with a 3 hour minimum for home events
$25/hour for away events with a 5 hour minimum
4. Fee for police vehicle and fuel per eight hour shift or part thereof:
$100 per shift.
5. Additional fee of $10 per hour is hereby established to cover
administrative costs, overhead, and out-of-pocket expenses of the
Town.
9. For purposes of this section, holidays shall be: New Years Day, Martin Luther King Jr.'s
Birthday, Washington's Birthday, Lincoln's Birthday, Good Friday, Easter, Memorial Day,
Fourth of July, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans's; Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas
Day.
§ 3-6.5 KEARNY CODE § 3-6.6
AO:82
§ 3-6.6. Cancellation. [Ord. No. 2010-19]
In the event that the person or entity requesting the services of off-duty Law
Enforcement Officer fails to contact the Kearny Police Department at least
two hours prior to the scheduled start time to cancel the job, or the Officer
works less than four hours and the job is completed, the Officer is entitled
to be paid for a minimum of four hours at the prevailing rate.
§ 3-6.7. Police Emergency. [Ord. No. 2010-19]
The Chief of Police or his designee shall have the authority to order any
Police Officer engaged in off-duty assignments within the Town to respond
to an emergency situation within the Town. The Chief of Police or his
designee shall also have the right to order any off-duty assignment to be
terminated when every said assignment creates an unacceptable risk to
the health, safety and welfare of the off-duty officer and/or the citizens of
the Town. In the event that a Police Officer is assigned to an emergency
situation, said person or entity where an off-duty Police Officer is called to
an emergency situation, said person or entity shall not be responsible for
the payment of the Officer's hourly rate, administrative fee or any other fees
to the Town until such time as said Police Officer and/or equipment returns
to the assignment with the off-duty person or entity who had requested such
services.
§ 3-7. through § 3-9. (RESERVED)
§ 3-10. INSPECTOR.
§ 3-10.1. Creation of Position. [1973 Code § 36-8]
The position of Inspector in the Police Department is hereby created.
§ 3-10.2. Duties; Minimum Qualifications; Salary. [1973 Code
§ 36-9]
The following is a list of the duties, minimum qualifications and probable
line of promotion of the position of Inspector in the Police Department:
a. Duties.
1. To be responsible for the enforcement of all laws and ordinances
within the jurisdiction of the Police Department.
2. To enforce rules and regulations and the discipline and efficiency of
the Police Force.
3. To supervise police work and conditions throughout the
municipality.
4. To exercise such other administrative authority and supervision of
departmental work as the Chief of Police may assign from time to
time.
§ 3-6.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-10.2
AO:83
§ 3-11. POLICE MATRON, TEMPORARY.
§ 3-11.1. Position Created. [1973 Code § 36-13]
The temporary position of Police Matron in the Police Department of the
Town of Kearny is hereby created.
§ 3-11.2. Duties; Minimum Qualifications. [1973 Code § 36-14; Ord.
No. 1-14-81; Ord. No. 11-24-87; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-60 § 5]
The following is a list of the duties, typical tasks and minimum qualifications
of the position:
§ 3-12. PARKING VIOLATION ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
§ 3-12.1. Position Created. [1973 Code § 36-14.1]
The position of Parking Violation Enforcement Officer is hereby created in
the Police Department of the Town of Kearny.
§ 3-12.2. Duties. [1973 Code § 36-14.2]
Under the supervision of the Chief of Police, the Officer shall enforce all
State and local laws or ordinances relating to the parking of motor vehicles
within the Town of Kearny.
b. Minimum Qualifications.
1. Education equivalent to that represented by graduation from high
school.
2. At least one year of experience as Captain of Police, or such other
combinations of education and experience as are considered
equivalent by the Civil Service Commission.
3. Thorough knowledge of State and local laws and ordinances,
administrative ability, coolness and resourcefulness in
emergencies, good moral character and good physical condition.
c. Probable Line of Promotion: From Captain.
a. Duties. Under the supervision of the Chief of Police, to perform such
duties with regard to female prisoners as she may be called upon to
perform.
b. Typical Tasks. To search female prisoners when called upon by the
Police Department, to assist in the transportation of female prisoners to
and from the County Jail or juveniles to any other locations where it
may be necessary to transport female prisoners or to pick them up.
c. (Reserved)
d. Salary. Salary shall be as set forth in the annual Salary Ordinance.
§ 3-10.2 KEARNY CODE § 3-12.3
AO:84
§ 3-12.3. (Reserved)10
§ 3-12.4. Salary. [1973 Code § 36-14.4]
Salary shall be as set forth in the annual Salary Ordinance of the Town of
Kearny.
§ 3-13. POLICE DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED.
§ 3-13.1. Adoption. [1973 Code § 36-24; Ord. No. 10-14-92; Ord. No.
6-9-94]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, there is hereby adopted a revision and
codification of an Ordinance entitled "An Ordinance To Provide For,
Establish, Regulate And Control A Day and Night Police, and to Regulate
And Define The Manner of Their Appointment And Removal," which revision
shall be part of the general revision and codification of all of the Ordinances
of the Town of Kearny, and which general revision is known as the "Revised
General Ordinances of the Town of Kearny," of which not less than one copy
has been made and is now filed in the office of the Town Clerk and the same
is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out herein from the
date this ordinance shall take effect, the provisions shall be controlling.
The copy of the revision and codification of the Ordinances of the Town of
Kearny above referred to as being filed in the office of the Town Clerk shall
remain in this office for the use and examination of the public until final
action is taken upon this ordinance and thereafter while it shall be in effect.
§ 3-14. through § 3-18. (RESERVED)
§ 3-19. (RESERVED)11
§ 3-20. MEDICAL BENEFITS.
§ 3-20.1. Injury While Performing Duty. [1973 Code § 36-20]
Any officer, member or employee of the Police Department of the Town
of Kearny who shall be injured while in the performance of his duty shall
a. This ordinance entitled "An Ordinance to Provide For, Establish,
Regulate And Control A Day And Night Police, and To Regulate And
Define the Manner of Their Appointment And Removal," shall be
amended to incorporate and implement the revised and amended rules
and regulations of the Kearny Police Department as of the effective date
of the adoption of this subsection.
10.Editor's Note: Former subsection 3-12.3, Qualifications, previously codified herein and
containing portions of 1973 Code § 36-14.3, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
2006-(O)-60.
11.Editor's Note: Former Section 3-19, Special Police Badge, previously codified herein and
containing portions of 1973 Code §§ 36-21 and 36-22, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 2006-(O)-60.
§ 3-12.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-20.1
AO:85
be paid full salary during the term of his injuries and for all medical
attendance required by the injured officer member or employee because of
these injuries.
§ 3-21. (RESERVED)12
§ 3-22. through § 3-40. (RESERVED)
12.Editor's Note: Former Section 3-21, Pensions, previously codified herein and containing
portions of 1973 Code §§ 37.1 — 37.5 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
2006-(O)-60.
§ 3-20.1 KEARNY CODE § 3-22
AO:86
ARTICLE II
Establishment of the Fire Department
§ 3-41. DEPARTMENT ORGANIZATION; DEFINITIONS.
§ 3-41.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 22-1]
As used in this section:
ALARM OF FIRE — Shall mean the period from the receipt of the alarm by
any means to the return of men and apparatus to quarters.
BOOK OF RULES AND/OR RULES AND REGULATIONS — Shall mean this
chapter and such additional administrative regulations as may be adopted
or promulgated by the Town Council.
CHAIRMAN (WHEN USED ALONE) — Shall mean the Chairman of the Fire
Committee of the Town Council of the Town of Kearny.
CHIEF — Shall mean the Fire Chief of the Fire Department of the Town of
Kearny.
COUNCIL OR TOWN COUNCIL — Shall mean the Town Council of the Town
of Kearny.
DEPARTMENT (WHEN USED ALONE) — Shall mean the Fire Department
of the Town of Kearny.
FIRE STATION OR STATION — Shall mean the several firehouses or
quarters in which the apparatus and men are housed.
MEMBERS OR MEMBERS OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT — Shall mean all
regular members of the Fire Department of the Town of Kearny, irrespective
of their rank or duty.
§ 3-41.2. Composition. [1973 Code § 22-2; Ord. No. 4-14-43,
10-1-80, 8-12-81; 1-10-95; Ord. No. 2005-(O)-13; Ord. No.
2007-(O)-74 § 2; Ord. No. 2016-32]
The Kearny Fire Department shall consist of: one Fire Chief; no more than
five Deputy Fire Chiefs; no more than 26 Captains; no more than one Chief
Inspector/Fire Official; no more than one Fire Prevention Specialist; and no
more than 68 firefighters. The Composition shall be implemented through
attrition to total 102.
§ 3-41.3. Command. [1973 Code § 22-3; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The entire force shall be commanded by the Fire Chief of the Fire
Department.
§ 3-41.4. Fire Station Force. [1973 Code § 22-4; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The force at each fire station shall consist of a Captain or a Lieutenant and
as many Firefighters as may be deemed necessary by the Fire Chief. It shall
be divided into two platoons, each under the command of an officer.
§ 3-41 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-41.5
AO:87
§ 3-41.5. Command in the Absence of Officers. [1973 Code § 22-5]
In the absence of the officers in charge of any of the above commands,
officers in the next lower rank, or, in the absence of officers, Firefighters
shall be designated to perform their duties.
§ 3-42. FIRE CHIEF.
§ 3-42.1. General Duty and Responsibility. [1972 Code § 22-6; Ord.
No. 8-12-81]
The Fire Chief of the Fire Department shall devote his entire time to the
discharge of the duties of his office; the Fire Chief shall be responsible to
the Mayor and Town Council for the conduct, efficiency and management of
the Department and shall report directly to the Administrator.
§ 3-42.2. Charge of Personnel; Duty at Fires; Inspections; Records.
[1973 Code § 22-7; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall have charge of the personnel of the Fire Department,
the extinguishment of fires, the necessary protection of property in
connection therewith; the making of inspections for fire; prevention and
safety of life and property; the keeping of accurate records of all business
transacted by the Department and of all fires occurring in the Town,
together with all pertinent data in connection therewith.
§ 3-42.3. Full Control of Apparatus, Equipment, Tools. [1973 Code
§ 22-8; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall have full control of all apparatus and equipment and
tools, their assignment and use.
§ 3-42.4. Purchase of New Equipment. [1973 Code § 22-9; Ord. No.
8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall recommend to the Mayor and Council, through the
Chairman of the Fire Committee and Town Administrator, the purchase of
new equipment which will increase the efficiency of the Department.
§ 3-42.5. Records of Property. [1973 Code § 22-10; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall keep an exact record of all property belonging to the
Fire Department, showing the date acquired and cost of each item, and he
shall check this record by physical inventory of the property at least once
each year.
§ 3-42.6. Responsibility for Morale and Efficiency. [1973 Code
§ 22-11; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall see that the Department is kept at the highest point
of morale and efficiency; that the fire stations and other quarters are being
§ 3-41.5 KEARNY CODE § 3-42.6
AO:88
properly conducted and are kept clean and in good repair and order; that all
apparatus, equipment and supplies are properly cared for and maintained
in proper working condition; that all drills, exercises and inspection duties
are regularly and properly performed; that all records and reports are duly
maintained and that all uniforms and equipment of the men are complete,
neat, serviceable and of approved design.
§ 3-42.7. Inspection of Uniforms. [1973 Code § 22-12; Ord. No.
8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall inspect all uniforms or parts thereof before they are
worn, rejecting all not complying with the regulations.
§ 3-42.8. Maintenance and Care of Apparatus. [1973 Code § 22-13;
Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall see that each piece of apparatus and equipment in the
Department is given a full operating test at least twice each year.
§ 3-42.9. Availability of Extra Hose in Usable Condition. [1973 Code
§ 22-14; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall see that there is at all times in the Department
sufficient extra hose in good, usable condition.
§ 3-42.10. Hose Tests Prior to Purchase. [1973 Code § 22-15; Ord.
No. 8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall see that all hose purchased for use by the Fire
Department is given a 300 pound test before it is accepted, and that it is
tested to 200 pounds at least twice each year during use to determine its
serviceability.
§ 3-42.11. Assignment to Each Member. [1973 Code § 22-16; Ord.
No. 8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall assign to every member of the Fire Department a
permanent designation by member, which shall be recorded at
headquarters. He shall keep a record of all appointments, resignations,
dismissals and deaths of all firemen as they take place.
§ 3-42.12. Regular Drills and Instructions. [1973 Code § 22-17; Ord.
No. 8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall see that all members of the Department undergo
regular drills and instructions; that a system of such drills and a school of
instruction is established, and a proper record kept thereof.
§ 3-42.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-42.13
AO:89
§ 3-42.13. Power to Demolish to Prevent Damage. [1973 Code
§ 22-18; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall have power in case of fire to demolish buildings or parts
of buildings which in his judgment are necessary to be destroyed in order
to prevent further damage of life and property.
§ 3-42.14. Authority to Assist in Neighboring Municipalities. [1973
Code § 22-19; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall have authority to send men and apparatus to
neighboring municipalities for the purpose of extinguishing fires or
protecting property left unprotected by an emergency when, in his
judgment, such action is necessary. He shall also have power to call upon
neighboring municipalities to assist in the extinguishing of fires and to
cover up unprotected territory whenever, in his judgment, it shall be
necessary.
§ 3-42.15. Monthly Reports of Fires. [1973 Code § 22-20; Ord. No.
8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall make monthly reports to the Mayor, Council and Town
Administrator of all fires which have occurred during the month and of all
fire alarms received.
§ 3-42.16. Report of Disabled Members. [1973 Code § 22-21; Ord.
No. 8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall promptly report to the Town Administrator the name of
any member of the Department who, by reason of age, disease, accident or
other disability, does not or cannot fully, promptly and properly perform full
duty in the Department, together with a detailed statement setting forth the
facts in the case.
§ 3-42.17. Enforcement of Laws and Ordinances; Report of
Violations. [1973 Code § 22-22; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall see that all the laws, ordinances, rules, regulations,
orders or directions for the government of the Department are promptly and
implicitly enforced and obeyed by all members of the Fire Department, and
that all violations that may come to his knowledge are promptly investigated
and reported to the Town Administrator, accompanied, when necessary, by
proper and well-sustained charges.
§ 3-42.18. Suspension of Members. [New]
All disciplinary action shall be done pursuant to the Rules and Regulations
of the New Jersey Department of Personnel.
§ 3-42.13 KEARNY CODE § 3-42.19
AO:90
§ 3-42.19. Supreme Command. [1973 Code § 22-24; Ord. No.
8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall have supreme command at all fires and at all times over
the members of the Department.
§ 3-42.20. Assignments; Transfers. [1973 Code § 22-25; Ord. No.
8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall make all assignments, transfers and details that may
occur by detailing another member of the Department to the position.
§ 3-42.21. Granting Special Leave of Absence. [New]
Leaves may be granted pursuant to the current Collective Bargaining
Agreements prior to their submission for payment.
§ 3-42.22. Approval of Bills. [1973 Code § 22-27; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall approve all bills for expenses of the Department prior
to the submission for payment.
§ 3-42.23. Annual Report. [1973 Code § 2-28; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall make an annual report to the Mayor and Council before
March 1 of each year as to the number and location of fires during the
previous year; the amount of losses incurred and the amount covered by
insurance; and such other information and recommendations as may be
appropriate.
§ 3-43. DEPUTY FIRE CHIEFS.
§ 3-43.1. Duty. [1973 Code § 22-29; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The Deputy Fire Chiefs shall rank next below the Fire Chief, and it shall be
their duty to carry out the orders and instructions of the Fire Chief with
respect to their commands in a prompt and efficient manner.
§ 3-43.2. Command in the Absence of Chief. [1973 Code § 22-30;
Ord. No. 8-2-81]
During the absence from duty of the Fire Chief, due to sickness or absence
from the Town of Kearny on leave or special duty, the Deputy Fire Chiefs
shall assume the duties of the Fire Chief, and, during such period, they shall
exercise the same powers, perform the same duties and be subjected to the
same rules and regulations as the Fire Chief. They shall not, however, issue
any orders making any transfers or assignments, or in any way interfere
with the general policy of the Department without the approval of the Fire
Chief or Chairman.
§ 3-42.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-43.3
AO:91
§ 3-43.3. Daily Inspections. [1973 Code § 22-31]
The Deputy Fire Chiefs shall make a personal inspection daily of all
companies and see that the Department is kept at the highest point of
morale and efficiency and that the company quarters are being kept clean
and in good repair and order; that all apparatus, equipment and supplies
are properly cared for and maintained in proper working condition; that all
drill exercises and inspection duties are regularly and properly performed,
and that all uniforms and equipment of the men are neat and serviceable
and of approved design.
§ 3-43.4. Duty to Attend Fires. [1973 Code § 22-32; Ord. No.
8-12-81]
The Deputy Fire Chiefs shall attend all fires while on duty and promptly
report their arrival to the officer in command. When at a fire they shall
assume command and have full control until the arrival of the Fire Chief of
the Department, and shall direct the movements of the officers and men so
as to extinguish the fire with the least possible damage from fire, water or
otherwise.
§ 3-43.5. Unnecessary Men and Apparatus to Return to
Headquarters. [1973 Code § 22-33]
The Deputy Fire Chiefs shall cause all men and apparatus not needed at
fires to return promptly to quarters.
§ 3-43.6. Investigation of Violations. [1973 Code § 22-34; Ord. No.
8-12-81]
The Deputy Fire Chiefs shall promptly and fully investigate all violations of
the rules and regulations of the Fire Department or any neglect of duty that
may come to their notice and shall make a full written report thereof to the
Fire Chief of the Department.
§ 3-43.7. Report to Chief if Unable to Perform Duties. [1973 Code
§ 22-35; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The Deputy Fire Chiefs shall promptly and officially report to the Fire Chief
of the Department if they are for any reason unable to perform their duties.
§ 3-43.8. Assistants to Alternate Duty. [1973 Code § 22-36; Ord. No.
8-12-81; New]
The tour of duty of the Deputy Fire Chiefs shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. and from 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. each day unless otherwise assigned by
the Chief to regular duty assignments.
§ 3-43.3 KEARNY CODE § 3-43.9
AO:92
§ 3-43.9. Full Uniform Requirements. [1973 Code § 22-37; Ord. No.
8-12-81]
The Deputy Fire Chiefs shall be in full uniform and operate from their
assigned quarters while on duty except when called elsewhere on
Department business.
§ 3-44. CAPTAINS.
§ 3-44.1. Responsibility. [1973 Code § 22-38; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
Captains shall rank next below the Deputy Fire Chiefs, and they shall have
command of their stations and be responsible for their condition and the
discipline and efficiency of the men, subject, however, to the supervision of
their superior officers.
§ 3-44.2. Duty to Respond to Alarms of Fire. [1973 Code § 22-39]
Captains shall respond to all alarms of fire in conformity with the schedule
prescribed in the running schedule.
§ 3-44.3. Duty to Direct Driver's Operation of Apparatus. [1973
Code § 22-40]
Captains shall ride as near as possible to the driver in answering alarms of
fire and shall direct the driver's operation of the apparatus.
§ 3-44.4. Command of Apparatus in Response to Alarm. [1973 Code
§ 22-41]
Captains shall see that all men and officers ride on the apparatus on alarms
of fire, and shall not permit racing or reckless driving or the passing of other
Department apparatus unless disabled, and shall not permit a return speed
of over 20 miles per hour or a speed at any time which may cause accidents.
§ 3-44.5. Report of Arrival at Fire. [1973 Code § 22-42]
Captains shall promptly report their arrival to the officer in command of the
fire.
§ 3-44.6. Command at Fires in Absence of Superior Officers. [1972
Code § 22-43]
Captains shall assume command at fires when first to arrive, and exercise
control until a superior officer appears and takes charge.
§ 3-44.7. Driving Apparatus Over Hoses. [1973 Code § 22-44]
Captains shall see that no apparatus or other vehicle is driven over any line
of hose except in case of necessity.
§ 3-43.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-44.8
AO:93
§ 3-44.8. Familiarizing Members with "Book of Rules." [1973 Code
§ 22-45]
Captains shall see that every member of their command has a copy of
the "Book of Rules" of the Department and that the rules are thoroughly
understood and obeyed by each member of their command.
§ 3-44.9. Investigation of Violations. [1973 Code § 22-46]
Captains shall promptly investigate any incapacity, inefficiency, neglect of
duty, disobedience of orders or the violation of any rule or regulation of
the Fire Department by any member of their command, and shall report
the same in writing to the Fire Chief, stating the name of the offender, the
nature of the offense, the names of the witnesses and the time and place of
its occurrence.
§ 3-44.10. Accessibility of Orders and Memoranda of Department.
[1973 Code § 22-47]
Captains shall see that all general orders and memoranda of the
Department are kept on file where they will be accessible to all members at
all times.
§ 3-44.11. Assembling for Roll Call; Issuance of Instructions. [1973
Code § 22-48]
Captains shall cause all the men on duty in their command to assemble
in full uniform on the apparatus room floor at the sounding of the 8:00
a.m. test signal, and they shall call the roll, read all orders and instructions
received since last roll call, issue any verbal instructions necessary and
instruct the men before dismissing them.
§ 3-44.12. Inspections. [1973 Code § 22-49]
Upon the visit of any superior officer for the purpose of inspection, the
Captain shall assemble the men as for roll call and report to the inspecting
officer.
§ 3-44.13. Control of Apparatus and Equipment. [1973 Code
§ 22-50]
Captains shall have full control of the apparatus and equipment entrusted
to the care of their command and shall be responsible for its care, upkeep
and safety.
§ 3-44.14. Responsibility for Fire Station and Accessory Equipment.
[1973 Code § 22-51]
The Captain on duty at any fire station shall be responsible for the building
and accessory equipment and for the ordering of supplies thereof and the
upkeep thereof.
§ 3-44.8 KEARNY CODE § 3-44.15
AO:94
§ 3-44.15. Inventory of Property. [1973 Code § 22-52]
Captains shall keep an accurate written inventory of all property entrusted
to their care and shall check this inventory by physical count at least once
a year. They shall not surrender any property belonging to the Department
without first receiving an order therefor from a superior officer.
§ 3-44.16. Station Journal Maintenance. [1973 Code § 22-53]
Captains shall see that the station journal is promptly and neatly written
up at all times and that all the events of the day and all data required by
regulations are properly entered.
§ 3-44.17. Fire Reports. [1973 Code § 22-54]
After every alarm of fire, Captains shall immediately enter or cause to
be entered in the station journal a report stating the time the alarm was
received; location of the fire; description of the property; owner and
occupant; number of box and location; amount of hose used; amount of
ladders used; number of hand extinguishers used and the officer in
command at the fire.
§ 3-44.18. Investigation of Accidents Involving Apparatus or Men.
[1973 Code § 22-55; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
After any accident involving any apparatus or men of their command,
Captains shall immediately investigate the circumstances and submit a
written report to the Fire Chief, giving the time, place and nature of the
accident, the names of the persons involved, the names and addresses
of witnesses, and any necessary comments, and they shall also promptly
report such accident by telephone to the Police Department.
§ 3-44.19. Accumulation of Trash in Quarters. [1973 Code § 22-56]
Captains shall see that no trash is permitted to accumulate about quarters.
§ 3-44.20. Drivers on Duty. [1973 Code § 22-57]
Captains shall always have on duty a driver for each piece of motor
apparatus.
§ 3-44.21. Visitors Courteously Received. [1973 Code § 22-58]
Captains shall see that visitors are courteously received, but shall not
permit any habitual lounging about quarters.
§ 3-44.22. Speaking Disrespectfully of Superiors. [1973 Code
§ 22-59]
Captains shall not permit visitors or members of the Department to speak
disrespectfully of superiors.
§ 3-44.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-44.23
AO:95
§ 3-44.23. Dormitory; Inspection. [1973 Code § 22-60]
Captains shall see that the dormitory is kept clean and neat and well aired,
and that all beds are made up and quarters throughout are clean and ready
for inspection by 10:00 a.m.
§ 3-44.24. Repair of Apparatus. [1973 Code § 22-61]
In case any apparatus needs repairing or adjustment, Captains shall
immediately notify the Fire Chief and note the fact in the station journal.
§ 3-44.25. Daily Reports of Fuel Used, Repairs Made. [1973 Code
§ 22-62]
Captains shall report daily the quantity of gasoline, oil and grease
consumed by each piece of apparatus and the repairs and adjustments made
on the same.
§ 3-44.26. Extinguishers. [1973 Code § 22-63]
Captains shall see that all extinguishers are kept freshly charged and that
all apparatus is tested frequently enough to ensure its proper operation at
all times.
§ 3-44.27. Maintenance of Sidewalks and Streets. [1973 Code
§ 22-64]
Captains shall see that the building, sidewalk, gutters and streets in front
of their quarters are kept clean and free from snow and ice and other
encumbrances.
§ 3-44.28. Familiarization with Buildings and Routes. [1973 Code
§ 22-65]
Captains shall familiarize themselves, and see that their men do likewise,
with all the buildings in their fire district and the best routes to follow.
§ 3-44.29. Records of Hoses. [1973 Code § 22-66]
Captains shall see that a proper record is kept of all the hoses on hand,
that they are always dry and properly cared for after use, that the required
amount is on hand or ordered and that they are properly marked.
§ 3-44.30. Report of Lost Tools, Equipment. [1973 Code § 22-67]
Captains shall report any lost tools or equipment immediately to
headquarters, with a statement of the circumstances.
§ 3-44.23 KEARNY CODE § 3-44.31
AO:96
§ 3-44.31. Performance of Duties Required by Superiors. [1973
Code § 22-68]
Captains shall perform such duties as may be required of them by their
superior officers.
§ 3-44.32. Instruction of Drivers. [1973 Code § 22-69]
Captains shall see that at least two men in each of their platoons are
instructed in the duties of driver and that the duty of driving back to
quarters and drilling with the apparatus is alternated between them.
§ 3-44.33. Drill and Instruction in Use of Equipment. [1973 Code
§ 22-70]
Captains shall see that the members of their command are constantly drilled
and instructed in the use of gas masks, tools and other equipment and
approved knots.
§ 3-44.34. Duty upon Returning from Fires. [1973 Code § 22-71;
New]
Upon returning to quarters after an alarm of fire, the first official act of the
officer commanding the platoon shall be to advise the Dispatcher that his
platoon and apparatus are in service, noting the time in the station journal.
§ 3-44.35. Front Doors of Quarters to Be Kept Closed. [1973 Code
§ 22-72; Ord. 8-12-81]
Captains shall see that the front doors of their quarters are kept closed at
all times unless otherwise directed by the Fire Chief.
§ 3-45. through § 3-48. (RESERVED)
§ 3-49. MECHANIC.
§ 3-49.1. General Duties. [1973 Code § 22-74; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The Department Mechanic shall have charge and control, under the
direction of the Fire Chief, of all repairs and alterations of apparatus, test
of all hose and equipment, keeping a proper record of work done, and shall
see that all apparatus in his charge is repaired promptly and as thoroughly
as possible, and shall perform such other duties as may be required or
prescribed by the Fire Chief.
§ 3-49.2. Work to Be Authorized. [1973 Code § 22-75; Ord. No.
8-12-81]
Under no circumstances shall work of any nature be performed in this
branch of the service unless authorized by the Fire Chief.
§ 3-44.31 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-49.3
AO:97
§ 3-49.3. Monthly Reports. [1973 Code § 22-76; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The Mechanic shall make out a monthly report of all work done and forward
same to the Fire Chief.
§ 3-49.4. Hours of Duty. [1973 Code § 22-77; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The hours of duty of the Mechanic shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily
except on Sundays, or as otherwise directed by the Fire Chief.
§ 3-49.5. Loaning Tools Restricted. [1973 Code § 22-78; Ord. No.
8-12-81]
The Mechanic shall not give or loan tools used in his Department to anyone
except by permission of the Fire Chief.
§ 3-49.6. Maintenance of Tools and Spare Parts. [1973 Code
§ 22-79]
The Mechanic shall see that his tools and spare parts are kept in proper
condition and a record made of same.
§ 3-49.7. Inspection and Tests of Equipment. [1973 Code § 22-80;
Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The Mechanic shall make an inspection and test of each piece of equipment
in the Department semiannually and submit a report to the Fire Chief of
same.
§ 3-50. DISPATCHERS.
§ 3-50.1. Subject to Rules and Regulations. [1973 Code § 22-81;
New]
All uniformed personnel who may be detailed or acting as dispatchers in
the Fire Department shall be subject to all the rules of the Fire Department
pertaining to Firefighters and shall rank equally with the Firefighters.
§ 3-50.2. Hours of Duty. [1973 Code § 22-82; Ord. No. 8-12-81; New]
Dispatchers shall report at their scheduled times, 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
and shall remain on duty until relieved. In case the relief operator does not
report on time, the dispatcher on duty shall notify the Fire Chief and remain
on duty until a substitute has reported.
§ 3-50.3. Duty to Remain Within Hearing Distance of Instruments.
[1973 Code § 22-83; New]
Dispatchers shall at all times be within hearing distance of the instruments
and at no time leave the dispatch room unless relieved.
§ 3-49.3 KEARNY CODE § 3-50.4
AO:98
§ 3-50.4. Quarters to Be Kept Clean. [1973 Code § 22-84; New]
On reporting for duty, dispatchers shall see that their quarters are kept
clean during their tour of duty.
§ 3-50.5. Daily Records. [1973 Code § 22-85; New]
Dispatchers shall keep a daily record book and journal in which they shall
note the exact time of receiving each alarm of fire, the station or place from
which it came and any additional pertinent data available, all alarms sent
out, tests made, trouble on wires, breaks or mutilation of register tape, time
going on and off duty, and anything else of importance which occurs, giving
in each case the exact time and circumstances.
§ 3-50.6. Familiarity with Streets. [1973 Code § 22-86; New; Ord.
No. 2006-(O)-60 § 9]
Dispatchers shall familiarize themselves with the streets of the Town.
§ 3-50.7. Reports of Circuit Trouble. [1973 Code § 22-87; New]
Dispatchers shall report any abnormal circuit condition or trouble with the
radio or alarm system immediately to the lineman or supervisor on duty,
who shall proceed to correct the same at once. This report shall also be
made to the Deputy Chief and entered in the journal, together with the
name of the lineman or supervisor notified.
§ 3-50.8. Still-Alarm Calls. [1973 Code § 22-88; Ord. No. 8-12-81;
New]
On receiving still-alarm calls, dispatchers shall ascertain street and number
clearly, also nature of fire. If in doubt of locality, dispatchers shall ask for
the name of nearest cross street and have call repeated back to them.
Dispatchers shall send three snappy rings over the alarm system or dispatch
in the appropriate manner as directed by the Chief, and give the nature of
fire and location to the nearest fire company. Dispatcher shall notify the Fire
Chief, Deputy Fire Chiefs when on duty, and all other fire stations that do
not respond, and they shall also perform any extra duty prescribed by the
Fire Chief.
§ 3-50.9. Going Off Duty. [1973 Code § 22-89; New]
On going off duty, the dispatcher shall go over the journal record of his shift
with his relief dispatcher and acquaint him with all information necessary
to give him an accurate knowledge of the condition of the system and of all
happenings during the just-completed shift.
§ 3-50.10. Test Signals. [1973 Code § 22-90; New]
Dispatchers shall send out one test signal over the alarm system at 8:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m. daily.
§ 3-50.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-50.11
AO:99
§ 3-50.11. Calls Restricted. [1973 Code § 22-91]
Local or out-of-town calls are not permitted unless sanctioned by the Chief
in charge. All outgoing calls must be recorded on the daily report book
at switchboard, recording date and number called and company or party
making call.
§ 3-50.12. Records of Members Reporting Out-of-Town. [1973 Code
§ 22-92; Ord. No. 8-12-81; New]
Dispatchers shall keep a record of all members reporting out-of-town and
when they report back again, in the daily report book, and send them to the
office of the Fire Chief each morning.
§ 3-51. FIREFIGHTERS.
§ 3-51.1. Interpretation of "Firefighter." [1973 Code § 22-93]
The grade of Firefighter in the Fire Department shall include all the
personnel of the Fire Department exclusive of the officers.
§ 3-51.2. Command in Absence of Officers. [1973 Code § 22-94; Ord.
No. 8-12-81]
In case any group of Firefighters on duty shall find that an officer is not
present to take charge, the senior firefighter in point of service shall assume
command and shall immediately report to the Fire Chief or Deputy in
command at the time.
§ 3-51.3. Duties to Maintain Quarters. [1972 Code § 22-95]
Under the supervision of their offices, the Firefighters shall repair, clean,
guard and otherwise care for the station and grounds in which they are
quartered and all fire apparatus assigned to their station.
§ 3-51.4. Performance of Duties. [1973 Code § 22-96; New]
The Firefighters shall promptly perform all duties of Firefighters as may be
established by the Fire Chief and their commanding officers and consistent
with the job specifications as provided by the Department of Personnel.
§ 3-51.5. Temporary Assignment or Transfers. [1973 Code § 22-97]
When temporarily assigned to another platoon or other duty than their own,
the Firefighters shall immediately conform to the directions of their new
officers.
§ 3-51.6. Minimum Qualifications. [Ord. No. 2011-36]
§ 3-50.11 KEARNY CODE § 3-51.6
AO:100
§ 3-52. TEMPORARY OFFICERS.
§ 3-52.1. Temporary Command. [1973 Code § 22-98]
In the absence of officers in charge of any of the commands, a member of
the next lower rank shall be designated to perform the duties of the regular
officer and shall be held to a like responsibility, and his authority shall be
the same as that of such regular officer and shall be so recognized.
§ 3-53. SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE AND FIRE ALARM SIGNAL
SERVICE.
§ 3-53.1. General Duties. [1973 Code § 22-99; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The Superintendent of the Police and Fire Alarm Signal Service shall have
charge and control of the police and fire alarm signal service under the
supervision of the Fire Chief, and he shall be responsible for the proper
installation, upkeep and repair of the police and fire alarm system and for
the training and discipline of members assigned to his Department.
§ 3-53.2. Reports of Trouble. [1973 Code § 22-100; Ord. No.
8-12-81]
The Superintendent shall report all matters pertaining to trouble of any
nature in his Department to the Fire Chief.
§ 3-53.3. Tests and Repairs. [1973 Code § 22-101]
The Superintendent shall devote all his time to the duties of his Department
in keeping the police and fire alarm system up to an efficient standard and
shall see that all police and fire alarm wires are regularly tested, especially
after storms and accidents, and that necessary repairs are promptly made.
a. Firefighter 1. All members of the Fire Department are required to be
certified as recognized by the NJ Division of Fire Safety as Firefighter
level 1 within 12 months from date of hire.
b. Firefighter 2. All members hired after January 2008 are required to be
certified as recognized by the NJ Division of Fire Safety as Firefighter
level 2 within 12 months from date of hire. Members hired prior to
January 2008 shall be certified by May 1, 2013.
c. Emergency Medical Technician (EMT). All members shall obtain an
Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) certification from the NJ
Department Health and Senior Services within 12 months from the date
of hire. This certification must be maintained throughout their career.
Failure to maintain said certification shall be grounds for dismissal
unless said failure is the result of (i) a prolonged absence from work
because of a catastrophic health condition or injury which the Chief
shall determine to be of sufficient gravity to excuse the failure or (ii) a
prolonged absence because of military leave.
§ 3-51.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-53.3
AO:101
When absent, the Superintendent shall keep the Chief informed as to where
he can be found in case of emergency.
§ 3-53.4. Inspections. [1973 Code § 22-102; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-60
§ 10]
The Superintendent shall personally inspect or cause to be inspected,
cleaned and tested the police and fire alarm system, and all instruments and
equipment connected with the system at least once a month.
§ 3-53.5. Records and Reports. [1973 Code § 22-103]
The Superintendent shall provide for and keep, as part of the public records
of his office, correct records, maps and plans of circuits, box locations,
machinery and other appliances of the system, and also see that accurate
and complete records of the work in his Department are maintained.
§ 3-53.6. Daily Reports. [1973 Code § 22-104]
The Superintendent shall submit a daily report to the Chief, setting forth all
repairs or new work done, a record of the men on duty, mileage, gasoline
and oil used on all cars in his Department and any occurrence affecting his
Department.
§ 3-53.7. Monthly Reports. [1973 Code § 22-105; Ord. No. 8-12-81;
New]
The Superintendent shall, on the first of each month, submit a report to the
Town Administrator, the Council, the Fire Committee Liaison and to the Fire
Chief on the activities of his Department for the preceding month.
§ 3-53.8. Governed by Personnel Rules. [1973 Code § 22-106]
The Superintendent shall be governed by all rules affecting the personnel of
the Department insofar as they are applicable to his Department.
§ 3-53.9. Hours of Duty. [1973 Code § 22-107; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The hours of duty of the Superintendent of Police and Fire Alarm Signal
Service shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily, except on Saturdays
and Sundays, on which days he shall alternate with the Assistant
Superintendent of Police and Fire Alarm Signal Service or as otherwise
prescribed by the Fire Chief of the Department.
§ 3-53.10. Detail of Member to Second and Third Alarms. [1973
Code § 22-108; New]
The Superintendent may be detailed to respond to fire alarms and to report
to the officer in command as needed by the Fire Chief.
§ 3-53.3 KEARNY CODE § 3-54
AO:102
§ 3-54. ASSISTANT SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE AND FIRE
ALARM SIGNAL SERVICE.
§ 3-54.1. Command. [1973 Code § 22-109; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
If appointed, an Assistant Superintendent of Police and Fire Alarm Signal
Service shall be under the supervision of the Superintendent of Police
and Fire Alarm Signal Service and Fire Chief. In the absence of the
Superintendent of Police and Fire Alarm Signal Service, he shall assume
general supervision and responsibility of the police and fire alarm signal
system.
§ 3-54.2. Hours of Duty. [1973 Code § 22-110; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The hours of duty of the Assistant Superintendent of Police and Fire Alarm
Signal Service shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. daily, except on
Saturdays and Sundays, on which days he shall alternate with the
Superintendent of Police and Fire Alarm Signal Service, unless otherwise
prescribed by the Fire Chief of the Department.
§ 3-55. LINEMEN.
§ 3-55.1. Duties. [1973 Code § 22-111; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
Linemen and other members of the Department may be assigned to the
police and fire alarm signal system from time to time, and their duties shall
be to assist the Superintendent of Police and Fire Alarm Signal Service in
maintaining, repairing and extending the municipal police and fire alarm
signal system; to keep switchboard, aerials and underground circuits of the
signal system's instruments in working order; and to do other related work
under the direction of the Superintendent of Police and Fire Alarm Signal
Service and the Fire Chief of the Department.
§ 3-55.2. Hours of Duty. [1973 Code § 22-112; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The hours of duty of the Linemen shall be from 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily,
unless otherwise so designated by the Fire Chief, except on Saturdays and
Sundays, on which days they shall alternate so that at least one Lineman is
on duty, unless otherwise prescribed by the Fire Chief.
§ 3-55.3. Duty to Respond to Alarms. [1973 Code § 22-113; New]
Linemen shall respond to fire alarms while on duty as directed by the Fire
Chief.
§ 3-56. DRIVERS.
§ 3-54 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-56.1
AO:103
§ 3-56.1. Drivers Designated. [1973 Code § 22-114]
Members of the Fire Department assigned to drive any Fire Department
apparatus shall be designated as drivers and shall rank equally with other
Firefighters and shall conform to the following rules.
§ 3-56.2. Care and Responsibility for Apparatus. [1973 Code
§ 22-115]
Drivers shall, under the direction of their commanding officer, have care
and be responsible for the keeping in proper condition and in readiness for
service at all times of the apparatus to which they are assigned.
§ 3-56.3. Familiarity with Operation and Care of Apparatus. [1973
Code § 22-116]
Drivers shall thoroughly familiarize themselves with the proper operation
and care of the apparatus.
§ 3-56.4. Operating Condition of Apparatus. [1973 Code § 22-117]
Drivers shall see that their apparatus has at all times a full supply of
gasoline and oil, that the apparatus is properly washed, greased and oiled,
that the radiator and tires are properly cared for, that the brakes and
steering mechanism are in perfect condition and that there are no loose or
defective parts.
§ 3-56.5. Reports, Records. [1973 Code § 22-118]
Drivers shall report to the commanding officer, who shall enter or cause
to be entered in the company journal, the date and mileage shown on the
speedometer and time of every run made, date and mileage and amount
of all gasoline put in the tank, and the same for each change of oil and
greasing.
§ 3-56.6. Driving Safety. [1973 Code § 22-119]
Drivers shall exercise the utmost care in driving at all times. When going
to a fire, they shall not at any time drive at a speed which will cause
accidents, and, returning from fires, they shall obey all municipal and
state traffic regulations. They shall always slow up sharply when turning
corners, approaching hospitals, schools or rail-road crossings or important
thoroughfares, and they shall have absolute control of their apparatus at all
times.
§ 3-56.7. Inspection. [1973 Code § 22-120]
At 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., drivers shall inspect their apparatus and make
sure that it is in every respect ready to make a run. They shall also start and
run the motor for a period of three minutes.
§ 3-56.1 KEARNY CODE § 3-56.8
AO:104
§ 3-56.8. Reporting Defects. [1973 Code § 22-121; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
Drivers shall immediately report any defect to their company commander,
who shall, in turn, immediately report to the Fire Chief.
§ 3-56.9. Drivers of Pumping Engines. [1973 Code § 22-122]
Drivers of pumping engines shall familiarize themselves with the principle
and operation of the pump and valves and all transmission mechanisms.
They shall learn enough about friction losses, line pressure, pumping
against head and other elements of hydraulics so that they can always
deliver the required volume of water at the nozzle with the minimum of
wear on the pump and at its most efficient speed.
§ 3-56.10. Precaution Against Freezing. [1973 Code § 22-123]
In cold weather, they shall see that antifreeze solution is used in the
radiator where possible and that every precaution is taken against freezing
of radiators or any of the mechanism.
§ 3-57. PART-TIME PUBLIC SAFETY TELECOMMUNICATOR.
§ 3-57.1. Position Created. [Ord. No. 2014-29]
There is hereby created in the Fire Department the part-time position of
Public Safety Telecommunicator.
§ 3-57.2. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 2014-29]
Under direction from the Chief or his designee the Public Safety
Telecommunicator shall receive and respond to telephone or other
electronic requests for emergency assistance, including law enforcement,
fire, medical, or other emergency services, shall dispatch appropriate units
to response sites and shall do related work as required.
§ 3-57.3. Subject to Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 2014-29]
The part-time Public Safety Telecommunicator shall be subject to all rules
and regulations of the Fire Department.
§ 3-58. through § 3-62. (RESERVED)
§ 3-63. GENERAL RULES.
§ 3-63.1. Conformity with Regulations. [1973 Code § 22-127; Ord.
No. 8-12-81; New; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-60 § 11]
a. Any general order issued to the Fire Department by the Fire Chief shall
be a rule of the Fire Department, and every member of the Fire
Department shall strictly conform to it and to the following rules:
§ 3-56.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-63.1
AO:105
b. Compliance Required by Members of the Fire Department.
1. Members of the Fire Department shall devote their entire time to
the service of the Fire Department, answer all alarms of fire
received at their station and make every effort to do their full duty
at all times and under all circumstances.
2. Members of the Fire Department shall promptly and cheerfully
obey all rules of the Fire Department and all orders received from
superior officers.
3. Members of the Fire Department shall promptly remove all persons
in danger at a fire and render such first aid as may be necessary.
4. Members of the Fire Department shall look for evidence of
incendiaries in cases of fires of suspicious origin, but shall avoid
expressing any public opinion on the same.
5. Members of the Fire Department shall endeavor to detect or obtain
evidence to convict persons sending false alarms of fire.
6. Members of the Fire Department shall carefully protect from waste
or abuse all public property in quarters and at fires. This applies
particularly to light, fuel and expendable supplies.
7. Members of the Fire Department shall not loan, sell or give away
any public property.
8. (Reserved)
9. Members of the Fire Department shall not leave quarters, a fire or
any duty without permission of their superior officer.
10. Members of the Fire Department shall not use obscene, immoral,
disreputable, impudent or improper language, but shall always be
respectful and gentlemanly to superiors, equals and citizens and
courteous to subordinates.
11. Members of the Fire Department shall at all times serve the best
interests of the Fire Department by observing and reporting all
matters pertaining to and concerning its welfare.
12. Members of the Fire Department shall not use the Department
telephone except for official Fire Department business or in case of
an emergency.
13. When answering the telephone, members of the Fire Department
shall always give their company number, then rank and their name.
14. Members of the Fire Department shall not enter in uniform any
place where intoxicating beverages are sold for any purpose except
the strict discharge of their duty.
§ 3-63.1 KEARNY CODE § 3-63.1
AO:106
15. Members of the Fire Department shall not at any time be under the
influence of any intoxicating beverages or any harmful drugs or
compounds.
16. Members of the Fire Department shall not, under any
circumstances, drink any intoxicating beverages or use any
harmful drug or compound while on duty, nor have or cause or
permit or allow the same to be brought into or kept in quarters.
17. Members of the Fire Department shall not indulge in or permit
gambling in any form in quarters.
18. Members of the Fire Department shall not violate any criminal law
or be guilty of immoral or improper conduct.
19. Members of the Fire Department shall not engage in altercations
under any circumstances.
20. Members of the Fire Department shall not be guilty of conduct
unbecoming a firefighter and a gentleman nor conduct prejudicial
to the good reputation, order or discipline of the Department.
21. Members of the Fire Department shall not be guilty of deception or
evasion or violation of any law, ordinance, rule or regulation.
22. Members of the Fire Department shall not be guilty of cowardice or
shrinking from duty.
23. Officers shall not unnecessarily jeopardize the lives or limbs of the
men under their command.
24. Officers finishing up work at a fire shall make certain that there is
no chance of rekindling.
25. Members of the Fire Department shall not invite, suggest or
request any contribution nor sell any tickets for any purpose, nor
receive any gifts of money or goods from any source without the
expressed permission in writing of the Fire Chief.
26. Members of the Fire Department shall give five days' notice of
intended resignation or retirement. Request for resignation or
retirement shall be in writing and forwarded through proper
channels. Any such request for resignation shall be a complete
waiver of any rights accrued to the member under the Pension Law.
27. Members of the Fire Department shall not permit any person not a
member of the Department to ride upon any Department vehicle.
28. All communications relating to the official business of the
Department to or from any member of the Department shall be
transmitted through official channels as follows: from a member
through is commanding officers, through the Chief of the
Department to the Chairman of the Fire Committee, if necessary,
§ 3-63.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-63.1
AO:107
and the reverse order for communications going the other way.
At each step in this channel an endorsement shall be added to
the communication, showing that it has passed through the proper
authorities and their comment on the same.
29. All applications for transfers shall be in the handwriting and over
the signatures of the applicants, stating truly and fully the
necessity therefor, and forwarded through official channels to the
Fire Chief, and members shall not, directly or indirectly solicit the
influence or intercession of any person or persons with the
Chairman of the Fire Committee or the members of the Town
Council to effect their transfer.
30. The printed form of the regulations and all amendments and
additions thereto shall be known as the "Book of Rules," and each
member shall be issued a copy and shall see that it is kept up-todate,
and each member shall make a copy of every order hereafter
issued which changes or affects the rules and regulations and
attach the same to his copy of the "Book of Rules." Commanding
officers shall be held responsible for seeing that this is done.
31. Members of the Fire Department shall not unnecessarily disturb
men asleep in the dormitory.
32. All members of the Fire Department are considered on duty 24
hours every day except when on regular or special leaves of
absence or on sick leave.
33. All members shall read and become familiar with the laws and
ordinances governing their work, with the "Book of Rules" and all
other regulations affecting them.
34. The day shall officially begin at 8:00 a.m. in the Fire Department.
35. Every member of the Fire Department shall devote his entire time
to the business of the Fire Department, and is expressly prohibited
from being employed in or giving his personal attention to any
other business.
36. No member of the Department shall under any circumstances make
any purchase or incur any liability for the Department except on
written authority of the Chief of the Fire Department.
37. Any work that is necessary to be done about the houses, lots,
apparatus or other property of the Department, or any work that is
connected with the Department, shall be done by the members if
practicable.
38. Members of the Department shall not engage in political or
religious discussions in quarters.
§ 3-63.1 KEARNY CODE § 3-63.1
AO:108
§ 3-64. HOUSE WATCH DUTY.
39. Whenever there is doubt as to the meaning of a rule or regulation,
application shall be made to the Chief for an explanation of the
same.
40. Members shall not smoke while in the street in uniform nor while
answering an alarm of fire.
41. No automobile other than the departmental cars shall be allowed in
Fire Department buildings.
42. Members shall at all times pay particular attention to all hydrants
they pass and shall promptly report any defect or obstruction to the
nearest station.
43. Members shall not receive rewards or presents of any kind for
duties performed without permission of the Fire Chief.
44. No one shall be permitted to demonstrate or sell their wares in any
fire quarters except on written permission from the Fire Chief.
45. All members shall promptly notify the Fire Chief through their
station commander of any change in their address or telephone
number.
46. Officers of the Fire Department are expected to set an example for
the other members, and any neglect or indifference or infraction of
regulations on their part will be considered an aggravated offense
and dealt with accordingly.
47. All members are forbidden to engage in critical discussions of the
management of the Fire Department or any other branch of the
municipal government while in quarters.
48. All members shall familiarize themselves with all street numbers,
hydrant locations and fire signal stations in their district and with
the most direct and least congested route to each.
49. All members shall study all the periodicals and books on the subject
of Fire Department work that are supplied to the fire quarters, and
shall always be on the alert to learn more about their profession
from all available sources of information.
50. At no time shall the apparatus exceed the speed limit or in any way
operate vehicle in an unsafe manner.
51. Racing to and from fires is strictly prohibited; and if the apparatus
of several companies proceed through the same street to or from a
fire, they shall do so in single file.
52. Each member of the Department shall address a superior officer of
the Department by his title.
§ 3-63.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-64.1
AO:109
§ 3-64.1. Continuous Floor Watch Maintained. [1973 Code § 22-128]
Continuous floor watch shall be maintained in the apparatus room at each
fire station in the Fire Department at all times, unless otherwise directed by
the Chief.
§ 3-64.2. Detail to Duty by Roster of Firemen. [1973 Code § 22-129]
The detail of the men on house watch duty shall be by roster of the
firefighters of the platoons on duty.
§ 3-64.3. Hours of Duty. [1973 Code § 22-130]
The Firefighters detailed as house watch shall begin duty promptly at the
time specified for a four-hour period and shall enter his name and the exact
time in the daily report book and the name of the man he relieves.
§ 3-64.4. Duties of House Watch. [1973 Code § 22-131; New]
The house watch shall see that everything in the apparatus room is in its
proper place and in good order, that the apparatus is ready for instant
use, that the telephone, telegraph instruments and communications and
computer equipment are operating properly and are wound up after each
alarm, that all telephone calls and telegraph signals are promptly and
properly answered and that the instruments are not tampered with.
§ 3-64.5. Responsibility for Receiving and Reporting Signals,
Alarms. [1973 Code § 22-132]
The house watch shall be responsible for correctly receiving and promptly
reporting to the commanding officer every signal sounded on the gong and
every alarm received by any means, and shall accompany his platoon in
answer to alarms of fire.
§ 3-64.6. Responsibility for Entries in Daily Report Book. [1973
Code § 22-133]
The house watch shall be strictly responsible for all entries made in the
daily report book during his hours of duty, except those made personally
by authorized officers. Any neglect on his part to make these entries, as
directed by his commanding officer or as required by regulation, or to
properly record any absence from quarters of either officers or men, shall
result in severe punishment.
§ 3-64.7. Items to Be Recorded. [1973 Code § 22-134]
The daily report book to be kept by the house watch shall be an accurate
and complete history of the activities of each platoon during its tour of duty
and all occurrences affecting it, the regular and special duty performed by
its individual officers and men, all orders received or given, whether verbal
or written, any accidents or injuries to men or apparatus, action taken
§ 3-64.1 KEARNY CODE § 3-64.7
AO:110
in reference thereto, unusual occurrences of all kinds, delinquencies of
officers or men, changing and testing of hose and charging of extinguishers,
receipt and transfer of equipment or supplies, roll calls, suspensions, leave,
sicknesses, visits of officials and anything in any way pertaining to the
administration of the company or of interest to the Department. Such record
shall be entered in the company journal by the commanding officer of the
company or a firefighter so designated by him.
§ 3-64.8. Orders, Other Matter to Be Recorded. [1973 Code
§ 22-135]
All orders, whether verbal or written, shall be entered in the daily report
book, as shall any entry of any extraordinary nature.
§ 3-64.9. Business of Visitors. [1973 Code § 22-136]
The house watch shall politely inquire as to the business of visitors and shall
then call his commanding officer.
§ 3-64.10. Violations. [1973 Code § 22-137]
The house watch shall not permit any violations of the rules and regulations
on the apparatus room floor or in front of quarters, and shall at once call his
commanding officer should a condition arise which he cannot control by his
orders.
§ 3-64.11. Members Leaving Quarters to Report. [1973 Code
§ 22-138]
All members on duty shall report to the house watch before leaving
quarters, giving their authority for leaving, and shall similarly report their
return. The house watch shall report these and all other absences in the
daily report book, recording the exact time and reason for each going and
coming.
§ 3-64.12. Failure to Comply. [1973 Code § 22-139]
Any failure of officers or men to comply with the above requirements
shall, in addition to being accounted a violation of the rules, subject the
delinquent to the charge of absence without leave during the time of such
absence from quarters.
§ 3-64.13. Leaving Post. [1973 Code § 140]
The house watch shall not leave his post unless properly relieved, and he
shall notify his successor before the time specified for his relief.
§ 3-65. ROUTINE OF DUTIES.
§ 3-64.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-65.1
AO:111
§ 3-65.1. Operation Under Two-Platoon System. [1973 Code
§ 22-141]
The Fire Department shall operate under the 2-platoon system.
§ 3-65.2. Assignment of Officers and Men. [1973 Code § 22-142;
Ord. No. 8-12-81; New]
The assignment of officers and men to stations and platoons shall be made
by the Fire Chief. The Chief may transfer any individual or group of men
or officers from one platoon or station to another for the good of the
Department and shall be reported to the Town Administrator and the
Council Fire Committee.
§ 3-65.3. Hours of Duty. [1973 Code § 22-143; New]
Unless otherwise directed by the Chief, the platoon shall go on duty from
8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. and another platoon shall go on duty from 6:00 p.m.
to 8:00 a.m. the following day. Each platoon on duty shall remain on duty
until properly relieved by the succeeding platoon.
§ 3-65.4. Officer in Charge to Read Journal Entries. [1973 Code
§ 22-144]
The officer in charge of each platoon shall, when entering upon his tour of
duty, carefully read the journal entries of the proceeding platoon.
§ 3-65.5. Officer in Charge to Assemble Platoon. [1973 Code
§ 22-145]
The officer in charge of each platoon shall assemble his platoon in full
uniform and call the roll at the exact hour for the beginning of its tour of
duty. He shall form the platoon in line, call the roll, read all orders and
pertinent matter received since last roll call, deliver any oral instructions
or directions deemed necessary, make a close inspection of the men as to
personal appearance and physical condition and dismiss them.
§ 3-65.6. Report of Members. [1973 Code § 22-146]
A report of all those present, all who were late in reporting and of all
absentees shall be entered by name on the daily report book, together
with the reason for all authorized absentees, and a similar report shall be
forwarded to the Fire Chief.
§ 3-65.7. Absence of Outgoing Platoon upon Reporting for Duty.
[1973 Code § 22-147; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
Should the platoon reporting for duty find that the preceding platoon is
absent from quarters and at a fire or other Department business, the officer
in charge shall promptly try to communicate with the Fire Chief or officer
in charge of the fire. Failing to do this promptly, or if instructed by the Fire
§ 3-65.1 KEARNY CODE § 3-65.7
AO:112
Chief or officer in charge of the fire, he shall direct his platoon to proceed
in a body on foot or by such public vehicular means of travel as may be
available and with all possible haste to the scene of the fire to relieve or
assist the preceding platoon. In such cases the Fire Chief shall keep in touch
and be aware of relief hours and whenever possible shall notify the officer
in charge of the relieving platoon whether he is to proceed to the fire or
remain in quarters so as to avoid unnecessary movement of the men.
§ 3-65.8. Arrival of Relieving Platoon at Fire. [1973 Code § 22-148]
Upon arriving at the fire, the relieving platoon shall report to the officer in
charge of the fire, who shall direct it to relieve the other platoon or shall
assign it to such other duty as he may deem advisable.
§ 3-65.9. Dismissal or Retention of Outgoing Platoon. [1973 Code
§ 22-149]
The officer in charge of the fire shall direct whether the platoon already on
duty is to be relieved upon the arrival of the relieving platoon or whether
it is to be held until he considers its services can be dispensed with. Upon
being relieved at the fire, the outgoing platoon shall return immediately to
quarters for roll call and dismissal.
§ 3-65.10. Absences and Lateness for Roll Call. [1973 Code
§ 22-150]
All members shall so time their departure from home when reporting for
roll call that ordinary delays of traffic and uncertain transit service will not
prevent their arrival at quarters well in advance of the hour for roll call. All
lateness and absences not authorized by proper authority must be explained
in writing to the Fire Chief through the platoon commander, and all such
offenders are subject to formal charges.
§ 3-65.11. Use of Dormitories. [1973 Code § 22-151]
Beds in the dormitories shall be used only between the hours of 7:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
§ 3-65.12. Bed Linens to Be Removed. [1973 Code § 22-152]
All members of the platoon shall be up at 7:00 a.m. and remove all their
linens from the beds.
§ 3-65.13. Equipment to Be Ready for Inspection. [1973 Code
§ 22-153]
All apparatus shall be cleaned and ready for inspection by 10:00 a.m.
§ 3-65.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-65.14
AO:113
§ 3-65.14. Quarters to Be Closed at Night. [1973 Code § 22-154]
All quarters shall be closed and all lights, except night lights, extinguished
by 11:00 p.m.
§ 3-65.15. Linen Changes. [1973 Code § 22-155]
No two persons shall use the same sheets and pillowcases and they shall be
changed once a week.
§ 3-65.16. Cleaning of Quarters. [1973 Code § 22-156]
When one shift returns from a fire at or after the time it is scheduled to be
relieved by the succeeding shift, the crew of the latter shall be required to
clean the apparatus and to return it to good working condition.
§ 3-65.17. Changing Shifts. [1973 Code § 22-157]
No member shall trade or substitute his shift with any other member except
on direct authority of the Fire Chief.
§ 3-65.18. Reporting Sickness, Injury. [1973 Code § 22-158]
Any member off duty who, on account of sickness, injury or any other
emergency, is unable to report for duty on time, shall notify his platoon
commander at least one hour before his term of duty begins.
§ 3-65.19. Members to Be Properly Relieved. [1973 Code § 22-159]
All members shall report for duty on time, and no member or platoon shall
go off duty until properly relieved.
§ 3-65.20. Failure to Report for Duty. [1973 Code § 22-160]
If any member fails to report for duty, his station commander may select a
member from the opposite shift to remain on duty until the absent member
reports or some other arrangement is made.
§ 3-65.21. Incoming Shift to Test Engines. [1973 Code § 22-161]
The engines of all motor apparatus shall be run for a period of three minutes
by the driver on the incoming shift just before roll call, and the driver shall,
when answering roll call, report the condition of the engine as being okay
or not, as the case may be, his report to be entered in the daily report book
and the company journal.
§ 3-66. LEAVES OF ABSENCE.
§ 3-65.14 KEARNY CODE § 3-66.1
AO:114
§ 3-66.1. Leaves With Pay. [1973 Code § 22-152; Ord. No. 8-12-81;
New]
At the discretion of the Fire Chief and with the approval of the Town
Administrator, regular leaves at full pay may be granted to members of the
Department each year pursuant to the Collective Bargaining Agreement.
§ 3-66.2. Leave Dates Set by Fire Chief. [1973 Code § 22-163; Ord.
No. 8-12-81; New]
The dates for regular leaves for each man shall be set each year by the Fire
Chief, subject to the approval by the Town Administrator. No member shall
change or trade his leave with another except by the same authority.
§ 3-66.3. Special or Sick Leave. [1973 Code § 22-164; Ord. No.
8-12-81]
All other leaves shall be known as special or sick leaves.
§ 3-66.4. Granting of Special Leave. [1973 Code § 22-165; Ord. No.
8-12-81; New]
Special leaves which are consistent with the Collective Bargaining
Agreement may be granted on written application of a member, which
application must contain an accurate and definite statement of the reasons
for requesting the leave. Misrepresentation in such requests shall be
severely punished.
§ 3-66.5. Extreme Emergencies. [1973 Code § 22-166; Ord. No.
8-12-81; New]
Special leaves shall only be granted in cases of extreme emergency, such as
severe sickness or death in the immediate family, or for some very unusual
reason satisfactory to the Fire Chief and consistent with the Collective
Bargaining Agreement.
§ 3-66.6. Leaves of Absence Staggered. [1973 Code § 22-167; Ord.
No. 8-12-81]
Leaves of absence shall be so regulated by the Fire Chief that there shall be
at all times enough men on duty to man and operate the apparatus and to
keep each company functioning.
§ 3-66.7. Conduct While on Leave or Off Duty. [1973 Code § 22-168;
Ord. No. 8-12-81]
All members shall be held responsible for any disorderly, disgraceful or
unlawful conduct while on leave or off duty.
§ 3-66.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-66.8
AO:115
§ 3-66.8. Excuse From Duty. [1973 Code § 22-169; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
No member of the Department shall excuse himself from duty.
§ 3-67. RECALL OF OFF-DUTY MEMBERS.
§ 3-67.1. Members Off Duty Subject to Recall. [1973 Code § 22-170]
Members of the Fire Department off duty shall be subject to recall to duty
in times of emergency by direction of the Fire Chief and no member off
duty shall be permitted to leave Town without first notifying the Department
telephone operator.
§ 3-67.2. Recall Orders. [1973 Code § 22-171; New]
Recall orders shall be sent out by Department telephone operators/
dispatchers to all members off duty on orders of the Fire Chief or officer in
command.
§ 3-67.3. List of Addresses, Telephone Numbers. [1973 Code
§ 22-172]
Each station commander shall keep a list on file showing the latest address
and telephone number of each member assigned to the station and shall
forward a duplicate of all data to headquarters. Each member shall report
any change of his address or telephone number within 24 hours to his
station commander.
§ 3-67.4. Response to Recall Orders. [1973 Code § 22-173]
Upon receiving the recall signal, each member shall immediately proceed
to his station, procure his equipment and then get in touch with the
Department telephone operator and, unless assigned by him otherwise,
shall proceed to location of fire.
§ 3-67.5. Recording of Off-Duty Members' Response to Recall. [1973
Code § 22-174; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
Upon receiving recall orders, each station commander shall enter in the
daily report book the names of all off-duty members with notation as to
whether or not they answered the call of reporting for duty on the recall
and any reasons for unusual lateness or absence, and a copy of these entries
shall be embodied in a report to the Fire Chief upon the ending of the recall
period.
§ 3-68. through § 3-79. (RESERVED)
§ 3-80. CHARGES AGAINST MEMBERS; TRIALS.
§ 3-66.8 KEARNY CODE § 3-80.1
AO:116
§ 3-80.1. Control and Discipline; Penalties. [1973 Code § 22-175;
New]
The control and discipline of the Fire Department shall be vested in the
Fire Chief consistent with the Rules and Regulations of the New Jersey
Department of Personnel. It shall have the power to enforce all the rules and
regulations herein provided and any administrative rules and regulations
herein provided and any administrative rules and regulations which it may
promulgate from time to time. It shall enforce these rules by reprimand,
deduction of pay, fine, reduction in rank, forfeiture of days off, suspension
from duty with or without pay or dismissal from the Department, with
the approval of the Town Administrator. The nature of the penalty shall
be in accordance with the nature and seriousness of the offense and the
disciplinary record of the offender.
§ 3-80.2. Offenses Enumerated. [1973 Code § 22-176; Ord. No.
2006-(O)-60 § 12]
Charges may be preferred against any member of the Fire Department by
any officer of the Department or any private citizen for any one or more of
the following offenses:
a. Negligent or willful injury to or waste of any public property.
b. Intoxication while on duty.
c. Disobedience of orders or commands.
d. Indecent, profane, harsh or uncivil language.
e. Disrespect to superior officers while on or off duty.
f. Neglect in promptly paying just debts.
g. Immorality, indecency or lewdness.
h. Absence without leave.
i. Incompetency, lack of energy or lack of interest in the performance of
duty.
j. Sleeping on duty.
k. Neglect of duty.
l. Violation of any criminal law.
m. Any violation of any national, State or municipal law that would tend to
bring discredit to the Fire Department.
n. Conduct unbecoming a firefighter and a gentleman.
o. Conduct subversive of good order and the discipline of the Department.
p. (Reserved)
§ 3-80.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-80.2
AO:117
§ 3-80.3. Charges to Be in Writing; Chief to Investigate. [1973 Code
§ 22-177; New]
All charges shall be in writing and shall be forwarded as promptly as
possible after the determining of the offense to the Fire Chief through
proper channels who shall in turn forward them to the Appointing Authority,
the Town Administrator. The Appointing Authority or the Chief acting on
their behalf shall investigate the merits of each charge and submit the
same, together with his recommendations, to the Town Administrator, who
shall take such action as is necessary.
§ 3-80.4. Resignation or Retirement Prohibited While Charges
Pending. [1973 Code § 22-178]
No member of the Department shall be allowed to resign or retire while
charges are pending against him, except by permission of the Town Council.
§ 3-80.5. Informal Investigation; Decision on Merits of Charges.
[1973 Code § 22-179; New]
The Fire Chief on behalf of the Appointing Authority may conduct an
informal investigation of charges or complaints against members of the
Fire Department before deciding whether or not they merit the bringing of
formal charges or a trial on charges already drawn.
§ 3-80.6. Filing Formal Charges. [1973 Code § 22-180; New]
When the Fire Chief of Appointing Authority directs that formal charges
be prepared against a member, it shall be done pursuant to the Rules
and Regulations of the New Jersey Department of Personnel as to content,
notice and service. The Fire Chief shall forward an outline of the case,
together with a record of all previous charges or other disciplinary action
against the accused. Formal charges in writing, in triplicate, shall be drawn
up, specifying the offenses sufficiently to intelligently advise the accused of
the charges. One copy of same shall be served on the accused by a member
q. Shirking of duty or any cowardly action at a fire or at a drill.
r. Bringing any intoxicating liquors upon any of the premises of the Fire
Department.
s. Making any false statement in any application for or in connection with
appointment to the Fire Department.
t. (Reserved)
u. Violating any of the ordinances of the Town of Kearny or of the rules and
regulations governing the Department, or any rule or regulation
promulgated by the Town Council or by the Chairman and approved by
the Council.
v. Intentionally making a false official statement.
§ 3-80.2 KEARNY CODE § 3-80.6
AO:118
of the Department. This copy shall be accompanied by a letter from the Fire
Chief or the Chairman of the Fire Committee notifying the accused of the
date and hour and place of the trial and of his right to obtain counsel and to
have witnesses appear in his behalf.
§ 3-80.7. Service of Trial Notices. [New]
The hour and date of serving the notice of trail and the charges on the
defendant shall be endorsed pursuant to the Rules and Regulations of the
New Jersey Department of Personnel.
§ 3-80.8. Subpoenas for Witnesses. [1973 Code § 22-182; New]
Subpoenas for any witnesses for either the Town or the defendant should be
served in person by a uniformed member of the Department, preferably an
Officer, but they may also be served in a manner consistent with the Rules
of Court for the State of New Jersey.
§ 3-80.9. Public or Private Trials. [1973 Code § 22-183; New]
The trial of a member of the Department on formal charges shall be held
before the Appointing Authority (Town Administrator), either publicly or
privately as may be prescribed in the Rules and Regulations of the New
Jersey Department of Personnel.
§ 3-80.10. Persons Required at Trial. [1973 Code § 22-184]
At the date and hour set for the trial, all witnesses, the defendant and
his counsel shall be present, if practical, and all members of the Fire
Department appearing as witnesses shall be in full uniform.
§ 3-80.11. Trial Procedure. [1973 Code § 22-185; New]
Trial procedure shall be pursuant to the Rules and Regulations of the
New Jersey Department of Personnel. All witnesses shall be sworn before
testifying and a record kept of the name of the witnesses. The defendant
shall be permitted to cross-examine the witnesses of the prosecution. Prior
to the commencement of the hearing before the Appointing Authority, the
defendant shall announce if he or she is pleading guilty.
§ 3-80.12. Decision and Sentencing. [1973 Code § 22-186]
The decision and sentence of the Fire Committee in each case shall be
rendered in writing, in triplicate, and a copy delivered to the defendant.
§ 3-81. SICK LEAVE.
§ 3-81.1. Notification of Sickness. [1973 Code § 22-187]
Upon any member of the Fire Department becoming sick or otherwise
physically incapacitated from performing full duty, he shall immediately
§ 3-80.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-81.1
AO:119
notify the Fire Chief through headquarters. The Fire Chief shall, at his
discretion, notify the physician, who shall promptly examine the member
and determine whether or not he shall be excused from duty, and shall
immediately notify the Fire Chief through headquarters of his
recommendations.
§ 3-81.2. Physician's Report. [1973 Code § 22-188]
Whenever the physician examines a firefighter for sickness or physical
disability, he shall send a written report to the Fire Chief, indicating the
name of the man examined, the nature of his disability and the
recommendation thereon. If he excuses the man from duty, he shall so
indicate on the report, together with an estimate of the probable length of
time the man will be absent from work.
§ 3-81.3. Injury. [1973 Code § 22-189; New]
If a member of the Department is injured or taken suddenly ill in quarters,
the commanding officer shall immediately notify the Fire Chief and be
guided by him, as well as follow the procedures in place for injury while
working.
§ 3-81.4. Members on Sick Leave Restricted to Residence. [1973
Code § 22-190; New]
No member on sick leave shall be allowed to leave his place of residence
except upon permission of the Fire Chief, who shall base said permission on
a report from the physician.
§ 3-81.5. Report of Accidents, Injury, Sickness. [1973 Code
§ 22-191]
All members of the Department shall immediately report any accident,
sickness or injury to themselves, no matter how slight, to their commanding
officer, stating the cause and extent of that injury or sickness.
§ 3-82. through § 3-94. (RESERVED)
§ 3-95. BILL OF DRESS.
§ 3-95.1. Insignia. [1973 Code § 22-192; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The following shall be the insignia of rank of the members of the Fire
Department:
a. For the Fire Chief, five crossed trumpets with bells projecting beyond
the mouthpieces and gold-plated.
b. For the Deputy Fire Chiefs, three crossed trumpets with bells
projecting beyond the mouthpieces and gold-plated.
§ 3-81.1 KEARNY CODE § 3-95.1
AO:120
§ 3-95.2. Coat Badges. [1973 Code § 22-193; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
Whenever so directed by the Fire Chief, there shall be worn a coat badge on
the left breast on the outside, and this badge shall be as follows:
c. For Captains of engine companies, two trumpets vertically arranged
and parallel, with the bells downward and nickel-plated.
d. For Lieutenants of engine companies, one trumpet horizontally
arranged, bell to the right and nickel-plated.
e. For Captains of truck and ladder companies, two axes vertically
arranged and parallel, with the blades at the top and edges toward each
other and nickel-plated.
f. For Lieutenants of truck and ladder companies, one axe horizontally
arranged, with the edge down and to the left and nickel-plated.
g. For the Mechanic of the Fire Department, the same insignia as for
Lieutenants of engine companies, except that in the center there shall
be a circle containing a motor engine and all nickel-plated.
h. For the Lineman of the Police and Fire Alarm Signal Service, the same
insignia as for Lieutenants of engine companies, except that in the
center there shall be a circle containing a spray of forked lightning and
superimposed on these a vertical clenched fist and all nickel-plated.
i. For the Superintendent of Police and Fire Alarm Signal Service, the
same insignia as for Captains of engine companies, except that in the
center there shall be a small circle containing a spray of forked
lightning and superimposed on these a vertical clenched fist and all
gold-plated.
j. For the Assistant Superintendent of Police and Fire Alarm Signal
Service, the same insignia as for Captains of engine companies, except
that in the center there shall be a small circle containing a spray of
forked lightning and superimposed on these a vertical clenched fist and
all nickel-plated.
k. For all other members of the Fire Department, a Maltese cross with
"Kearny" in the top arm, hook and ladder crossed on the left arm,
hydrant in the right arm and the words "Fire Department" in the bottom
arm, and in the center of the cross a circle containing the registered
number of the member in raised letters, horizontally arranged, all
nickel-plated.
a. For all officers, a shield surmounted by a spread eagle, the whole to be
1 3/4 inches high and 1 1/4 inches wide, the insignia of rank in a oneinch-
diameter circle in the center of the shield, surmounted by a circle
of words indicating the rank of office and in the lower part "Kearny" and
with the letters "N.J." at the bottom of the shield. The rank shall be
placed at the top of the shield between the spread eagle and the one-
§ 3-95.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-95.2
AO:121
§ 3-95.3. Cap Insignia. [1973 Code § 22-194; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
On all uniform caps, a cap insignia shall be worn fastened to the front
midway between the top and the chin strap; these cap insignia shall be as
follows:
§ 3-95.4. Collar Insignia. [1973 Code § 22-195]
All officers shall wear on their coats in each lapel above the notch a collar
insignia consisting of the insignia of rank on a round metal background one
inch in diameter, with a mounting screw at the back and plated as is the
insignia of rank.
§ 3-95.5. Buttons. [1973 Code § 22-196]
All exposed buttons shall be of metal, round in shape with a fastening eye at
the back. The button insignia shall consist of a wreath with the block letters
"F.D." horizontally arranged at the center.
§ 3-95.6. Shirts. [1973 Code § 22-197]
A regulation uniform shirt shall always be worn with the uniform coat and
shall be made as follows:
inch circle, all to be plated as is the insignia of rank and to be fastened
to the coat with a vertical pin at the back.
b. For all other members, the insignia of rank, a two-inch square with a
vertical pin at the back.
a. For the Fire Chief and the Deputy Fire Chiefs, the insignia of rank 1 1/4
inches in diameter on a round background 1 5/8 inches in diameter,
with mounting crew at the back, all gold-plated.
b. For all Captains, Superintendent and Assistant Superintendent, the
insignia of rank on an oval background two inches wide by 1 5/8 inches
high, with mounting screw at the back and all plated as is the insignia of
rank.
c. For all Lieutenants, the insignia of rank on an oval background 1 1/34
inches wide and two inches high, with mounting screw at the back and
nickel-plated.
d. For all other members, the insignia of rank two inches square, with
mounting screw at the back.
a. For all officers, it shall consist of a plain white linen or muslin shirt with
a rolling collar high enough to show at the back of the coat collar and
with a medium-width opening at the front.
b. For all other members, it shall consist of a plain gray linen or cotton
shirt with soft or semistarched rolling collar.
§ 3-95.2 KEARNY CODE § 3-95.7
AO:122
§ 3-95.7. Tie. [1973 Code § 22-198]
A regulation uniform tie shall always be worn with the uniform coat and
shall consist of a plain black tie of good material passed around the inside
of the collar of the shirt and fastened with a four-in-hand knot in front.
§ 3-95.8. Shoes. [1973 Code § 22-199]
Regulation uniform shoes of plain black leather cut either high or low shall
always be worn with uniform trousers.
§ 3-95.9. Gloves. [1973 Code § 22-200; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
White lisle gloves shall be worn at ceremonies and official inspections and
as directed by the Fire Chief.
§ 3-95.10. Cap. [1973 Code § 22-201; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The regulation uniform cap shall be worn summer and winter and shall be
as follows:
§ 3-95.11. Winter Overcoat and Summer Uniform. [1973 Code
§ 22-202; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
Winter overcoats and summer uniforms shall be as prescribed by the Fire
Chief with the approval of the Chairman of the Fire Committee.
a. For the Fire Chief and Deputy Fire Chief, a cap of regulation indigo
blue, sixteen-ounce wool cloth, three inches high all around with a bell
crown with two ventilator holes on each side. The lower portion of the
sides shall be covered with a black silk velvet band 1 1/2 inches wide.
The visor shall be sloping, or patent leather, two inches long with bound
edges and lined with green cloth. Above the visor, there shall be a
gilded flexible metal chin strap fastened at each end with regulation
buttons. It shall be fully lined and the inside of the top protected with a
noninflammable sweat guard. The sweat band shall be 1 1/2 inches
high.
b. For Superintendents, the cap shall be the same as that for the Chief,
except that the band around the lower side of the cap shall be of black
mohair.
c. For all other officers, the cap shall be the same as that for the
Superintendents, except that the chin strap and buttons shall be nickelplated.
d. For all other members, the cap shall be the same as that for the officers,
except that the band around the lower side of the cap shall be of plain
blue cloth, of the same material as the cap. It shall have a welt rim and
welt midway of the rim, and the chin strap shall be of one-half-inch wide
patent leather fastened at the end with regulation cap buttons.
§ 3-95.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-95.12
AO:123
§ 3-95.12. Members to Provide Own Bill of Dress. [1973 Code
§ 22-203; New]
All members shall provide themselves with a full bill of dress within 30 days
of their appointment or promotion to a new rank, and every member of the
Department shall at all times own and be provided with the full equipment
specified in this bill of dress, in good, serviceable condition, and shall use
none other than his own. Said provision subject to the Bargaining Unit
Agreement between the members of the Department and the Town where
applicable.
§ 3-95.13. Expenses. [1973 Code § 22-204; New]
All expenses for bill of dress shall be paid by each member. Said provision
subject to the Bargaining Unit Agreement between the members of the
Department and the Town where applicable.
§ 3-95.14. Dress Requirement at Fires. [1973 Code § 22-205; New]
Unless otherwise directed, all members shall wear the regulation fire
helmet and rubber coat and boots at all alarms of fire, except that drivers
may wear the uniform cap when driving. All members are required to
wear the turnout gear ordered by the Fire Chief consistent with all legal
requirements.
§ 3-95.15. Dress Requirement When on Duty. [1973 Code § 22-206]
All members shall wear the full uniform and regulation dress at all times
when on duty, and no member shall wear the uniform dress or any part
thereof when off duty.
§ 3-95.16. Time for House Fatigues Uniform. [1973 Code § 22-207]
House fatigues uniform may be worn only within the limits of the engine
house or yard, and no member shall leave these limits unless in full uniform
fully buttoned up, except when answering an alarm of fire or performing
some duty for which it is impractical to change.
§ 3-95.17. Seasonal Dress Requirements. [1973 Code § 22-208; Ord.
No. 8-12-81]
Summer coats shall be worn from April 15 to November 15 and winter coats
from November 15 to April 15, subject to the discretion of the Fire Chief.
§ 3-95.18. Uniform Inspection Annually. [1973 Code § 22-209; Ord.
No. 8-12-81]
The Fire Chief shall make a uniform inspection once each year.
§ 3-95.12 KEARNY CODE § 3-95.19
AO:124
§ 3-95.19. Trousers. [1973 Code § 22-210; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
Regulation uniform trousers shall be the same for all members and for both
summer and winter wear. They shall be cut to fit close at the waist but free
at buttocks and legs, with lap seams at the sides and no cuffs at the bottom.
The cloth shall be of the same material, weight and color as prescribed for
the officers' summer coat. They shall be held in place by a black belt or
black suspenders.
§ 3-95.20. House Fatigues Uniform; Specifications. [1973 Code
§ 22-211; New]
The regulation house fatigues uniform shall consist of the regulation shirt
with or without a tie, and khaki or corduroy trousers or as required by law.
§ 3-95.21. Fire Helmets. [1973 Code § 22-212; Ord. No. 8-12-81;
New]
The regulation "warbaby" fire helmet shall be made of leather specially
prepared to give the required stiffness. The crown of the helmet shall have
four combs or ribs to give added strength inside the crown; at the base
there shall be a metal reinforcing band securely riveted into place and
designed so as to maintain the head size of the helmet. There shall be a
lining of substantial material, shaped so as to hold the head away from the
top of the helmet; between the lining and the side of the head there shall be
a layer of insulating material. The brim of the helmet shall be of oval shape
approximately 11 by 14 inches, its edge rolled with a piece of stiff wire with
ends butt-welded securely stitched therein. The brim shall extend about two
inches at the front, drooping in a curve to about one inch below the base of
the crown at the front and about two inches below at the rear. Applicable
legal requirements may prevent the above, in which case said requirements
would apply.
a. For the Fire Chief, the helmet shall be as above described, white in
color, with a gilt leather front piece having the insignia of rank (five
crossed trumpets) in the center and the initials "K.F.D." below.
b. For the Deputy Fire Chiefs, same as that for the Chief, but with the
insignia of rank (three crossed trumpets).
c. For Captains of engine companies, the helmet shall be as first
described, black in color, and shall have a white patent-leather front
piece with the company number in black raised in the center, initials
"K.F.D." in black at the bottom, two trumpets placed vertically, one on
each side of the company number.
d. For Lieutenants of engine companies, the same as that for Captains,
except that there shall be a single trumpet set horizontally with the bell
to the right and just above the company number.
§ 3-95.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-95.21
AO:125
§ 3-96. UNIFORMED MEMBERS: SCHEDULE OF ACTUAL DUTY.
§ 3-96.1. Schedule of Actual Duty Established. [1973 Code § 22-213]
There is hereby established in the Fire Department a schedule of actual
duty for each paid member of the Fire Department so that each paid
member shall be on actual duty for an average of 42 hours per week in any
eight week cycle, except as hereinafter provided. Said schedule of actual
duty is hereafter set forth in subsections 3-96.2 through 3-96.7.
§ 3-96.2. Group Divisions. [1973 Code § 22-214]
The uniformed members of the Fire Department shall be divided into four
groups.
§ 3-96.3. Assignment of Uniformed Members. [1973 Code § 22-215]
The Fire Chief of the Fire Department of the Town of Kearny shall assign
the uniformed members of said Fire Department to each group.
§ 3-96.4. Arrangement of Duty into Irregular Tours. [1973 Code
§ 22-216; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The schedule of actual duty in each eight week cycle shall be arranged by
the Fire Chief so that each member of the several groups above mentioned
shall perform irregular tours of duty consisting of 10 hours each and 14
hours each, averaging 42 hours per week in an eight week cycle.
e. For Captains of hook and ladder companies, same as that for Captains
of engine companies, except that the number and letters shall be in red
and two axes shall be set alongside the company number.
f. For Lieutenants of hook and ladder companies, the same as that for
Captains of hook and ladder companies, except that the insignia shall
be one axe horizontally with the head at the left and above the company
number.
g. For all of the members of the engine companies, same as that for the
officers of the engine companies, but the front piece shall be black with
the company number in white and the initials "K.F.D." in white just
below the number.
h. For all of the members of the hook and ladder companies, same as that
for the officers of the hook and ladder companies, except that the front
piece shall be of red patent leather with the company number in white
and the letters "K.F.D." in white just below the number.
§ 3-95.21 KEARNY CODE § 3-96.5
AO:126
§ 3-96.5. Hours of Duty. [1973 Code § 22-217]
The ten hour tour of duty shall commence at 8:00 a.m. and end at 6:00 p.m.
of the same day. The fourteen-hour tour of duty shall commence at 6:00 p.m.
and end the following day at 8:00 a.m.
§ 3-96.6. Emergencies. [1973 Code § 22-218]
In times of emergency the officer, board or official having charge or control
of the Fire Department shall be permitted to summon and keep on duty as
many such firemen as shall be necessary, within the sole discretion of such
officer, board or official to cope with such emergency; provided that any
member of such Fire Department so kept on duty during such emergency
shall receive, during the next 12 months thereafter, a number of hours
free from actual duty, deducted from such 42 average hours, equal to the
number of hours in excess of an average of 42 hours per week in any eight
week cycle which he shall have served during such emergency.
§ 3-96.7. Exceptions. [1973 Code § 22-219; Ord. No. 8-12-81]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the Fire Chief of the Fire
Department.
§ 3-97. SERVICES REQUESTED BY PRIVATE BUSINESS AND
ORGANIZATIONS. [Added 12-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-37]
§ 3-97.1. Applicability.
The services authorized herein are limited to services which shall be
performed within the Town, and apply only to "fire watch" services provided
to private businesses. It shall not apply to any emergency response provided
by the Fire Department.
§ 3-97.2. Purpose.
The Town of Kearny hereby establishes a policy regarding the provision of
"fire watch" services by the Fire Department.
§ 3-97.3. Request for Services.
a. The Kearny Fire Department shall be permitted to provide "fire watch"
services within the boundaries of the Town of Kearny for private
employers for activities on private property such as the use or sale of
fireworks, and activities using pyrotechnics or open flames.
b. The services provided for herein shall only be provided at times and
locations where the Fire Chief determines such deployment is
necessary, would not be inconsistent with the efficient functioning and
good reputation of the Fire Department, and would not unreasonably
endanger or threaten the safety of the Fire Department personnel who
are to perform the work.
§ 3-96.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-97.3
AO:127
§ 3-97.4. Rates of Compensation; Administrative Fee; Payment for
Services.
Rates of compensation for contracting for Fire Department services are
established as follows:
§ 3-97.5. Cancellation.
In the event that the person or entity requesting the services of the Kearny
Fire Department fails to contact the Kearny Fire Department at least 24
hours prior to the scheduled start time to cancel the job, the Town is entitled
a. All requests to the Town for Fire Department "fire watch" services shall
be forwarded to the Fire Chief or his designee at least 10 days before
such services are required. The request will include the type of activity
requiring the fire watch, and the dates/times when such services are
requested.
b. In emergent situations, requests to the Town for fire watch services by
the Fire Department shall be made as necessary to the Fire Chief or his
designee who may accommodate such request in a reasonable manner
in his discretion.
c. The Fire Chief or his designee shall determine the number of Fire
Department personnel and vehicles to be assigned to the fire watch.
a. Rate of compensation per hour for each Fire Department person on
site:
Monday to Friday
First 8 hours $55 per hour (4 hr. min.)
Per hour after first 8 hours $60 per hour
Saturdays/Sundays/Holidays* $65 per hour (4 hr. min.)
NOTES:
* For purposes of this section, holidays shall be: New Year's Day,
Martin Luther King's Birthday, Washington's Birthday, Lincoln's
Birthday, Good Friday, Easter, Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor
Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas
Day.
b. Fee for fire vehicle (other than fire engine truck) and fuel per eight-hour
shift or part thereof: $250 per vehicle per shift.
c. Fee for fire engine truck and fuel per eight-hour shift or part thereof:
$500 per vehicle per shift.
d. Additional fee of $10 per hour is hereby established to cover
administrative costs, overhead, and out-of-pocket expenses of the Town.
§ 3-97.3 KEARNY CODE § 3-97.5
AO:128
to be paid for a minimum of four hours at the rates set forth in Subsection
3-97.4.
§ 3-97.6. Public Emergency.
The Fire Chief or his designee shall have the authority to order any Fire
Department personnel engaged in fire watch services within the Town to
respond to an emergency situation within the Town. The Fire Chief or his
designee shall also have the right to order any fire watch assignment to be
terminated whenever said assignment creates an unacceptable risk to the
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town. In these instances
the entity requesting the fire watch services shall not be responsible for the
payment of the hourly rate, administrative fee or any other fees to the Town
until such time as the Kearny Fire Department returns to the "fire watch"
assignment.
§ 3-98. through § 3-99. (RESERVED)
§ 3-100. EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE.
§ 3-100.1. Trained Personnel to Provide. [1973 Code § 22-220; Ord.
No. 4-11-95]
The Kearny Fire Department, through its trained and certified personnel,
shall be authorized and empowered to provide emergency medical service
in conjunction with their duties of employment.
§ 3-97.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-100.1
AO:129
Chapter 4
POLICE REGULATIONS
§ 4-1. ALARM SYSTEMS.
§ 4-1.1. Purpose. [1973 Code § 48A-1; Ord. No. 8-10-83]
The purpose of this section is to provide regulations for various types
of burglar and fire emergency devices, whether being direct line, radio,
telephone or other means of activating a device to the Police Headquarters
of the Town of Kearny which would require response thereof by the Police
Department, Fire Department or other municipal agency.
§ 4-1.2. Scope. [1973 Code § 48A-1; Ord. No. 8-10-83]
The provisions of this section shall apply to any person who operates,
maintains, or owns any alarm device or local alarm system designed to
summon the Police or Fire Department or other municipal agency to any
location in response to any type of alarm signal.
§ 4-1.3. Definitions. [1973 Code § 48A-3; Ord. No. 8-10-83]
As used in this section:
ALARM SYSTEM — Shall mean any alarm device providing a signal to
the Police Department by means of telephone lines or other radio method
providing warning of intrusion, fire, smoke, flood or other peril or any other
device audible or otherwise, resulting in Police response.
FALSE ALARM — Shall mean the activation of an alarm system by
inadvertence, negligence, malfunction or unintentional act of someone
other than an intruder but does not include alarms caused by hurricanes,
storms or other climatic conditions, and shall also include the deliberate
activation of an alarm system in order to test the alarm without prior
notification to the Police Department of the alarm test.
The Police Department shall determine that a malfunction has occurred
when an alarm is activated and no cause for the activation of the alarm can
be determined.
PERSON — Shall mean and include any natural person, partner or
corporation or association.
§ 4-1.4. Regulations. [1973 Code § 48A-4; Ord. No. 8-10-83]
In the event an alarm system is activated under conditions heretofore
defined as false alarm, the Chief of Police shall cause an investigation to be
made and keep a record of the instance on file.
When it is determined by the Police Department that four false alarms have
occurred in any given calendar year, a warning shall be issued by the Police
Department to the owner, user or maintainer of the alarm system, notifying
§ 3-100.1 KEARNY CODE § 4-1.4
AO:130
him that in the event of a 5th false alarm in the same calendar year, a
summons will be issued citing a violation under this section.
§ 4-1.5. Penalties. [1973 Code § 48A-5; Ord. No. 8-10-83; Ord. No.
2000-0-48; Ord. No. 2002-O-83 § 5]
§ 4-2. DRUG-FREE ZONES.
§ 4-2.1. Drug-Free School Zone Map Adopted. [1973 Code § 69-1;
Ord. No. 10-26-88; Ord. No. 1999-O-27 § 2; Ord. No. 2016-42; Ord.
No. 2019-12]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, the drug-free school zone map dated February
28, 2019, prepared by Michael Neglia, PE, PLS, PP, the Municipal Engineer,
is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and record of the
locations and areas within the Town of property which is used for school
purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary
school or school board, and of the areas within 1,000 feet of such school
property.
§ 4-2.2. Location and Boundaries of School Property. [1973 Code
§ 69-2; Ord. No. 10-26-88]
The drug-free school zone map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 4-2.1 shall continue to constitute an official finding and record as
to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of property
owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board
which is used for school purposes until such time if any, that this chapter
shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect to the
location and boundaries of school property and drug-free school zones.
§ 4-2.3. Notification of Changes in Location and Boundaries. [1973
Code § 69-3; Ord. No. 10-26-88]
The School Board or the Chief Administrative Officer in the case of any
private or parochial school is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal
a. Any person found guilty after trial in the Municipal Court for violation
of a false alarm for the 4th to 5th occurrences in the same calendar year
shall be fined the sum of $50.
b. For the 6th to 10th occurrences in the same calendar year the fine shall
be $75.
c. For the 11th to 20th occurrences the fee shall be $100.
d. Any further violations in the same calendar year beyond 20 shall subject
the violator to a penalty up to a maximum of $1,000 within the
discretion of the Municipal Judge, with a mandatory court appearance
required.
§ 4-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-2.3
AO:131
Attorney of any changes or contemplated changes in the location and
boundaries of any property owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board and which is used for school purposes.
§ 4-2.4. Copies of Map on File. [1973 Code § 69-4; Ord. No.
10-26-88]
The Town Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the original
of the map approved and adopted pursuant to subsection 4-2.1, and to
provide, at a reasonable cost, a true copy thereof to any person, agency
or court which may from time to time request such a copy, along with a
certification that such copy is a true copy of the map approved and adopted
herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true copy of such
map and of this chapter shall be provided without cost to the County Clerk
and to the office of the Hudson County Prosecutor.
§ 4-2.5. Map to be Used as Evidence. [1973 Code § 69-5; Ord. No.
10-26-88]
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
a. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 4-2.1 was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence in
prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this State, and that
pursuant to State Law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence
of the following:
1. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
municipality;
2. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board;
3. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
4. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
b. All of the property depicted on the map approved and adopted herein as
school property was owned by or leased to a school or school board and
was being used for school purposes as of July 9, 1987, that being the
effective date of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.
c. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, a Prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that Statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to subsection 4-2.1. The failure of the map approved
herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property which is, in
fact, used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any
§ 4-2.3 KEARNY CODE § 4-2.5
AO:132
§ 4-2A. DRUG-FREE ZONES AROUND PUBLIC PROPERTIES.
§ 4-2A.1. Drug-Free Public Property Zone Map Adopted. [Ord. No.
1999-0-27 § 3; Ord. No. 2016-42; Ord. No. 2019-12]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, the drug-free public property zone map dated
February 28, 2019, prepared by Michael Neglia, PE, PLS, PP, the Municipal
Engineer, is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and record
of the locations and areas within the Town of property which is used for a
public housing facility owned by or leased to a housing authority or that is
used for any public park, or public building, and of the areas on or within
500 feet of such public housing, public park, or public building property.
§ 4-2A.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1999-0-27 § 3]
As used in this section:
PUBLIC BUILDING — Shall mean any publicly owned or leased edifice or
structure.
PUBLIC HOUSING FACILITY — Shall mean any dwelling, complex of
dwellings, accommodation, building, structure, or facility and real property
of any nature appurtenant thereto and used in connection therewith, which
is owned by or leased to a local housing authority in accordance with
the "Local Redevelopment and Housing Law," 1992 (N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1, et
seq.) for the purpose of providing living accommodations to persons of low
income.
PUBLIC PARK — Shall mean a park, recreation facility or area, or
playground owned or controlled by a State, County, or local government
unit.
§ 4-2A.3. Location and Boundaries of Public Zone Property. [Ord.
No. 1999-0-27 § 3]
The drug-free public zone map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 4-2A.1 shall continue to constitute an official finding and record
as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 500 feet of a public
housing facility, public park or public building until such time, if any, this
chapter shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with respect
elementary or secondary school or school board, whether the absence
of such depiction is the result of inadvertent omission or the result of
any changes in the location and boundaries of such property which have
not yet been incorporated into a revised approved map, shall not be
deemed to be an official finding and record that such property is not
owned by or leased to a school or school board, or that such property is
not used for school purposes.
d. All of the requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a drug-free school zone map have
been complied with.
§ 4-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-2A.3
AO:133
to the location and boundaries of public housing facilities, public parks,
public buildings and drug-free public housing, public parks, and public
building zones.
§ 4-2A.4. Copies of Map on File. [Ord. No. 1999-0-27 § 3]
The Town Clerk is hereby directed to receive and to keep on file the original
of the map approved and adopted pursuant to subsection 4-2A.1, and to
provide, at a reasonable cost, a true copy thereof to any person, agency
or court which may from time to time request such a copy, along with
a certification that such a copy is a true copy of the map approved and
adopted herein and kept on file. It is hereby further directed that a true
copy of such map and of this chapter shall be provided without cost to the
County Clerk and to the office of the Hudson County Prosecutor.
§ 4-2A.5. Map to be Used as Evidence. [Ord. No. 1999-0-27 § 3]
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
a. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 4-2A.1 was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence
in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this State and that,
pursuant to the statute such map shall constitute prima facie evidence
of the following.
1. The location of the public housing facilities within the municipality.
2. The location of the public parks within the municipality.
3. The location of the public buildings within the municipality.
4. The boundaries of the real property that is used for a public
housing facility owned by or leased to a housing authority pursuant
to the "Local Redevelopment and Housing Law," (N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-1, et seq.), or that is used for any public park or public
building.
5. That such property is and continues to be used for public housing,
public park, or public building purposes.
6. The location and boundaries of areas that are on or within 500 feet
of such public housing, public parks or public building property.
b. Except as otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted map, all of the property depicted on the map approved and
adopted herein as public housing, public park, or public building
property was used for public housing, public park, or public building
purposes as of January 9, 1998, that being the effective date of N.J.S.A.
2C:35-7.1.
c. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7.1, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
§ 4-2A.3 KEARNY CODE § 4-2A.5
AO:134
§ 4-3. REGISTRATION IN PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
§ 4-3.1. Registration of Nonresidents Unlawful. [1973 Code § 38-1;
Ord. No. 11-22-94]
§ 4-3.2. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 38-2; New]
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 4-4. PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY OF MINORS.
§ 4-4.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 1997-25 § I]
The Council of the Town of Kearny finds that many minors are contributing
to breaches of the public peace. Accordingly, this section is declared
necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety and
welfare of the people of the Town. It is intended to address situations where
parents have failed to act responsibly and reasonably in the supervision of
minors, which failure causes detriment to the general public.
testimony in order to establish a violation of the offense defined in
that statute. The failure of the map approved herein to depict the
location and boundaries of any property that is a public housing facility,
public park, or public building whether the absence of such depiction
is the result of inadvertent omission or the result of any changes in
the location and boundaries of such property that have not yet been
incorporated into a revised approved map, shall not be deemed to
be an official finding and record that such property is not used for
public housing, public park, or public building purposes; nor shall this
subsection be construed to preclude the use or admissibility of any map
or diagram other than the one that has been approved by the Mayor
and Council, provided that the map or diagram is otherwise permissible
pursuant to the Rules of Evidence.
d. All of the requirements set forth herein concerning the preparation,
approval, and adoption of a drug-free public housing, public park, or
public building zone have been complied with.
a. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to assist, aid, abet, allow,
permit, suffer or encourage a minor to register or enroll in the Kearny
School System where the minor is ineligible to attend as a result of the
minor's nonresident status.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit his or her name,
address or other residence designating documentation to be utilized in
the registration or enrollment of any nonresident student in the Town of
Kearny School System unless previous approval has been granted by
the Superintendent of the Kearny School System or his or her designee.
§ 4-2A.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-4.2
AO:135
§ 4-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1997-25 § II]
DELINQUENT ACTS — Shall mean those acts which violate the laws of the
United States, the laws of the State of New Jersey or Ordinances of the
Town of Kearny, or those acts which would cause or tend to cause the minor
to come under the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court or Superior Court, but
does not include traffic violations.
ILLEGAL DRUGS — Shall mean controlled dangerous substances obtained
without a legal prescription as defined in N.J.S.A. 24:21-2 and N.J.S.A.
2C:35-2.
JUVENILE DELINQUENT — Shall mean a minor who commits a delinquent
act.
MINOR — Shall mean any person under the age of 18 years residing with a
parent or legal guardian.
PARENT — Shall mean mother, father, legal guardian and any other person
having the care or custody of a minor or any person acting in parents' stead
who have custody or control of the minor.
§ 4-4.3. Parental Duties. [Ord. No. 1997-25 § III]
§ 4-4.4. Notification of Parents. [Ord. No. 1997-25 § IV]
Whenever a minor is arrested or detained for the commission of any
delinquent act within the Town, the parent of the minor shall be
a. It is the continuous duty of a parent to exercise control so as to prevent
their minor from committing any delinquent act.
b. Included (without limitation) in this continuous duty of reasonable
parental control are the following parental duties:
1. To keep illegal drugs or illegal firearms out of the home and legal
firearms locked in placed that are inaccessible to the minor;
2. To require the minor to attend regular school sessions and to forbid
the minor from being absent from class without parental or school
permission;
3. To arrange proper supervision for the minor when the parent must
be absent;
4. To take the necessary precautions to prevent the minor from
maliciously or willfully destroying real or personal property which
belongs to the Town or which is located in the Town.
5. To forbid the minor from keeping stolen property, illegally
possessed firearms or illegal drugs or associating with known
juvenile delinquents, and to seek help from appropriate
governmental authorities or private agencies in handling or
controlling the minor when necessary.
§ 4-4.2 KEARNY CODE § 4-4.4
AO:136
immediately notified by the Kearny Police Department advising the parent
of such arrest or detention, the reason therefor, and the parent's
responsibility under this section.
§ 4-4.5. Parental Violation and Penalty. [Ord. No. 1997-25 § V]
§ 4-4.6. Additional Remedies. [Ord. No. 1997-25 § VII]
The remedy provisions of this section shall not be exclusive and the State
or any other person shall have the right to proceed under any other legally
available remedies in addition to the remedies provided in this section.
§ 4-5. USE OF INTOXICATING BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC PLACES.
§ 4-5.1. Prohibited Acts. [1973 Code § 49-28; Ord. No. 6-12-74; Ord.
No. 12-22-82]
a. No parent of any minor shall fail to exercise reasonable parental control
over such minor and adjudication that a minor has committed a
delinquent act shall be evidence that the minor's parent failed to
exercise reasonable parental control.
b. The parent of the minor who committed a delinquent act shall be held
civilly responsible for the damages caused by the commission of the
delinquent act.
c. Upon the first conviction of a violation of this section, parents shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $75, nor more than $100.
d. Upon the second conviction of a violation of this section, parents shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $500, and in
addition shall be sentenced to probation with the condition that the
parent participate in, through completion, a Court approved,
community based treatment program (such as parenting skills, family
services, employment and training), or at the discretion of the Court,
the imprisonment for a period of not more than 30 days.
e. Upon a third or subsequent violation and conviction the parent shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $200, nor more than $500, and at the
discretion of the Court, imprisonment for a period of up to 90 days.
a. No person shall drink, imbibe or consume any alcoholic beverage upon
any portion of lawn or other public grounds within the Town, including
but not limited to public places, playgrounds and municipal grounds
surrounding municipal buildings and public streets in the Town.
b. The possession by any person of an open container of any alcoholic
beverage in any of the aforementioned public places shall constitute a
prima facie violation of paragraph a hereof that any person so
possessing an open container of any alcoholic beverage in any of the
aforementioned public places is actually observed in the act of drinking
therefrom.
§ 4-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-5.1
AO:137
§ 4-5.2. Exceptions. [1973 Code § 49-29; Ord. No. 6-12-74; Ord. No.
12-22-82]
The foregoing prohibitions shall not apply to certain specific areas
designated in writing by the Recreation Commission or to those persons or
groups of persons who are issued a special permit by the Superintendent
of Recreation for consumption of alcoholic beverages, which permit shall
designate the function, number of persons, area of the activity and hours of
validity of the permit.
§ 4-5.3. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 49-30; Ord. No.
6-12-74; Ord. No. 12-22-82]
Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 4-6. SKATEBOARDS.
§ 4-6.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 110-38]
As used in this section:
SKATEBOARD — Shall mean a single platform which is mounted on wheels,
having no mechanism or other device with which to steer or control the
direction of movement thereof while being used, operated or ridden.
§ 4-6.2. Use in Public Places Prohibited. [1973 Code § 110-39]
No person shall use, operate or ride upon any skateboard on any public
street, public sidewalk, public park, public parking lot or other public place
within the Town.
§ 4-6.3. Forfeiture and Destruction of Skateboards. [1973 Code
§ 110-40]
Any Police Officer who shall observe any person using, operating or riding
upon a skateboard in violation of this section shall take possession of the
skateboard, and the same shall be forfeited to the Town and destroyed.
§ 4-6.4. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 110-41; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of subsection 4-6.2 shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 4-6.5. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2008-(O)-48]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the skateboard park within
Gunnel Oval Park.
c. No person shall be drunk or in a state of intoxication in or upon any
street, highway, thoroughfare or other public place within the Town.
§ 4-5.1 KEARNY CODE § 4-7
AO:138
§ 4-7. LOITERING.
§ 4-7.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 99-1]
As used in this section:
LOITERING — Shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location, and
includes the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about
aimlessly.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any place to which the public has access,
and shall include any street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk. It shall also
include the front or the neighborhood of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern
or other place of business, and public grounds, areas, parks as well as
parking lots or other vacant private property not owned by or under the
control of a person charged with violating this section, or, in the case of a
minor, not owned by or under the control of his parent or guardian.
§ 4-7.2. Prohibited Acts. [1973 Code § 99-2]
No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
§ 4-7.3. Order of Police Officer; Refusal to Obey. [1973 Code § 99-3]
Whenever any Police Officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment,
decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing or
is likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in subsection 4-7.2 he
shall, if he deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and
safety, order that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse
to leave after being ordered to do so by a Police Officer shall be guilty of a
violation of this section.
§ 4-7.4. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 99-4; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 4-8. CURFEW FOR JUVENILES.
a. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
b. Create or cause to be created any disturbances or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
c. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
d. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place as defined in subsection 4-7.1. This paragraph shall include the
making of unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting
nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to whom
or in whose hearing they are made.
§ 4-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-8.1
AO:139
§ 4-8.1. Curfew Hours Established; Exceptions. [1973 Code § 99A-2]
It shall be unlawful for juveniles to be in any public place between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
This prohibition does not apply if the juvenile is:
§ 4-8.2. Responsibility of Parent or Guardian. [1973 Code § 99A-3]
It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to permit, suffer or allow any
juvenile in his or her care to be in any public place between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 4-8.3. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 99A-4]
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall perform community
service and may be subject to a fine of no more than $1,000; and if parents
or guardians as well as a juvenile are found guilty of violating this section,
the parents or guardians shall perform community service together with the
juvenile. The period of community service shall not exceed 90 days.
§ 4-9. CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES PARAPHERNALIA.
§ 4-9.1. (Reserved) [1973 Code § 110-48; Ord. No. 3-28-79; Ord. No.
2016-41]
§ 4-9.2. Maintenance of Premises for Manufacture, Distribution,
Etc. Unlawful. [1973 Code § 110-49; Ord. No. 3-28-79]
It shall constitute a common nuisance to knowingly maintain any building,
conveyance or premises whatever which is resorted to by persons for the
manufacture, distribution, dispensing, administration or use of any type of
syringe, needle, eye dropper, spoon, pipe, testing kit, rolling paper, or other
paraphernalia or appliances designed for or ordinarily used in smoking,
testing, weighting, measuring, injecting, cooking or sniffing marijuana,
cocaine, opium, hashish, or other controlled dangerous substances as
defined by N.J.S.A. 24:21-1 et seq.
a. Engaged in, or traveling to or from, a business or occupation which the
laws of the State of New Jersey authorize a juvenile to perform;
b. Engaged in an errand involving a medical emergency;
c. Attending religious services, extracurricular school activities, activities
sponsored by a religious or community organization or other cultural,
educational or social events or is in direct transit to or from such
events.
§ 4-8.1 KEARNY CODE § 4-9.3
AO:140
§ 4-9.3. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 110-50; Ord. No.
3-28-79; New]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section
1-5.
§ 4-10. OBSCENE MATERIALS AND ACTIONS.
§ 4-10.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 105-1; Ord. No. 10-12-77]
As used in this section:
AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC — Shall mean that the matter or performance
may be purchased or attended on a subscription basis, on a membership fee
arrangement or for a separate fee for each item or performance.
DISSEMINATE — Shall mean to transfer possession of, with or without
consideration.
KNOWINGLY — Shall mean being aware of the character and the content of
the material.
MATERIAL — Shall mean any book, magazine, newspaper or printed or
written material; any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture or other
pictorial representation; any statue or other figure; any recording,
transcription or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction; or any
other articles, equipment or machines.
NUDITY — Shall mean the showing of the human male or female genitals
or pubic area with less than a fully opaque covering, or the depiction of
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
OBSCENE — Shall mean that to the average person applying temporary
community standards:
PERFORMANCE — Shall mean any preview, play, show, skit, film, dance or
other exhibition performed before an audience.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or other legal entity.
PROMOTE — Shall mean to cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist.
SERVICE TO PATRONS — Shall mean the provision of services to paying
guests in establishments providing food and beverages, including but not
The predominant appeal of the matter, taken as a whole, is to prurient
interest, i.e., a shameful or morbid interest in sexual conduct, nudity or
excretion.
a.
The matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner sexual
conduct regulated by N.J.S.A. 2A:115-1 through 2A:115-5.
b.
The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
c.
§ 4-9.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-10.1
AO:141
limited to hostessing, hat checking, cooking, bartending, serving, table
setting and clearing, waitering and waitressing, and entertaining.
§ 4-10.2. Prohibited Conduct. [1973 Code § 105-2; Ord. No.
10-12-77]
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
§ 4-10.3. Service of Notice; Content. [1973 Code § 105-3; Ord. No.
10-12-77]
§ 4-10.4. Types of Proceedings. [1973 Code § 105-4; Ord. No.
10-12-77]
a. Knowingly disseminate, distribute or make available to the public any
obscene material.
b. Knowingly engage or participate in any obscene performance made
available to the public.
c. Knowingly engage in commerce for commercial gain with materials
depicting and describing explicit sexual conduct, nudity or excretion
utilizing displays, circulars, advertisements and other public sales
efforts that promote such commerce primarily on the basis of their
prurient appeal.
d. Knowingly promote the commission of any of the above-listed unlawful
acts.
a. Actual notice of the obscene nature of such material, performance or
activity may be given to a person involved in or responsible for such
from the Town Attorney on the basis of information lawfully gathered
and supplied to him by the Chief of Police.
b. Such notice shall be in writing and delivered by mail or in person to the
alleged offender.
c. Such notice shall state that:
1. In the opinion of the Town Attorney, the activity engaged in falls
within the prohibitions of subsection 4-10.2.
2. If such activity has not ceased within seven judicial days, the Town
will take appropriate legal action.
3. A declaratory judgment proceeding as described in paragraph b of
subsection 4-10.4 is available if a person engaged in the challenged
activity wishes to initiate the legal determination of whether the
activity is in fact obscene.
d. A person who promotes any obscene activity as prohibited in subsection
4-10.2 in the course of his business is presumed to do so with
knowledge of its content and character.
§ 4-10.1 KEARNY CODE § 4-10.4
AO:142
§ 4-10.5. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 105-5; Ord. No.
10-12-77]
Whoever violates this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
a. In Rem Proceedings.
1. The Chief of Police may apply to the Town Attorney to institute
appropriate civil proceedings against any material which is alleged
to be obscene in a sworn affidavit.
2. Upon the filing of an application for seizure authorized in
paragraph 1 above, the Chief of Police shall immediately cause
notice thereof to be served, either personally or by mail, upon any
person residing or doing business in the Town who is known or
believed by the Chief of Police to have any of the following interests
in material named in the complaint:
(a) The publisher.
(b) The wholesaler, distributor or circulator.
(c) Every retailer or dealer who has, or may have, possession of
any material identical to material named in the complaint.
b. Declaratory Judgment.
1. Any person receiving notice in writing from the Town Attorney
under subsection 4-10.3 that a specified activity is obscene may
bring an action against the Town for a declaratory judgment to
determine whether such activity is obscene.
2. If it is adjudged and declared by the court that such activity is
obscene, then the Town Attorney may cause the publication of such
judgment in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town, and
upon such publication all persons residing or doing business in the
Town will be presumed to have actual notice of the nature of the
activity.
c. Criminal Prosecution.
1. The Chief of Police may cause criminal charges to be brought
against any person presently engaging in or who has engaged in
any prohibited activity in violation of subsection 4-10.2.
2. If the Town Attorney has given notice pursuant to subsection
4-10.3, then such criminal charges may be brought only after seven
judicial days for receipt of the notice.
d. Proceedings authorized by this subsection shall be in addition to any
others provided by law.
§ 4-10.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-11
AO:143
§ 4-11. DISPLAY OF OBSCENE MATERIAL RESTRICTED. [Ord. No.
1997-0-3]
§ 4-12. NOISE CONTROL.13
§ 4-12.1. Prohibited Acts. [1973 Code § 110-10; Ord. No. 1996-0-24
§ 1]
a. It shall be a petty disorderly persons offense for a retailer to display or
permit to be displayed at his business premises any obscene material as
defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:34-3, at a height of less than five feet or without a
blinder or other covering placed or printed on the front of the material
displayed. The public display of obscene material shall constitute
presumptive evidence that the retailer knowingly made or permitted
the display.
b. "Retailer," as used in this section shall mean any person, firm,
association or corporation, who operates a store, newsstand, booth,
concession or similar business with unimpeded access for persons
under 18 years old, who is in the business of making sales of periodicals
or other publications at retail containing pictures, drawings or
photographs.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, suffer, permit,
allow or cause to be made or continued upon any residence, premises or
in any vehicle, owned, occupied or controlled by him or upon any public
street, thoroughfare or parking lot, or in any public park, playground,
gathering place or means of public transportation, any excessive,
unnecessary or unusually loud noise which either annoys, injures,
disturbs or endangers the comfort, health, repose, peace or safety of
others within the Town of Kearny; or which are so harsh, prolonged or
unusual in their use, time and place as to annoy, disturb, or endanger
the comfort, health, repose, peace or safety of others of the Town of
Kearny.
b. Loud, disturbing, injurious, unnecessary and unlawful noises in
violation of this section include but are not limited to the following acts:
1. The playing or permitting the playing of any radio, tape, tape
recorder, phonograph, compact disc player, television set, amplified
or unamplified musical instrument or other electronic sound
producing device in such a manner or with such volume as to
unreasonably annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or peace of the
public.
2. The audible alarm system or signal utilized for the detection,
prevention, and deterrence of unlawful entry, theft and/or damage
of any motor vehicle as defined under Title 39:1-1 of the Motor
13.Editor's Note: For regulations concerning dogs disturbing the peace, see Chapter 9,
subsection 9-3.6.
§ 4-11 KEARNY CODE § 4-12.1
AO:144
§ 4-12.2. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 1996-0-24 § 2]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 4-12.3. Removal of Vehicles in Violation. [Ord. No. 1996-0-24 § 3]
Any unoccupied motor vehicle found to be in violation of this section shall
be deemed a nuisance and any Kearny Police Officer may provide for the
removal of such motor vehicle. Before regaining possession of the motor
vehicle, the owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage
of the vehicle, as such may result from the removal by the Police Officer.
§ 4-12A. UNREASONABLE AND EXCESSIVE SOUND AND NOISE IN
PARKS AND PUBLIC PLACES.
§ 4-12A.1. Supplement to N.J.A.C. 7-29 and Noise Ordinances of the
Hudson Regional Health Commission. [Ord. No. 2009-38 § 4-12A.1]
This section is adopted pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 13:1G-21
and supplements the provisions of N.J.A.C. 7-29 and the Ordinances of the
Hudson Regional Health Commission which are also applicable to the Town
of Kearny.
§ 4-12A.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2009-38 § 4-12A.2]
The following words and terms, when used in this section, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Terms
not defined in this subsection shall have the same meaning as those defined
in N.J.A.C. 7:29:
DBA — Shall mean the measured sound level expressed in db when using
the "A" weighted network of a sound level meter; the abbreviation
designating the unit of sound level as measured by sound level meter using
the A-scale.
DECIBEL (DB) — Shall mean the practical unit of measurement for sound
pressure level; the number of decibels of a measured sound is equal to
20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the sound pressure
Vehicle and Traffic Laws of the State of New Jersey, when such
vehicle is parked on any public street, thoroughfare or parking lot
within the Town of Kearny and when the alarm system becomes
activated to the extent that would make or cause excessive,
unnecessary or unusually loud noise, which either annoys, injures,
disturbs, or endangers the comfort, health, repose, peace, or safety
of members of the public within the Town of Kearny or which are
so harsh, prolonged, or unusual in their use, time and place as to
annoy, disturb, or endanger the comfort, health, repose, peace or
safety of others within the Town.
§ 4-12.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-12A.2
AO:145
of the measured sound to the sound pressure of a standard sound (20
micropascals), abbreviated db.
LOUD AMPLIFICATION DEVICE OR SIMILAR EQUIPMENT — Shall mean
a radio, television, phonograph, stereo, record player, tape player, cassette
player, compact disc player, loud speaker, or sound amplifier which is
operated in such a manner that it violates the provisions of subsection
4-12A.5.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICERS — Shall mean employees of the Town
designated by the Town Administrator who are certified pursuant to the
County Environmental Health Act (N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.) to perform
noise enforcement activities. Those employees are hereby authorized to
issue a summons for violation of any provision of this section and are
authorized to enlist the assistance of the Police Department to abate the
noise, if necessary.
PUBLIC PLACES — Shall mean any real property or structures thereon that
are owned, leased, or controlled by a governmental entity.
§ 4-12A.3. Applicability. [Ord. No. 2009-38 § 4-12A.3]
§ 4-12A.4. Noise Control Officers. [Ord. No. 2009-38 § 4-12A.4]
a. This section applies to sound from parks, public places and any sites of
celebrations or events approved by the Mayor and Council all of which
events shall require the issuance of a permit by the Department of
Recreation.
b. For all events, all amplification devices and speakers shall be placed,
located or installed as specified in the permit.
c. Notwithstanding any provision of this Code, the location or placement
of amplification devices shall not constitute a violation of the Code
unless the decibel level exceeds the provisions of subsection 4-12A.5.
a. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by noise control officers
to be designated by the Town Administrator. A person shall be qualified
to be a noise control officer if the person meets the criteria set forth in
the definition above and completes, at a location specified by the
Department of Environmental Protection in N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.11, a noise
certification and recertification course which is offered by an
accredited university and approved by the Department.
b. Sound measurements made by a noise control officer shall conform to
the procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:29-2.
c. Noise control officers shall:
1. Enforce the noise control provisions of this section.
2. Investigate and pursue possible violations of this section for sound
levels which equal or exceed the sound levels set forth herein and
§ 4-12A.2 KEARNY CODE § 4-12A.4
AO:146
§ 4-12A.5. Maximum Permissible Sound Levels. [Ord. No. 2009-38
§ 4-12A.5; Ord. No. 2009-45]
§ 4-12A.6. Restricted Use and Activities. [Ord. No. 2009-38
§ 4-12A.6]
Notwithstanding the exceptions listed at N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.4, the provisions of
this ordinance shall apply to parks, public places and any celebrations or
events approved by the Mayor and Council.
§ 4-12A.7. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2009-38 § 4-12A.7]
§ 4-13. LITTER CONTROL.
§ 4-13.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 83-20; Ord. No. 9-14-88; Ord.
No. 2006-(O)-12 § 1; Ord. No. 2014-40 § 1]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
shall make sure the amplification devices and speakers have been
placed or installed in conformity with the permit.
3. Cooperate with noise control officers of adjacent municipalities in
enforcing one another's municipal noise ordinances.
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the operation of any
source of sound on any source property listed in subsection 4-12A.3 in
excess of 50 dBa between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 11:00 a.m. or in
excess of 65 dBa at all other hours when measured from the residential
lot line of a complaining resident.
b. No amplification device shall be used after 9:00 p.m. on Sunday.
c. The use of an amplification devise shall not be permitted for longer than
six hours in any one day at any one event.
a. Any person violating any of the provisions of the section, upon
conviction thereof in Kearny Municipal Court, shall be liable to the
penalty stated in Section 1-5 of the Code as amended. If the violation is
of a continuing nature, each day during which it occurs shall constitute
an additional, separate, and distinct offense.
b. No provision of this section shall be construed to impair any common
law or statutory cause of action, right of private enforcement, or legal
remedy therefrom, of any person for injury or damage arising from any
violation of this section or from other law.
§ 4-12A.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-13.1
AO:147
GARBAGE — Shall mean putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Shall mean "garbage," "refuse," and "rubbish" as defined herein
and all other waste material which, if thrown or dispersed as herein
prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare or
render the streets, unoccupied private property or public places unsightly.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — Shall mean a container suitable for the depositing
of litter.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any and all streets, sidewalks, alleys or
other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds
and buildings and includes the areas around privately owned commercial
premises, shopping malls which are generally accessible and open to the
public and/or to which the public is generally invited for the purpose of
conducting business.
PUTRESCIBLE — Shall mean organic matter having the tendency to
decompose with the formation of malodorous by-products.
REFUSE — Shall mean putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except
body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Shall mean putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes
(except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings,
dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial
wastes.
UNOCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY — Shall mean any unoccupied
structure or lot that is not owned by any Federal, State or Local government
or agency.
§ 4-13.2. Prohibited Acts and Regulated Activities. [1973 Code
§ 83-20; Ord. No. 9-14-88; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 1; Ord. No.
2014-40, § 2]
§ 4-13.3. Required Locations for Litter Receptacles. [1973 Code
§ 83-21; Ord. No. 9-14-88]
The use of litter receptacles shall be required at the following public places,
which exist in the municipality. The proprietor of these places or sponsors
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or unoccupied private
property other than in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow
such litter to remain.
b. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this section, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this section.
§ 4-13.1 KEARNY CODE § 4-13.3
AO:148
of these events shall be responsible for providing and servicing the
receptacles such that adequate containerization is available.
§ 4-13.4. Unlawful Dumping or Discarding of Trash Prohibited.
[1973 Code § 83-22; Ord. No. 9-14-88]
It shall be unlawful for any person to discard or dump along any street or
road, on or off any right-of-way, any household or commercial solid waste,
rubbish, refuse, junk, vehicle or vehicle parts, rubber tires, appliances,
furniture or private property, except by written consent of the owner of the
property, in any place not specifically designated for the purpose of solid
waste storage or disposal.
§ 4-13.5. Litter from Vehicles. [1973 Code § 83-27; Ord. No.
9-14-88]
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved, stopped or parked
on any highway unless such a vehicle is constructed or loaded to prevent
any of its load from dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping
therefrom. Any person operating a vehicle from which any glass or objects
have fallen or otherwise endanger travelers or public property, shall
immediately cause the public property to be cleaned of all glass or objects
and shall pay the costs therefor.
§ 4-13.6. Sweeping into Gutters Prohibited; Sidewalks; Exception.
[Ord. No. 2014-40 § 5]
a. Buildings held out for use by the public, including schools, government
buildings and railroad and bus stations;
b. Sidewalks used by pedestrians in active retail commercially zoned
areas, such that at a minimum there shall be no single linear quarter
mile without a receptacle;
c. All parks and recreation areas;
d. All drive-in restaurants;
e. All street vendor locations;
f. All self-service refreshment areas;
g. All construction sites;
h. All shopping centers;
i. All gasoline service station islands;
j. All marinas, boat moorages and fueling stations, all boat launching
stations and all public and private piers operated for public use;
k. All special events to which the public is invited, including sporting
events, parades, carnivals, circuses, barbecues, and festivals.
§ 4-13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-13.6
AO:149
§ 4-13.7. Litter on Unoccupied Private Property or Vacant Lots.
[Ord. No. 2014-40 § 5]
No person shall throw, place or deposit any litter, or cause, suffer or permit
any litter to be thrown, placed or deposited, upon any unoccupied private
property or upon any vacant lot within the Town, whether owned by such
person or not, except that the owner or person in control of such property
or lot may maintain authorized private receptacles for private collection,
and then only if the placement or deposit is in such manner as to prevent
the litter from being dispersed by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place or upon other private property.
§ 4-13.8. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 1; Ord. No. 2014-40
§ 3]
This section shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Town of
Kearny and any other department hereinafter designated by the Town
Administrator.
§ 4-13.9. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 1; Ord. No. 2014-40 § 6]
§ 4-14. SWIMMING AND BATHING IN TOWN WATERS.
a. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other
public place within the Town an accumulation of litter.
b. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front
of their premises free of litter.
c. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit
residents for whom municipal trash services are provided from
delivering to the curb the trash which is collected by the Town on a
weekly basis except that the placement shall be consistent with
subsection 20-1.4 of the Town Code - Receptacle Requirements; Time
for Placement.
a. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $100 nor more
than $2,000, or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, or
any combination thereof as determined by the Municipal Court Judge.
Each day on which a violation of an ordinance exists shall be considered
a separate and distinct violation and shall be subject to imposition of a
separate penalty for each day of the violation as the Municipal Court
Judge may determine.
b. Where a person has been convicted of a violation of this subsection and
within 12 months thereafter is found guilty of a repeat violation of this
subsection, the Judge of the Municipal Court, if the Judge finds the
repeat violation was willful, may sentence the offender to imprisonment
in the County jail for a period not to exceed 90 days in addition to or in
lieu of the penalties set forth in paragraph a.
§ 4-13.6 KEARNY CODE § 4-14.1
AO:150
§ 4-14.1. Prohibited. [1973 Code § 110-42]
No person shall swim or bathe in the waters in, of or bounding the Town of
Kearny.
§ 4-14.2. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 110-43; New]
Each and every person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 4-15. SIGNS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY. [Ord. No. 2010-41]
§ 4-16. CONSTRUCTION HOURS.14
§ 4-16.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 110-51; Ord. No. 4-13-93]
As used in this section:
CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean any site preparation, assembly, erection,
substantial repairs and alterations, or similar action.
DEMOLITION — Shall mean any dismantling, intentional destruction or
removal of structure, utilities, public or private right-of-way, or similar
property.
NOISE — Shall mean any sound which tends to annoy, disturb, injure or
endanger or tends to cause an adverse effect on humans.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, association, partnership, or
corporation and includes any officer, employee, department or agency, or a
State or any political subdivision of a State or Federal agency not associated
with national defense.
a. Except as otherwise authorized in Chapter 38 or elsewhere in the Town
Code, no person or other entity may paint, mark, write on, post or
otherwise affix any handbill or sign to or upon any public property or
structure or within the public rights-of-way in the Town.
b. The term "sign" includes, but not by way of limitation, any card, poster,
notice, yard sale sign, pennant or banner, balloon or other advertising
device.
c. The forgoing provisions shall not apply to the Town of Kearny or to any
municipal or governmental official acting in the exercise of his or her
governmental duties.
d. Any person or other entity in violation of the provisions of this section
shall upon conviction in the Municipal Court be subject to a fine of not
less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each offense.
14.Editor's Note: For additional construction and building regulations, see Chapter 14,
Building and Housing.
§ 4-14.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-16.1
AO:151
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard,
sidewalk, alley or similar place.
§ 4-16.2. Prohibited Acts. [1973 Code § 110-52; Ord. No. 4-13-93]
§ 4-16.3. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 110-53; Ord. No.
4-13-93]
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 4-17. LOCKING OF VEHICLE IGNITIONS REQUIRED.
§ 4-17.1. Responsibility of Owner or Operator. [1973 Code § 133-1]
No person who is the owner of or is operating or is in charge of a motor
vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended on the streets of the Town
without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition and removing the key.
§ 4-17.2. Discovery Made by Police Officer. [1973 Code § 133-3]
Whenever a Police Officer shall find a motor vehicle standing in violation
of the provisions of this section, he may remove the ignition key therefrom
and, in the event that the person who is the owner or is operating or is in
charge thereof is not present, shall deliver it to the Police Station within one
hour after removing same, to be held for and returned to such person. In
a. Construction. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit
the operation of any tools, or heavy equipment used in construction,
drilling or demolition work between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. the following day, Monday through Saturday, or at any time on
Sundays or holidays. The prohibitions of this subsection shall not apply
to cases of emergency in the interest of public health and safety. This
paragraph shall not apply to the use of domestic power tools.
b. Domestic Power Tools. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to
use or operate or permit the use or operation of any mechanically
powered saws, drills, sanders, grinders and tools, including similar
devices outdoors in residential areas between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., the following day. This paragraph shall not apply to the
use of domestic power tools in cases of emergency in the interest of
public health.
a. Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation
of any provision of this section or any other ordinance of the Town
exists shall constitute a separate violation.
b. The maximum penalty stated above is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. Any lesser penalty,
including a nominal penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for
a particular case or a particular violation.
§ 4-16.1 KEARNY CODE § 4-17.2
AO:152
the event that the key is so removed and delivered to the Police Station, the
officer shall attach to the motor vehicle a tag stating where the key may be
reclaimed.
§ 4-17.3. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 133-2; New]
Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 4-18. GAMES OF CHANCE ON SUNDAY.
§ 4-18.1. Operation on Sunday Authorized. [1973 Code § 82-1]
The conduct of certain games of chance provided for in the "Bingo Licensing
Law" and "Raffles Licensing Law," on the first day of the week, commonly
known and designated as Sunday, is hereby authorized in the Town of
Kearny, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-24 et seq. and N.J.S.A.
5:8-50 et seq., and licenses issued in connection therewith may so provide.
§ 4-19. SMOKING IN GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS.
§ 4-19.1. Prohibition. [1973 Code § 110-54; Ord. No. 4-13-93]
Smoking defined as the burning of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any
other matter or substance which contains tobacco, is prohibited in all
municipal buildings, offices and common areas, or other government
buildings as defined in N.J.S.A. 26:3D-46 et seq.
§ 4-19.2. Penalty. [1973 Code § 110-55; New]
Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 4-20. DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
§ 4-20.1. Disorderly Houses Unlawful. [1973 Code § 110-1]
No person shall keep or maintain what is commonly known as a disorderly
house, or allow or permit any house, shop, store or other building owned or
occupied by him or her to be used as a disorderly house or to be frequented
or resorted to by riotous persons, gamblers, vagrants, criminals or persons
of ill repute or for any unlawful purpose whatsoever.
§ 4-20.2. Gaming or Gambling Establishments. [1973 Code § 110-2]
No person shall set up, keep or maintain, or permit to be set up, kept or
maintained, any premises used for gaming purposes, and no person shall
indulge in any form of gaming or gambling or lend encouragement to the
same by his presence or attendance, or aid or abet any form of gaming or
gambling in any way, or be in possession of any gaming devices, numbers
slips for lotteries or other gambling paraphernalia.
§ 4-17.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-20.3
AO:153
§ 4-20.3. Disturbances; Disorderly Assemblages. [1973 Code
§ 110-3]
No person shall participate in any riot, disturbance or disorderly
assemblage tending to break the peace or annoy other persons.
§ 4-20.4. Disturbance in Public and Private Places. [1973 Code
§ 110-4]
No person shall create a disturbance in public, quasi-public or private
places not his own, having a tendency to annoy other persons; and no
person shall create a disturbance or use loud, profane and indecent
language on his own property which shall tend to annoy other persons.
§ 4-20.5. Obstructing Police Officers. [1973 Code § 110-5]
No person shall obstruct in any way or interfere with any police officer or
other law-enforcement officer in the performance of his duties.
§ 4-20.6. Indecent, Immoral Conduct. [1973 Code § 110-6]
No person shall, in public or in private, engage in any lewd, indecent,
immoral or lascivious conduct or acts.
§ 4-20.7. (Reserved)15
§ 4-20.8. Activities Obstructing Streets or Sidewalks. [1973 Code
§ 110-9]
No person shall engage in any practice, sport or exercise having a tendency
to obstruct the public highways or to interfere with the traffic thereon or to
annoy persons passing in the streets or on the sidewalks either in vehicles
or on foot.
§ 4-20.9. Fights. [1974 Code § 110-11]
No person shall engage in any affrays or assaults commonly known as fights
in the Town.
§ 4-20.10. Threatening Damage or Injury to Persons or Property.
[1973 Code § 110-12]
No person shall threaten or cause damage or injury to the person, property
or members of the family of another, for any cause or upon any pretext
whatsoever.
15.Editor's Note: Former subsection 4-20.7, Indecent Language; Enticing Females into
Vehicles, previously codified herein and containing portions of 1973 Code § 110-7, was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-(O)-60.
§ 4-20.3 KEARNY CODE § 4-20.11
AO:154
§ 4-20.11. Engaging in Acts Hazardous to Others. [1972 Code
§ 110-13]
No person shall commit or engage in any acts or course of conduct which
may tend to be noxious or deleterious to the health, safety, welfare or wellbeing
of another.
§ 4-20.12. Intoxication. [1972 Code § 110-14]
No person under the influence of intoxicating liquor shall loiter in any public
or quasi-public place or in or upon any property not his own.
§ 4-20.13. Damaging Public or Private Property. [1973 Code
§ 110-15]
No person shall cause injury or damage to any public, quasi-public or
private property not his own.
§ 4-20.14. Trespassing. [1973 Code § 110-16]
No person shall trespass on any land or property not his own.
§ 4-20.15. Smoking in Prohibited Areas. [1973 Code § 110-18]
No person shall make or carry any lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette in any
public or quasi-public building, conveyance, theater, auditorium, shop or
factory or in any retail store wherein "No Smoking" signs are displayed or
posted.
§ 4-20.16. Expectorating in Private or Public. [1973 Code § 110-19]
No person shall spit or expectorate in any public or quasi-public place,
street, sidewalk or thoroughfare or upon any private property not his own.
§ 4-20.17. Begging for Alms. [1973 Code § 110-20]
No person shall go about from door to door or place himself or herself in the
streets to beg or gather alms.
§ 4-20.18. Physiognomy, Palmistry and Fortune-Telling. [1973 Code
§ 110-21]
No person shall use or pretend to use or have any skill in physiognomy,
palmistry or like crafty science, or pretend to tell destinies or fortunes.
§ 4-20.19. Defrauding or Cheating. [1973 Code § 110-22]
No person shall engage in any conduct or course of action with intent to
defraud or cheat another.
§ 4-20.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-20.20
AO:155
§ 4-20.20. Firearms Prohibited; Exceptions. [1973 Code § 110-23]
No unauthorized person or persons shall carry or discharge firearms within
the limits of the Town of Kearny, other than members of the lawenforcement
agencies and members of recognized rifle and pistol clubs at
regularly established ranges or going to and from regularly established
ranges.
§ 4-20.21. Cruelty to Animals. [1973 Code § 110-24]
No person shall commit any act of abuse or cruelty to any animal.
§ 4-20.22. (Reserved)16
§ 4-20.23. Child Abuse. [1973 Code § 110-27]
No parent, guardian or custodian of any minor child or children shall:
§ 4-20.24. Trick or Acrobatic Flying. [1973 Code § 110-28]
No person, pilot or passenger, while operating or riding in an aircraft in
flight over the Town of Kearny, shall engage in trick or acrobatic flying or
in any acrobatic feat, or, except while landing or taking off, shall fly at such
a low level as to endanger the persons on the surface beneath, or drop any
object except loose sand or water ballast.
a. Abandon or desert such minor child or children.
b. Willfully fail to provide proper and sufficient food, clothing,
maintenance, regular school education as required by law, medical
attendance or surgical treatment and a clean and proper home.
c. Fail to do or permit to be done any act necessary for the child's physical
or moral well-being.
d. Habitually use, in the presence or hearing of such child, profane,
indecent or abusive language.
e. Perform any indecent, immoral or unlawful act or deed in the presence
of such child or children that may tend to debauch or endanger or
degrade the morals of the child, or permit anyone else to do so.
f. Inflict or permit anyone else to inflict unnecessary mental or physical
pain or suffering, or permit any such child to suffer unnecessarily by
any willful act of omission or commission.
g. Expose any such child to unnecessary hardship, fatigue or mental or
physical strains that may tend to injure the health or moral well-being
of such child.
16.Editor's Note: Former subsection 4-20.22, Engaging in Business, Trade or Occupation on
Sunday, previously codified herein and containing portions of 1973 Code § 110-26, was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-(O)-60.
§ 4-20.20 KEARNY CODE § 4-20.25
AO:156
§ 4-20.25. Peashooters, Slingshots, Missiles. [1973 Code § 110-29]
No person shall sell, exchange or use a peashooter, slingshot or other
similar implement for the discharge of any missile whatsoever in the Town
of Kearny.
§ 4-20.26. Knives, Switchblades. [1973 Code § 110-30]
No person shall sell, give, loan, furnish, deliver, purchase, have or possess
any knife having a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure
applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle of the knife, the
blade of which, when open, projects from the handle.
§ 4-20.27. Abandoning Iceboxes, Refrigerators. [1973 Code
§ 110-31]
No person shall abandon, discard or otherwise dispose of an icebox,
refrigerator or other object with a door or lid and a lock or catch and with
an interior space large enough to permit a person to be locked or entrapped
therein, unless all doors, locks, catches and lids are removed from the
icebox, refrigerator or other object in such a manner as to prevent a person
from being locked or entrapped therein.
§ 4-20.28. Selling Alcoholic Beverages to Minors. [1973 Code
§ 110-31.4]
No person above the age of 21 years shall sell, transfer, give or deliver any
alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of 21 years.
§ 4-20.29. through § 4-20.40 (Reserved)
§ 4-20.41. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 110-32; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, upon conviction
thereof, shall be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 4-21. CIRCUSES, BAZAARS, CARNIVALS.17
§ 4-21.1. Permit, Terms and Conditions. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-35 § 1;
Ord. No. 2009-5 § 1; Ord. No. 2015-28]
No person, firm or corporation may hold, conduct or participate in any
circus, bazaar or carnival, other than a bona fide charitable, eleemosynary,
educational or cultural organization organized not for profit and being able
to establish that it is such type of nonprofit organization, subject, however,
to the following requirements:
17.Editor's Note: Former Section 4-21, Circuses; Exhibitions; Marathons, previously codified
herein and containing portions of 1973 Code §§ 120-1 — 120-4, was repealed in its entirety
by Ordinance No. 2007-(O)-35.
§ 4-20.25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-21.1
AO:157
a. Each organization authorized to hold, conduct or participate in any
such event in accordance with this section shall file an application with
the Town Clerk at least 60 days prior to the date of the commencement
of such event.
b. Such application shall set forth the following:
1. Name of organization conducting the circus, bazaar or carnival.
2. Name and address of owner of the property upon which said event
is to be conducted.
3. Written consent of owner if applicant is other than owner.
4. Name and contact number of a representative of the organization
who will be on the premises while the event is being conducted.
5. Street address or Tax Map reference of location at which said event
is to be conducted.
6. Number of vendors, number of tents and/or tables, a description
and number of rides to be utilized during the circus, bazaar or
carnival.
7. Number of days requested.
8. Date, if any, of prior circus, bazaar or carnival within three years
prior to date of application.
9. Whether or not applicant has been issued any other license to
operate by any local, State or Federal agency.
10. Whether or not the event will be held indoors or outdoors.
11. Date or dates of sale.
12. Sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known to him to be
so.
13. There shall be a permit fee of $200 per day for each day provided
for in subsection 4-21.1d., but the said fee shall not apply to the
days for set up and restoration provided for in subsection 4-21.2a
and b.
c. No more than two permits to any one such organization shall be
authorized in any one calendar year.
d. Such events shall be limited to four consecutive calendar days and shall
be conducted only between the hours of 11:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
Permittees shall be allowed a maximum of two rain days.
e. A representative of the organization conducting the event must be on
the premises throughout the entire period of the event.
§ 4-21.1 KEARNY CODE § 4-21.1
AO:158
f. Notice, in the form of a sign no smaller than four feet by four feet
naming the sponsoring organization, as well as the permit for
conducting the sale, must be prominently displayed upon the premises
upon which the event is conducted throughout the entire period of the
event.
g. No permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless the applicant
does represent, stipulate, contract and agree that they will jointly and
severally defend, indemnify and hold the Town of Kearny harmless
against liability for any and all claims for damage to property or injury
to or death of persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of
the permit or the conducting of the event.
h. No permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless the applicant
shall file with the Town Clerk a certificate of insurance with a
company(ies) duly licensed to transact business under the insurance
laws of this State, with coverage limits of at least $1,000,000 per
occurrence and $2,000,000 aggregate, insuring against loss from
liability imposed by law upon the applicant for damages on account of
bodily injury or death or on account of property damage suffered by any
person or persons as a result of an accident occurring by reason of the
set-up, operation or cleanup of the event, and no permit shall continue
effective unless such insurance shall remain in full force and effect,
during the entire term of the permit. Such certificate of insurance shall
provide for the payment of any final judgment recovered by any person
on account of the set-up, operation or cleanup of the event and shall be
for the benefit of any person suffering loss, damage or injury as
aforesaid.
Each certificate of insurance shall provide that neither the applicant,
nor its insurer, shall have any right to subrogation against the Town of
Kearny.
Each certificate of insurance shall provide primary coverage for any
and all losses and shall be drafted so as to protect all parties.
The applicant shall have the Town of Kearny, its agents and employees
added as an additional insured on the certificate of insurance required
by this section.
i. The permit issued pursuant to this section shall not be assigned or
transferred.
j. If the event is proposed to take place on a Friday, Saturday or Sunday,
the applicant shall provide a police presence at the site from 6:00 p.m.
to one hour after closing at a number required by the Chief of Police,
but in no event less than two, one to be on premises and one for traffic
duty.
If the event is proposed to take place on a holiday, the applicant shall
provide a police presence at a number required by the Chief of Police
from the time the site is opened to the public until one hour after
§ 4-21.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-21.1
AO:159
§ 4-21.2. Set-up, Maintenance and Restoration of Premises upon
Completion of Sale. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-35 § 1; Ord. No. 2009-5 § 2]
closing, but in no event less than two, one to be on premises and one
for traffic duty.
Holidays include the following:
New Year's Day July 4th (Independence Day)
Martin Luther King's Day Labor Day
Lincoln's Birthday Election Day (General)
Washington's Birthday Veteran's Day
President's Day Thanksgiving Day
Good Friday Day after Thanksgiving Day
Easter Sunday Christmas Day
Memorial Day
Application for police services shall be made to the Chief of Police
pursuant to Section 3-6 of the Town Code, as amended, which
regulates the private employment of Kearny police officers within the
Town when they are off duty. The applicant shall be responsible for the
cost of the police presence as provided for by subsection 3-6.5a of the
Code, as amended.
If the Chief of Police is unable to provide a police presence, the
applicant shall provide a licensed private security presence by an
entity approved by the Chief of Police and at a number required by
him, but in no event less than two, one to be on premises and one
to assist in directing traffic. The applicant shall be responsible for
compensating the entity retained.
a. Applicants may bring materials on site no earlier than 48 hours prior to
the start of any event authorized by this chapter. The event area shall
be maintained in a safe, neat and clean condition at all times.
b. Immediately upon the conclusion of any event authorized by this
chapter, the permittee shall be obliged within 24 hours after the
conclusion of said event to clean said premises and remove all
merchandise and equipment therefrom and restore same to the
condition in which it existed prior to said permitted event. However, if
the applicant applies for and is granted permits for two four-day periods
which are not continuous, but are in successive weeks, the permittee
shall not be obliged to remove all merchandise and equipment
therefrom and restore the same to the condition in which it existed
prior to said event in and during those days intervening between the
two permits, but only at the conclusion of the second permit period.
§ 4-21.1 KEARNY CODE § 4-21.3
AO:160
§ 4-21.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-35 § 1]
Any person, association or corporation conducting any such event without
obtaining a permit or who shall violate any of the other terms and
regulations of this section may have their permit revoked. Such persons
shall also, upon conviction of any violation hereof, be fined not less than $25
nor more than $200 for each day of each violation. Each day that such sale
or violation shall continue without being duly licensed shall be considered a
separate violation.
§ 4-21.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-35 § 1]
This section shall be enforced by the Kearny Police Department, the
Department of Public Works and any other department hereinafter
designated by the Town Administrator.
§ 4-22. REPAIR OF VEHICLES ON THE PUBLIC HIGHWAYS.
§ 4-22.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1997-(O)-42 § II]
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean and include all vehicles propelled
otherwise than by muscular power, excepting such vehicles as run only upon
rails or tracks and motorized bicycles.
REPAIRS — Shall mean work performed or to be performed upon any motor
vehicle, including but not limited to motors, ignition systems, transmissions,
driver electrical systems, or body or fender work.
§ 4-22.2. Repair of Motor Vehicles on Public Highways Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 1997-(O)-42 § III]
No motor vehicle shall be repaired on any public highway located within
the Town of Kearny, except for emergency repairs, which emergency repair
work shall be limited solely to that required in order to remove the motor
vehicle from the public highway.
§ 4-22.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 1997-(O)-42 § IV]
§ 4-23. EXTENDED IDLING OF DIESEL-POWERED MOTOR
VEHICLES.
a. The prohibition of the repair of motor vehicles on the public highways
shall apply with full force and effect as to any person permitting or
performing repairs, whether they are the owner of the vehicle, or a
person or persons having custody of said vehicle, or any person or
persons performing the repairs.
b. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof be subject to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or
imprisonment for a period of time not exceeding 90 days; or a period of
community service for a period not exceeding 90 days.
§ 4-21.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-23.1
AO:161
§ 4-23.1. Extended Idling of Diesel-Powered Vehicles Prohibited;
Exceptions. [Ord. No. 1998-(O)-7 § II]
§ 4-24. DESIGNATION OF SCHOOL CROSSWALKS.
§ 4-24.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2001-0-04]
N.J.S.A. 2C:11-5b(3) which deals with vehicular homicide and N.J.S.A.
2C:12-1c(3) which deals with the crime of assault both have a section (b)
which provides: (b) driving through a school crossing as defined in N.J.S.A.
39:1-1 if the municipality, by ordinance or resolution, has designated the
school crossing as such.
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the engine of a dieselpowered
motor vehicle to idle for more than three consecutive minutes
if the vehicle is not in motion, except:
1. A motor vehicle at the vehicle operator's place of business where
the motor vehicle is permanently assigned may idle for 30
consecutive minutes; or
2. A motor vehicle may idle for 15 consecutive minutes when the
vehicle engine has been stopped for three or more hours.
b. The provisions of paragraph a above shall not apply to:
1. Autobuses while discharging or picking up passengers;
2. Motor vehicles stopped in a line of traffic;
3. Motor vehicles whose primary and/or secondary power source is
utilized in whole or in part for necessary and definitively prescribed
mechanical operation other than propulsion, passenger
compartment heating or air conditioning;
4. Motor vehicles being or waiting to be examined by State or Federal
motor vehicle inspectors;
5. Emergency motor vehicles in an emergency situation;
6. Motor vehicles while being repaired;
7. Motor vehicles while engaged in the process of connection,
detachment or exchange of trailers; or
8. Motor vehicles manufactured with a sleeper berth while being
used, in a nonresidentially zoned area, by the vehicle's operator for
sleeping or resting.
§ 4-23.1 KEARNY CODE § 4-24.2
AO:162
§ 4-24.2. Crosswalks Designated. [Ord. No. 2001-0-04]
The crossings set forth in Schedule A, attached hereto are designated
as school crossings for purposes of N.J.S.A. 2C:11-5b(3) and N.J.S.A.
2C:12-1c(3).
SCHEDULE “A”
SCHOOL CROSSINGS
Kearny Avenue and Laurel Avenue
Kearny Avenue and Stewart Avenue
Kearny Avenue and Midland Avenue
Midland Avenue and Beech Street
Midland Avenue and Chestnut Street
Midland Avenue and Forest Street
Midland Avenue and Davis Avenue
Midland Avenue and Schuyler Avenue
Midland Avenue and Belgrove Drive
Pleasant Place and West Bennett Avenue
Kearny Avenue and the Belleville Turnpike
Laurel Avenue and Forest Street
Columbia Avenue and Chestnut Street
Stuyvesant Avenue and Forest Street
Stewart Avenue and Forest Street
Stewart Avenue and Elm Street
Stuyvesant Avenue and Elm Street
Kearny Avenue and Oakwood Avenue
Kearny Avenue and Halstead Street
Belgrove Drive and Halstead Street
Kearny Avenue and Bergen Avenue
Bergen Avenue and Davis Avenue
Bergen Avenue and Ivy Street
Belgrove Drive and Quincy Avenue
Davis Avenue and Oakwood Avenue
Kearny Avenue and Woodland Avenue
Wilson Avenue and Highland Avenue
Schuyler Avenue and Dukes Street
Belgrove Drive and Woodland Avenue
§ 4-24.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-24.2
AO:163
SCHEDULE “A”
SCHOOL CROSSINGS
Schuyler Avenue and Bergen Avenue
Wilson Avenue and Davis Avenue
Wilson Avenue between Davis Avenue and Schuyler Avenue
Schuyler Avenue and Harrison Avenue
Hoyt Street and Davis Avenue
Hoyt Street and Schuyler Avenue
Hoyt Street and Devon Street
Kearny Avenue and Hoyt Street
Kearny Avenue and Patterson Street
Schuyler Avenue and King Street
Forest Street and Prospect Place
Forest Street and Shepherd Place
Grand Place and Stewart Avenue
Wilkinson Terrace and Belgrove Drive
Belgrove Drive and Peden Terrace
Brighton Avenue and Halstead Street
Brighton Avenue and Liberty Street
Belgrove Drive and Rose Street
Rose Street and Alexander Avenue
Rose Street and Highland Avenue
Woodland Avenue and John Street
Woodland Avenue and Highland Avenue
Highland Avenue and Patterson Street
Highland Avenue 213 feet south of Wilson Avenue
Highland Avenue and Wilson Avenue
Chestnut Street and Hoyt Street
Wilson Avenue 546 1/2 feet east of Davis Avenue
Bergen Avenue and Kingsland Avenue
Devon Street and King Street
Devon Street 223 feet south of King Street
King Street and Elm Street
King Street and Forest Street
King Street and Davis Avenue
§ 4-24.2 KEARNY CODE § 4-24.2
AO:164
SCHEDULE “A”
SCHOOL CROSSINGS
Oakwood Avenue and Chestnut Street
Oakwood Avenue and Beech Street
Kearny Avenue and New Lawn Avenue
§ 4-25. ABANDONED SHOPPING CARTS. [Ord. No. 2002-O-72 §§ 1
— 3]
§ 4-26. FLEA MARKETS.
§ 4-26.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-50]
For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
FLEA MARKET — Shall mean a sale of items of tangible personal property
wherein on one location there are multiple vendors who have paid a fee for
the privilege of occupying the space allotted to each such vendor for the
purpose of displaying and selling items of tangible personal property.
§ 4-26.2. Permit, Terms and Conditions. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-50; Ord.
No. 2018-48]
No person, firm or corporation may conduct or participate in displaying or
selling at a flea market, other than a bona fide charitable, eleemosynary,
educational or cultural organization organized not for profit and being able
to establish that it is such type of nonprofit organization, subject, however,
to the following requirements.
a. To avoid a safety hazard, any shopping cart abandoned on any street,
sidewalk or other public right-of-way within the town shall be seized,
collected and stored in an appropriate place by the Department of
Public Works.
b. If a cart is not retrieved by its rightful owner within 24 hours of its
seizure, the owner of the shopping cart shall not recover the cart
without payment of a seizure and storage fee of $25 per shopping cart.
c. If a seized shopping cart is not reclaimed by its rightful owner within six
months of its seizure by the Town, the Town shall deem the cart
abandoned and may dispose of the cart or carts at auction or in any
other manner deemed appropriate in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-157 and the proceeds thereof shall be deposited in the general
funds.
a. Each organization authorized to conduct or participate in displaying or
selling at a flea market in accordance with this section shall file an
application with the Town Clerk at least 30 days prior to the date of the
commencement of such flea market sale.
§ 4-24.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-26.2
AO:165
b. Such application shall set forth the following:
1. Name of organization conducting sale.
2. Name and address of owner of the property upon which said flea
market sale is to be conducted.
3. Written consent of owner if applicant is other than owner.
4. Name and contact number of a representative of the organization
who will be on the premises while the sale is being conducted.
5. Street address or Tax Map reference of location at which said flea
market sale is to be conducted.
6. Number of vendors and number of tents and/or tables to be utilized
during the sale.
7. Number of days.
8. Date, if any, of prior sales within three years prior to the date of
application.
9. Whether or not applicant has been issued any other vendor's
license by any local, State or Federal agency.
10. Whether or not sale will be held indoors or outdoors.
11. Date or dates of sale.
12. Sworn statement or affirmation by the person signing that the
information therein given is full and true and known to him to be
so.
13. For each such sale conducted, there shall be a permit fee of $100,
minus the amount of any other fee that is paid to the Town for the
use of public property in those instances where the sale will be held
on public (rather than private) property. By way of example, if the
sale is held on private property, the fee is $100, but if the sale will
be held on public property (and the fee for the use of that public
property is $75), the permit fee for the sale shall be $25 ($100
minus $75.).
c. No more than two permits to any one such organization shall be
authorized in any one calendar year.
d. Such flea market sales shall be limited to two consecutive calendar days
and shall be conducted only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. Permittees shall be allowed a maximum of two rain days.
e. A representative of the organization conducting the sale must be on the
premises throughout the entire period of the sale.
f. Notice, in the form of a sign no smaller than four feet by four feet
naming the sponsoring organization, as well as the permit for
§ 4-26.2 KEARNY CODE § 4-26.2
AO:166
§ 4-26.3. Set-up, Maintenance and Restoration of Premises upon
Completion of Sale. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-50]
conducting the sale, must be prominently displayed upon the premises
upon which the sale is conducted throughout the entire period of the
sale.
g. No permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless the applicant
does represent, stipulate, contract and agree that they will jointly and
severally defend, indemnify and hold the Town of Kearny harmless
against liability for any and all claims for damage to property or injury
to or death of persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of
the permit or the conducting of the sale.
h. No permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless the applicant
shall file with the Town Clerk an insurance policy or policies of a
company duly licensed to transact business under the insurance laws of
this State, with coverage limits of a least $100,000 per person and
$1,000,000 per accident, insuring against loss from liability imposed by
law upon the applicant for damages on account of bodily injury or death
suffered, and in the sum of $50,000 against loss on account of property
damage suffered by any person or persons as a result of an accident
occurring by reason of the set-up, operation or cleanup of the flea
market, and no permit shall continue effective unless such insurance
shall remain in full force and effect, during the entire term of the
permit. Such insurance policy shall provide for the payment of any final
judgment recovered by any person on account of the set-up, operation
or cleanup of the flea market and shall be for the benefit of any person
suffering loss, damage or injury as aforesaid.
Each insurance policy shall provide that neither the applicant, nor its
insurer, shall have any right to subrogation against the Town of Kearny.
Each insurance policy shall provide primary coverage for any and all
losses and shall be drafted so as to protect all parties.
The applicant shall have the Town of Kearny, its agents and employees
added as an additional insurance on the insurance policies required by
this section.
The permit issued pursuant to this section shall not be assigned or
transferred.
i. No personal property offered for sale shall be displayed or otherwise
placed on any sidewalk, road, highway, street or public right of way. The
foregoing prohibition shall not apply to any Town sponsored street fair.
a. Applicants may bring materials on site no earlier than 25 hours prior to
the start of any sale authorized by this section. The sale area shall be
maintained in a safe, neat and clean condition at all times.
§ 4-26.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-26.3
AO:167
§ 4-26.4. Exceptions to Provisions. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-50]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to affect the following:
§ 4-26.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-50; Ord. No.
2018-48]
Any person, association or corporation conducting any such sale of similar
activity without obtaining a permit or who shall violate any of the other
terms and regulations of this section may have their permit revoked. Such
persons shall also, upon conviction of any violation hereof, be fined not less
than $50 nor more than $500 or be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 10
days for each violation. Each day on which a violation of an ordinance exists
shall be considered a separate and distinct violation and shall be subject to
imposition of a separate penalty for each day of the violation.
§ 4-26.6. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-50]
This section shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Town of
Kearny and any other department hereinafter designated by the Town
Administrator.
§ 4-27. ALCOHOL CONSUMPTION ON PRIVATE PROPERTY BY
INDIVIDUALS UNDER THE AGE OF 21 YEARS.
§ 4-27.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2010-48]
As used in this section, the following terms have the meaning indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Shall mean an alcoholic beverage as defined in
the New Jersey Alcoholic Beverage Law, N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq.
DIVISION — Shall mean the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles.
GUARDIAN — Shall mean a person who has qualified as a guardian of an
under aged person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
b. Immediately upon the conclusion of any sale authorized by this section,
the permittee shall be obliged within 24 hours after the conclusion of
said sale to clean the outside of said premises and remove all unsold
merchandise therefrom and restore same to the condition in which it
existed prior to said sale.
a. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
b. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
c. The selling or advertising for sale of an item or items of personal
property which are specifically described in the advertisement and
which separate items do not exceed five in number and which are not
displayed outside the promises.
§ 4-26.3 KEARNY CODE § 4-27.1
AO:168
PERSON UNDER THE LEGAL AGE — Shall mean a person under the age of
21 years and includes the term under aged person.
RELATIVE — Shall mean an adult who is related to a person under the legal
age by blood, marriage, or adoption.
§ 4-27.2. Possession or Consumption on Private Premises
Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2010-48]
It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age who, without legal
authority to knowingly possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage
on private premises, and it shall be unlawful for any person to furnish, serve
or allow the consumption of any alcoholic beverage to or by a minor on any
private premises.
§ 4-27.3. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2010-48]
§ 4-27.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2010-48]
a. Nothing herein shall prohibit a person under the legal age from
consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a
religious observance, ceremony or rite or from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the
permission of a parent, guardian, or relative who has attained the legal
age to purchase and to consume alcoholic beverages.
b. Nothing herein shall prohibit the possession of alcoholic beverages by
any person under the legal age while such person is actually engaged in
the performance of employment by a person who is licensed under
N.J.S.A. 33:1 et seq. or while actively engaged in preparation of food
while enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel management program at a duly
chartered school, except that this section shall not be construed to
prelude the imposition of a penalty under this section or pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 33-1.81, or any other section of law, against a person who is
convicted to unlawful alcoholic beverages activity on or at premises
licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
a. Upon the conviction of any person under the legal age for a violation of
this section, the court shall impose a fine of $250 for the first offense
and $350 for any subsequent offense.
b. In addition, the court may suspend or postpone for six months, the
driving privileges of the person under the legal age and the suspension
of postponement of such person's driver's license. The court shall
forward a report to the Division stating the first day and the last day of a
suspension or postponement period imposed by the court pursuant to
this section. If at the time of the imposition of a sentence, such person is
less than 17 years of age, the period of license postponement, including
a suspension or postponement of the privilege of operation of a
motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day the sentence is imposed
§ 4-27.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-27.4
AO:169
§ 4-27.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2010-48]
The Police Department shall have jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of
this section.
§ 4-28. SECURITY DURING NIGHTTIME RETAIL HOURS.
§ 4-28.1. Minimum Numbers of Uniformed Personnel. [Ord. No.
2016-60]
Any person or entity which engages in the business of retail sales and
has retail sales space of 65,000 square feet or more and which chooses to
operate within the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m., shall, during that
period, have a security force of at least one uniformed man or woman per
30,000 square feet of retail space who shall be visibly present on the indoor
premises.
§ 4-28.2. Technologies. [Ord. No. 2016-60]
The entity may install technology for the detection of thefts and other
crimes on the premises, but may not substitute the installation of
technology for the requirements of Section of 4-28.1.
§ 4-28.3. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2016-60]
Any entity violating any provision of this ordinance shall, upon conviction
therefor, be subject to a daily fine of $1,000 for each day the first violation
occurs and continues and to a daily fine of $2,000 for each day any
subsequent violation occurs and continues.
and shall run for a period of six months after the person reaches the
age of 17 years.
c. If at the time of the imposition of a sentence the convicted person has a
valid driver's license issued by the State of New Jersey, the court shall
immediately collect the license and forward same to the Division, along
with the report required hereunder. If for any reason the license cannot
be collected, the court shall include in the report the complete name,
address, date of birth, eye color and sex of the person, as well as the
first and the last date of the license suspension period imposed by the
court.
d. If a person convicted under this section is not a New Jersey resident,
the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
driving privileges of the person and submit the required report to the
Division. The court shall not collect the license of a nonresident
convicted under this section. Upon receipt of a report from the court,
the Division shall give required notice to appropriate officials in the
licensing jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
§ 4-27.4 KEARNY CODE § 4-28.4
AO:170
§ 4-28.4. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 2016-60]
This ordinance shall take effect 30 days after its enactment.
§ 4-29. CULTIVATION OR PROCESSING OF MARIJUANA
PROHIBITED. [Added 4-21-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-16]
§ 4-29.1. Prohibited Acts.
The growth and/or cultivation, extraction, manufacturing, warehousing or
distribution of marijuana is expressly prohibited in all areas of the Town
of Kearny. Nothing herein shall preclude operation of a medical marijuana
dispensary in the SKI-N Zone to the extent such use is permitted in that
zone.
§ 4-29.2. Violations and Penalties.
Any such person or entity violating any provision of this section shall be
subject to a daily fine of $1,000 for each day the first violation occurs and
continues and to a daily fine of $2,000 for each day any subsequent violation
occurs and continues.
§ 4-29.3. Enforcement.
The Police Department and/or the Construction Official shall have
jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this section. In addition to imposing
the fines set forth herein, the Town shall have the right to seek injunctive
relief in the New Jersey Superior Court, Hudson County, to close any
business violating Subsection 4-29.1.
Chapter 5
LICENSING AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
Editor's Note: For regulations concerning the licensing of
reclamation salvagers, see Chapter 20, Section 20-10.
For prohibitions on short-term rentals of single family houses, see
Chapter 15, Section 15-3.
§ 4-28.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-29.3
AO:171

ARTICLE I
Business Licenses
§ 5-1. MERCANTILE BUSINESS LICENSES.
§ 5-1.1. Fees. [1973 Code § 98-31; Ord. No. 5-22-74; Ord. No.
12-11-74; Ord. No. 7-9-75; Ord. No. 12-23-82; Ord. No. 5-13-87; Ord.
No. 2012-22]
Type of License Fee
Food vending machine (per machine including milk) $50
Kennel $100
Pound $100
Shelter $100
Pet shop $50
Coin-operated dry cleaning $75
Retail food establishments (selling area under 5,000
square feet)
$50
Retail food establishments (selling area over 5,000
square feet)
$100
Restaurants (seating 1-20) $50
Restaurants (seating 21-50) $75
Restaurants (seating 51 and over) $100
Retail food establishments (temporary) $20
Mobile retail food establishments $250
§ 5-1.2. Public Recreational Bathing Places Pursuant to N.J.A.C.
8:26-1.3. [Ord. No. 2015-30]
The fee for the issuance or renewal of a license to operate a public
recreational bathing facility shall be $200 annually.
§ 5-1.3. Purpose of Fee. [1973 Code § 98-32; Ord. No. 5-22-74]
The above license fees are hereby imposed for the purpose of defraying the
cost of regulation of the aforementioned businesses.
§ 5-1.4. License Not Transferable. [1973 Code § 98-33; Ord. No.
5-22-74]
No license granted to any person or corporation under the terms of this
section shall be assignable or transferable.
§ 5-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-1.5
AO:173
§ 5-1.5. Expiration. [1973 Code § 98-34; Ord. No. 5-22-74]
All licenses granted hereunder shall expire on May 31 of each year
regardless of when such license is issued.
§ 5-1.6. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 98-35; Ord. 5-22-74;
New]
Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-2. PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS.
§ 5-2.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 111-1]
As used in this section:
PEDDLER — Shall mean a person, commonly referred to either as a
"peddler" or "hawker," who goes from place to place or from house to
house by traveling on the streets and carries with him goods, wares and
merchandise for the purpose of then and there selling and delivering such
goods, wares and merchandise to consumers.
§ 5-2.2. Licenses Required. [1973 Code § 111-2]
It shall be unlawful for any peddler to sell, solicit, dispose of or offer for sale
any goods, wares or merchandise within the Town of Kearny, without first
obtaining the licenses hereinafter mentioned and paying the license fees
herein prescribed.
§ 5-2.3. Application for License. [1973 Code § 111-3]
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to obtain a license under this
section shall apply in writing to the Town Clerk on a form or forms prepared
by the Town Clerk and approved by the Council. Every application for a
license shall contain the name of the person, firm or corporation desiring
the same and the place of business of such applicant. Such applicant shall
also give the name and address of the person making such application and,
if a firm, of each member of same. If the applicant is a corporation, the
application shall contain the names and residences of its principal officers.
In addition to such statements, there shall be set forth in the application
the location of the place of business, or proposed location thereof, for which
the license is sought. Following the filing of the application, the Town Clerk
shall investigate and verify the facts therein stated. After such investigation
and the payment of the license fees prescribed, the license shall be issued
and shall be evidenced by a plate, badge or other means of identification.
§ 5-2.4. Types of Licenses. [1973 Code § 111-4]
§ 5-1.5 KEARNY CODE § 5-2.4
AO:174
§ 5-2.5. Duration of License. [1973 Code § 111-5]
Each license shall be good only in the year in which it is issued and shall be
effective from the first day of June in each year. Any licensee applying for
and obtaining a license after June 1 of any year, shall pay the license fee for
the full year and shall not be allowed any rebate or refund if the licensee
surrenders the license before the expiration of the year.
§ 5-2.6. License Fees. [1973 Code § 111-6; § 112-1; Ord. No.
2-23-93; Ord. No. 10-10-1995]
The license fees payable shall be as follows:
a. Licenses for Vehicles. A license shall be obtained for each wagon,
pushcart, bicycle, tricycle, automobile or other vehicle, whether motordriven
or not, used in connection with peddling. This license may be
transferred from one vehicle to another owned by the same licensee.
The plate, badge or other evidence of such license shall be displayed at
all times in a conspicuous part of the vehicle.
b. Licenses for Individuals. A license shall be obtained by each individual
actually engaged in the business of peddling either as owner of the
business or as agent, servant or employee of another licensed peddler.
This license shall not authorize any individual except the one
designated therein to peddle thereunder and shall not be transferable.
The license shall be carried by the individual at all times and shall be
exhibited upon the demand of any of the citizens of the Town or any
member of the Police Department.
a. License Fees for Vehicles. Each wagon, pushcart, bicycle, tricycle,
automobile, or other vehicle, whether motor-driven or not, used in
connection with peddling shall be subject to a license fee as hereinafter
set forth. Any vehicle carrying any one of the specified licenses
following may be used in connection with the peddling of any other
goods, wares and merchandise for which the same or lesser license fee
is payable:
1. Peddlers of ice and/or coal: $50.
2. Peddlers of shrubbery, plants, bulbs and products of the nursery:
$50.
3. Peddlers of fruits and vegetables: $50.
4. Peddlers of house-furnishing goods: $50.
5. Peddlers of dairy products, butter, cheese, eggs and poultry (milk
excepted): $50.
6. Peddlers of bread, cakes, pastries and pies: $50.
7. Peddlers of fish or fish products: $50.
§ 5-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-2.6
AO:175
§ 5-2.7. Purpose; Disposition of Fees. [1973 Code § 111-7]
This section is enacted for the purpose of raising revenue. Revenue derived
from the imposition of the license fees above stated shall be used for
general purposes of the Town.
§ 5-2.8. Prohibited Noises; Noisemaking Devices. [1973 Code
§ 111-8]
No peddler nor any person in his behalf shall shout, make any cryout, blow
a horn or use any loud-speaking radio or sound-amplifying system upon any
of the streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the Town of Kearny or
upon any private premises in the Town where sound of sufficient volume is
emitted or produced therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon
the streets, avenues, alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose
of attracting attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such
licensee proposes to sell.
§ 5-2.9. Stationary Location Prohibited; Trespassing Prohibited.
[1973 Code § 111-9]
No peddler shall maintain a stationary location in any area zoned residential
by the Kearny Zoning Ordinance nor shall any peddler obstruct the streets
or sidewalks of the Town of Kearny, nor shall any peddler trespass on the
private property of others, while peddling of any goods in the Town of
Kearny.
§ 5-2.10. Hours and Days of Sale. [1973 Code § 111-10; Ord. No.
2001-0-09; Ord. No. 2008-(O)-25]
8. Peddlers of meat and/or groceries: $50.
9. Peddlers of candy, soft drinks, sandwiches, box lunches and cigars:
$50.
10. Peddlers of ice cream or ice-cream combinations: $100.
11. Peddlers of dry goods and wearing apparel: $50.
12. Peddlers with wagon, pushcart, automobile or other vehicle,
whether motor-driven or not, selling any article not hereinabove
provided for, for each vehicle: $50.
b. License Fees for Individuals. The license fee for any individual peddling
goods, wares and merchandise of any kind whatsoever shall be $50,
except that a license for one named individual shall be issued without
charge with the license for each wagon, pushcart, automobile or other
vehicle.
a. No peddler, with the exception of a peddler of ice cream or box lunches,
shall sell, solicit, dispose of or offer for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.,
§ 5-2.6 KEARNY CODE § 5-2.10
AO:176
§ 5-2.11. Proximity to Stores Selling Similar Goods. [1973 Code
§ 111-11]
No peddler shall sell, solicit, dispose of or offer for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise within 200 feet of established premises dealing in the same or
similar goods, wares or merchandise.
§ 5-2.12. Peddling Prohibited in Certain Areas; Exceptions. [1973
Code § 111-12; Ord. No. 2001-0-09]
No peddler shall sell, solicit, dispose of or offer for sale any goods, wares or
merchandise on Kearny Avenue, Midland Avenue and Elm Street between
Midland Avenue and Belleville Turnpike and Hackensack Avenue south of
State Highways 1 and 9, except during the time when a parade, street fair
or other special event has been approved by the Mayor and Council to be
conducted on one of those streets. In no event shall any such peddler sell or
offer for sale any product of the kind generally referred to as silly string.
§ 5-2.13. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 111-13; New]
Any person, a firm, corporation or association, violating or assisting in
the violations of this section or any section hereof, shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-2.14. Parking of Vehicles of Transient Merchants and Itinerant
Vendors. [Ord. No. 2000-0-32 §§ 1 — 4]
except that at outdoor events sponsored by the Town such sales and
solicitations may take place at the location of the event beginning one
hour before the start of the event and ending 1/2 hour after the end of
the event.
b. No ice-cream peddler shall sell, solicit, dispose of or offer ice cream for
sale except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. during the
months of June, July and August and between 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
during the other months of the year except that at outdoor events
sponsored by the Town such sales and solicitations may take place at
the locations of the event beginning one hour before the start of the
event and ending 1/2 hour after the end of the event.
a. Definition of Vendor's Vehicle or Container. As used in this subsection,
"vendor's vehicle" or "container" shall mean a motor vehicle or
dispensing container transported by a motor vehicle that is used to
carry the goods, wares or other merchandise offered for sale to the
general public and from which sales are made to customers invited to
the vehicle or container and solicited for such purpose through any
device or means designed to attract attention to such vehicle or
container.
b. Time Limits. No vendor or merchant shall park his vendor's vehicle or
container for a period longer than 30 minutes in any one block during
§ 5-2.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-2.14
AO:177
§ 5-3. CANVASSERS.
§ 5-3.1. Permit Required. [1973 Code § 111-14]
No person, except as in this section provided, shall canvass, solicit,
distribute circulars or other matter, nor call from house to house in the
Town, without first having reported to and received a written permit from
the Chief of Police or the Officer in Charge at Police Headquarters.
§ 5-3.2. Issuance; Denial or Revocation. [1973 Code § 111-15]
The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the Officer in Charge at Police
Headquarters, shall have power to grant a permit to canvass, which permit
shall specify the number of hours or days that the permit will be in effect,
and such officer shall refuse to issue a permit in all cases where the
application of the canvasser or further investigation, to be made at the
discretion of such Officer, shows that the canvasser is not of good character
or that he is canvassing for a project not free from fraud. The Chief of Police
or, in his absence, the Officer in Charge at Police Headquarters, shall revoke
the permit for failure or refusal on the part of the permittee to observe the
rules and regulations herein set forth.
§ 5-3.3. Application for Permit. [1973 Code § 111-16]
Before the permit may be issued, the canvasser shall make an application to
canvass, giving his or her full name and address, age, height, weight, place
of birth, whether married or single, length and place of residence, whether
or not previously arrested or convicted of crime, clothing worn, by whom
employed, address of employer and a description of the project for which
he or she is canvassing; and a copy of any and all contracts, agreements
or other paper writings to be signed by the persons interviewed by the
canvasser, certified by the employer to be a true copy of the contracts or
agreements, shall be filed with the application to canvass. Each applicant
shall be fingerprinted and photographed before a permit shall be issued.
any twelve-hour period. This subsection shall not affect any person
engaged in the delivery of goods, wares or merchandise or other
articles or things in the regular course of business to the premises of
persons ordering or entitled to receive the same.
c. Whenever any Police Officer determines that a vendor's vehicle or
container has been parked on one block for a period longer than 30
minutes, he shall order the vendor or merchant to remove his vendor's
vehicle or container from the block upon which it is located. Any vendor
or merchant who refuses to remove his vendor's vehicle or container
after being ordered to do so by a Police Officer shall be guilty of a
violation of this subsection.
d. Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this subsection
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable for the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-2.14 KEARNY CODE § 5-3.4
AO:178
§ 5-3.4. Permit Fee. [1973 Code § 111-17; 112-1; Ord. No. 2-23-93;
Ord. No. 10-10-95; Ord. No. 2012-22]
§ 5-3.5. Rules and Regulations. [1973 Code § 111-18]
No person shall canvass within the Town except between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 5:00 p.m. A copy of the permittee's photograph shall be carried
on his or her permit, which photograph shall be furnished by the applicant.
The permittee shall exhibit his or her permit to any Police Officer or other
person upon request. The permittee shall be courteous to all persons in
canvassing and shall not importune or annoy any of the inhabitants of the
Town and shall conduct himself or herself in a lawful manner. On expiration
of the permit, the holder thereof shall surrender the same to the Officer in
Charge at Police Headquarters.
§ 5-3.6. Nonapplicability to Certain Deliveries. [1973 Code
§ 111-19]
This section shall not affect any person engaged in the delivery of goods,
wares or merchandise or other articles or thing in the regular course of
business to the premises of persons ordering or entitled to receive same.
§ 5-3.7. Nonapplicability to Certain Purposes. [1973 Code § 111-20]
This section shall not affect any person or persons duly licensed by the
State of New Jersey to engage in the pursuit of his/her or their business
in the Town of Kearny, and, further, shall not affect any person or persons
employed by insurance companies duly authorized to do business in the
Town.
§ 5-3.8. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 111-21; New]
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-4. AUCTIONEERS, BILLPOSTERS, JUNKMEN.
§ 5-4.1. License Required. [1973 Code § 98-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or attempt to sell at public auction
any goods, chattels or personal property, or to post or tack bills or engage in
the business of billposting, or junkman, or use any vehicle for such purposes
a. The fee for each permit issued hereunder shall be $30, except that if the
permit is issued for noncommercial purposes, no fee shall be exacted.
b. For each renewal of any permit heretofore issued by the Town of Kearny
pursuant to the provisions of this section the investigation fee shall not
exceed $6 and the maximum waiting time within which such permit
shall be issued shall not exceed 24 hours.
§ 5-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-4.1
AO:179
in the Town of Kearny, without having first obtained a license from the Town
Clerk to do so.
§ 5-4.2. Issuance of License. [1973 Code § 98-2]
The Town Clerk is hereby authorized to issue any such license upon
payment to him by the applicant of the proper fee therefor as hereinafter
provided.
§ 5-4.3. Duration of License; Nontransferability. [1973 Code § 98-3]
Every such license shall remain in force and be valid only for the time
therein expressed but not for a greater period than one year, and shall apply
only to the person to whom granted and shall not be transferable.
§ 5-4.4. Metal Tags. [1973 Code § 98-4]
Peddler and junkman licensees shall receive a metal tag numbered to
correspond to the license, which shall be attached to the side of the vehicle
if one is used for peddling or for the business of junkman. A separate
tag shall be required for each vehicle used for such purpose of peddling,
hawking or junk business, and no vehicle shall be used for such purposes
unless the metal tag is attached thereto as aforesaid.
§ 5-4.5. Exhibition of License. [1973 Code § 98-5]
Any person, corporation or partnership to whom any such license is issued
as herein provided is hereby required to exhibit any such license whenever
called upon by any Police Officer to do so.
§ 5-4.6. Fees. [1973 Code § 980-6; 112-1; Ord. No. 2-23-9; Ord. No.
10-10-95; Ord. No. 2012-12]
License fees under this section shall be as follows:
Auctioneers $75
§ 5-4.7. Purpose. [1973 Code § 98-7]
The license fees imposed by this section for auctioneers and bill tackers or
posters are imposed for revenue purposes.
§ 5-4.8. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 98-8; New]
Any person, corporation or partnership violating any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-5. MERCHANTS, ITINERANT VENDORS.
§ 5-4.1 KEARNY CODE § 5-5.1
AO:180
§ 5-5.1. Purpose. [1973 Code § 98-9]
The purpose of this section is:
§ 5-5.2. Definitions. [1973 Code § 98-10]
As used in this section:
NEW MERCHANT — Shall mean a person who engages in business in this
municipality by hiring premises for the sale of merchandise and intending
to remain longer than one year subsequent to the opening of the premises.
PERSON — Shall mean an individual, firm, partnership, corporation,
voluntary association, incorporated association and principal agent thereof.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT AND/OR ITINERANT VENDOR — As defined in
Chapter 88 of the Pamphlet Laws of the State of New Jersey for the year
1931, and also it is intended that "transient merchant" and/or "itinerant
vendor" shall mean and include all persons engaged in the distributing
by sale or otherwise of all newspapers, periodicals, magazines, catalogs,
pamphlets, books and flowers.
§ 5-5.3. License Required. [1973 Code § 98-11]
It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant, itinerant vendor or new
merchant to offer for sale or to sell or dispose of any goods, wares or
merchandise within the municipality of the Town without first obtaining a
license and paying the license fee hereinafter prescribed, except that new
merchants shall not be required to pay the license fee provided for until
the same becomes due as hereinafter provided; nor shall a person who sells
goods, the proceeds of which are devoted exclusively to the purposes of
a philanthropic, charitable or religious society on whose behalf he acts as
an agent without pay, be required to pay the license fee or meet the bond
requirement as hereinafter provided.
§ 5-5.4. Separate License for Each Location. [1973 Code § 98-12]
A separate license shall be obtained by a licensed transient merchant,
itinerant vendor or new merchant for each branch or separate place of
business in which his business is conducted, and each license shall
authorize the licensee to conduct business only at the location which is
indicated therein.
a. To prevent unfair competition and dishonest business practices by
requiring persons intending to engage in any of the occupations to be
licensed by this section to furnish certain preliminary information and
to conform to the requirements of this section, and, to the extent set
forth in this section, to regulate the conduct of persons engaged in any
of the occupations.
b. To impose upon transient merchants and itinerant vendors license fees
for revenue.
§ 5-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-5.5
AO:181
§ 5-5.5. Application for License. [1973 Code § 98-13]
a. In the case of an application for a license as a transient vendor or new
merchant, the Town Clerk is directed to establish the classification of
the business by procuring from the applicant a declaration of intention
in writing as to whether he intends to remain in business within the
municipality temporarily or for longer than one year.
b. Applicants desiring a license to operate as a transient merchant,
itinerant vendor or new merchant shall file with the Town Clerk an
application on a blank form to be furnished by the Clerk. The applicant
shall furnish the following information as required on the form:
1. Name of applicant.
2. Permanent home address.
3. Names and addresses of persons from whom goods making up the
stock were or are to be purchased.
4. Three business references.
5. The place or places of residence of the applicant for the three
preceding years.
6. The length of time for which the license is desired.
7. A description of the wares to be offered for sale.
8. The number either of arrests or convictions for misdemeanors or
crimes and the nature of the offenses for which arrested or
convicted.
9. If applicant represents a person or firm, a letter from the person or
firm for whom applicant purports to work, authorizing him to act as
such person's or firm's representative.
10. The average quantity and kind, as nearly as can be, and the value,
of the stock if goods, wares and merchandise intended to be sold or
exposed for sale.
11. The location of such goods, wares and merchandise by street and
number and whether on the premises from which they are to be
sold or in warehouse or storage.
The Town Clerk, in arriving at the valuation of the stock of goods,
may require the submission of bills or invoices of such goods, wares
and merchandise intended to be sold.
c. The statements required by this section to be set forth by the applicant
on his application shall in every case by verified by the oath of the
applicant.
§ 5-5.5 KEARNY CODE § 5-5.6
AO:182
§ 5-5.6. Investigation. [1973 Code § 98-14]
Following the filing of the application with the Town Clerk, the Clerk shall
investigate the statements contained in the application as to the arrests
and/or convictions and the alleged present and preceding places of
residence of applicant, and shall investigate the financial statements
contained in the application. If the statements made in the application are
found to be correct and satisfactory, the Town Clerk shall report to the
Council, and the Council shall grant a license to the applicant, provided all
other requirements of this section shall have been complied with.
§ 5-5.7. Bond Required. [1973 Code § 98-15]
§ 5-5.8. License Fees and Terms. [1973 Code § 98-16]
a. Before any license shall issue, the applicant for a transient merchant's,
itinerant vendor's or new merchant's license shall file with the Town
Clerk a bond executed by the applicant, with good and sufficient surety
or sureties, to be approved by the Town Council, in the amount
hereinafter specified, which bond shall remain in force for one year and
shall be conditioned to indemnify and pay to the Town of Kearny any
penalties or costs incurred in the enforcement of any of the provisions
of this section, and further conditioned to indemnify or reimburse any
purchaser of goods, wares and merchandise in a sum equal to at least
the amount of any payment or payments such purchaser may have been
induced to make through the misrepresentations as to the kind, quality
or value of such goods, wares and merchandise so purchased, whether
the misrepresentations were made by the owner or by his servant,
agent or employee either at the time of making the sales or through any
advertisement of any character whatsoever printed or circulated with
reference to the stock of goods, wares and merchandise or any part
thereof; and further conditions that the bond shall be due and payable
for any falsification of a statement of fact in the application filed for the
license or if the business conducted under the license is conducted in a
manner contrary to law or against the morals, public health or safety of
the life or limb of the public, or, in the case of a new merchant, if the
licensee discontinues the business licensed in the municipality within
one year after date of the issuance of the license without the payment of
the license fee or fees required under this section.
b. The penal amount of the bond in the case of a transient merchant or
itinerant vendor shall be 25% of the value of the applicant's stock and in
no event less than the sum of $1,000.
c. The penal amount of the bond in the case of a new merchant shall be
30% of the value of the applicant's stock, but in no case shall the bond
exceed $1,000 nor be less than $500.
a. Upon payment by an applicant to the Town Clerk of the sum of $500, the
Clerk is authorized to issue a license as transient merchant or itinerant
vendor, provided that such applicant shall otherwise comply with the
§ 5-5.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-5.8
AO:183
§ 5-5.9. Nontransferability. [1973 Code § 98-17]
The license issued to any applicant shall not authorize any person except
the designated licensee to engage in business under such license. The
license shall not be transferable from the person to whom issued to any
other person excepting upon the transferee's complying with all the
provisions of this section in relation to the original application for a license,
except that relating to the payment of the license fee, and shall then only be
transferable in case the original license fee has been paid or a bond given
to guarantee its payment and the approval of the transfer has been given
by the Council upon the payment of a transfer fee to the Town in the sum of
10% of the original license fee.
§ 5-5.10. Posting of License. [1973 Code § 98-18]
A licensee shall have his license posted at his place of business in a
prominent position therein at all times during the valid period of existence
of such license.
§ 5-5.11. Revocation or Suspension of License. [1973 Code § 98-19]
§ 5-5.12. Hearings. [1973 Code § 98-20]
The Council shall hold such hearings and make such investigations as it may
deem necessary in carrying out the provisions of this section in relation to
suspension or revocation of licenses.
provisions of this section. Such license shall continue in favor of the
person to whom it is issued for a period of 180 days from the day of
issue.
b. No license fee shall be required of a new merchant as a condition
precedent to the granting to him of a license as a new merchant by the
Council. If, however, such new merchant removes his stock and
business from the municipality within the year, he shall pay to the Town
Clerk the sum of $300 for each place at which his business was
conducted and which place of business is discontinued.
a. A license may be revoked by the Council for the violation of the terms of
the license or falsification in applying for the license, or when, in the
opinion of the Council, the business so licensed is conducted in a
manner contrary to law or to public morals or to the public health or to
the safety of the life or limb of the public. Before a license is revoked,
the licensee shall be accorded a hearing before the Council. The
decision of the Council as to revocation shall be final.
b. A license may be suspended for not more than two weeks by the Council
upon probable cause being shown that the license should be revoked.
§ 5-5.8 KEARNY CODE § 5-5.13
AO:184
§ 5-5.13. Exemption. [1973 Code § 98-21]
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to relieve any person
from complying with the provisions of any ordinance of the Town of Kearny
relating to the manufacture, sale, distribution or handling of food or food
products.
§ 5-5.14. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 98-22; New]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section
1-5.
§ 5-6. JUKEBOXES.
§ 5-6.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 92-1]
As used in this section:
JUKEBOX — Shall mean any music-vending machine, contrivance or device
which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any
slot, crevice or other opening, or by the payment of any price, operates, or
may be operated, for the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
§ 5-6.2. License Required. [1973 Code § 92-2]
Any person displaying for public patronage or keeping for operation any
jukebox shall be required to obtain a license from the Town upon payment
of a license fee, as hereinafter provided. Application for such license shall
be made to the Town Clerk upon a form to be supplied by the Clerk.
§ 5-6.3. Application for License. [1973 Code § 92-3; Ord. No.
2006-(O)-60 § 14]
a. The application for such license shall contain the following information:
1. Name and address of the applicant, age, date and place of birth; if
applicant is a corporation, the names, ages and addresses, dates
and places of birth of its officers and directors; if a firm or
association, the names, ages, addresses, dates and places of birth
of all members.
2. Prior convictions of applicant, if any.
3. Places where machine or device is to be displayed or operated and
the business conducted at that place.
4. Description of machine to be covered by the license, mechanical
features, name of manufacturer, serial number.
b. No license shall be issued to any applicant unless the applicant shall be
18 years of age, or over, and no license shall be issued to a corporation,
§ 5-5.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-6.3
AO:185
§ 5-6.4. Investigation by Police. [1973 Code § 92-4]
The Town Clerk shall refer each application for a license to the Chief
of Police who shall investigate the applicant and the location whereon
it is proposed to operate the jukebox and shall thereafter forward the
application to the Mayor and Council with a written report of his findings
and recommendations.
§ 5-6.5. Approval; Conditions. [1973 Code § 92-5; Ord. No.
2006-(O)-50]
All applications for licenses must be approved by the Mayor and Council,
and after approval the Town Clerk shall issue the license to the applicant
upon payment of the license fee set forth in Chapter 34, Summary of
Fees. The Mayor and Council shall be guided by the following standards in
deciding upon approval or disapproval of an application for a license.
firm or association unless all officers and directors of the corporation,
or all members of the firm or association, are 18 years of age or over.
a. The applicant, if an individual, or its officers and directors, if a
corporation, or the members, if a firm or association, shall be:
1. Eighteen years of age or over;
2. Of good moral character; and
3. Must not advocate or be a member of any party, group or
organization that advocates subversive practices designed to
overthrow, destroy or sabotage the Government of the United
States.
b. The applicant's premises, and use thereof, must be in compliance with
the Zoning Ordinance and all other rules, regulations, ordinances and
laws.
c. In determining the moral character of applicants, as set forth in
paragraph a.2 above, the Mayor and Council shall consider:
1. Penal History. All convictions, the reasons therefor, and the
demeanor of the applicant subsequent to his release.
2. License History. The license history of the applicant; whether such
person, in previously operating in this or another State under a
license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reasons
therefor, and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to such
action.
3. General Personal History. Such other facts relevant to the general
personal history of the applicant as they shall find necessary to a
fair determination of the eligibility of the applicant.
§ 5-6.3 KEARNY CODE § 5-6.6
AO:186
§ 5-6.6. (Reserved)
Former subsection 5-6.6 pertaining to license fees for jukeboxes, previously
codified herein and containing portions of 1973 Code § 92-6 and Ordinances
10-10-95 and 2004-(O)-27, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
2012-22.
§ 5-6.7. Hours. [1973 Code § 92-7]
No person, firm or corporation or association holding a license under this
section shall permit the playing of a jukebox between the hours of 2:00 a.m.
and 9:00 a.m. of any day, and shall not permit the playing at any time to be
so loud as to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood.
§ 5-6.8. Revocation. [1973 Code 92-8]
The Mayor and Town Council shall have the power to revoke any such
license issued pursuant to this section, for cause, after notice to the
applicant and an opportunity to be heard.
§ 5-6.9. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 92-9; New]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-7. MINIATURE GOLF.
§ 5-7.1. License Required. [1973 Code § 86-1]
It shall not be lawful for any person, firm or corporation to maintain or
operate any miniature golf course or any game of similar nature on any lot
or in any building within the Town of Kearny without having first obtained a
license from the Town Clerk so to do.
§ 5-7.2. (Reserved)
Former subsection 5-7.2 pertaining to license fees for miniature golf,
previously codified herein and containing portions of 1973 Code § 86-2, was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2012-22.
§ 5-7.3. Hours of Operation. [1973 Code § 86-3]
The business of operating any such miniature golf course or any game of
similar nature upon any lot or in any building shall be closed at 11:00 p.m.
and shall remain closed until 7:00 a.m. of the morning next following, and
such business shall not be conducted on any part of the day known as
Sunday.
§ 5-6.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-7.4
AO:187
§ 5-7.4. Noise Restrictions. [1973 Code § 86-4]
No person, firm or corporation operating or maintaining the business
referred to in this section shall make, countenance or permit any improper
noise or disturbance on the premises so occupied and shall not impede or
obstruct any public sidewalk adjacent to the premises so occupied or permit
the same to be done.
§ 5-7.5. Issuance of License. [1973 Code § 86-5]
The Town Clerk, when authorized by the Town Council, shall issue any such
license upon the payment by the applicant of the proper fee therefor as
heretofore provided.
§ 5-7.6. Nontransferability. [1973 Code § 86-6]
Every such license shall remain in force and be valid for the time therein
expressed, and shall apply only to the person to whom granted and shall not
be transferable.
§ 5-7.7. Exhibition of License. [1973 Code § 86-7]
Any person to whom such license is granted as herein provided shall exhibit
such license whenever called upon so to do.
§ 5-7.8. Revocation. [1973 Code § 86-8]
The Town Council shall have the power to revoke any license for violation
of this section or any other ordinance of the Town of Kearny by the licensee
hereunder.
§ 5-7.9. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 86-9; New]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-8. ARCADES; COIN OPERATED MECHANICAL AND
ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICES; VIDEO GAMES.
§ 5-8.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 64-1; No. 11-24-82; Ord. No.
1-12-83; Ord. No. 2-22-84; Ord. No. 6-27-90]
As used in this section:
ARCADE — Shall mean any single building or premises containing five or
more coin-operated amusement devices.
COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE (HEREINAFTER DEVICE) —
Shall mean any automatic, mechanical or electronic amusement device,
game or device of skill or entertainment, such as pinball machines,
electronic games, bowling machines, mechanical game machines, skee-ball
machines, pokerino machines and commercial pool tables, which is or are
§ 5-7.4 KEARNY CODE § 5-8.1
AO:188
operated or set in motion by the deposit therein of any coin or coins, tokens
or slugs or the like thereof, purchased for cash, and including electronic
video type games or machines or similar devices that use a display screen
for points, lines or dots of light that can be manipulated to simulate games
or other types of entertainment; provided however that this definition shall
also include commercial pool tables which are not operated by the deposit
of coins but for which a fee of any kind is paid in consideration for the
temporary use thereof. Excluded from this definition are music vending
machines commonly known as "juke boxes."
§ 5-8.2. License Required. [1973 Code § 64.2; Ord. No. 11-24-82;
Ord. No. 1-12-83]
No person shall install, place, maintain, operate or possess in any store,
place of business, building, public place, or quasi-public place wherein the
public is invited or may enter, any coin-operated amusement device within
the limits of the Town of Kearny without first applying for and obtaining a
license from the Mayor and Council for each device to be utilized.
§ 5-8.3. Eligibility Requirements. [1973 Code § 64-3; Ord. No.
11-24-82; Ord. No. 1-12-83; Ord. No. 2-22-84]
§ 5-8.4. License Fees. [1973 Code § 64-4; Ord. No. 11-24-82; Ord.
No. 1-12-83; Ord. No. 2-22-84; Ord. No. 10-10-95; Ord. No.
2004-(O)-27 § 2]
a. Each device shall be located not less than five feet from the entrance
way or exit of the premises and placed so that it does not obstruct or
interfere with the free and unfettered passage of patrons or users of the
premises.
b. No device shall be operated by an individual under the age of 16 prior
to 2:30 p.m. This provision shall only be applicable on weekdays,
Monday through Friday inclusive when public, private, or parochial
schools are in session.
a. The distribution fee for all premises that contain a device as defined in
this section shall be $100 per distributor and shall be paid annually on
or before January 15, of the year in which the device is to be utilized.
b. The fee for a license to operate a device as defined in this section shall
be $50 for the first machine and $25 for each additional machine. The
fee shall be paid annually on or before January 15 of the year in which
the device is to be utilized.
c. The fee for an arcade as defined in this chapter shall be $1,500, which
shall include the distribution fee.
d. No license, distribution, and/or arcade fee is refunded upon the
revocation or surrender of any license.
§ 5-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-8.5
AO:189
§ 5-8.5. License Term. [1973 Code § 64-5; Ord. No. 11-24-82; Ord.
No. 1-12-83]
§ 5-8.6. Transfer of License. [1973 Code § 64-6; Ord. No. 11-24-82;
Ord. No. 1-12-83; Ord. No. 2-22-84]
The holder of a license shall not be permitted to transfer that license to any
other individual or to any other similar machine without prior approval of
the Kearny Vice Squad.
§ 5-8.7. Peace and Good Order. [1973 Code § 64-7; Ord. No.
11-24-82; Ord. No. 1-12-83; Ord. No. 5-25-83]
§ 5-8.8. Posting and Display. [1973 Code § 64-8; Ord. No. 11-24-82;
Ord. No. 1-12-83]
The license granted pursuant to this section shall:
a. All licenses issued under this section shall be for a term of one year,
commencing on January 1 and expiring on December 31 of each year.
b. The application and license fees set forth in subsection 5-8.4 shall be
payable in full for the calendar year or any portion of the year.
a. No licensee shall permit any disorderly, lewd, dissolute, drunken,
obnoxious or boisterous person or any person under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or controlled dangerous substance to be admitted to
or remain on or about the licensed premises.
b. The licensee shall provide one off-street parking space for every 200
square feet of floor area; provided however that this requirement shall
not apply to any licensee who is also the holder of a plenary retail
consumption license issued by the Town of Kearny pursuant to the laws
of the State of New Jersey governing the sale and consumption of
alcoholic beverages and which licensee operates no more than one
coin-operated amusement device.
a. Be posted in a conspicuous place at the location for which the license
was granted.
b. State the name and address of the licensee.
c. State the manufacturer, model number, and serial number for each
device for which the license was issued.
d. Such licenses must be signed by the Town Clerk.
e. Such licenses must indicate the date of issuance and expiration date.
§ 5-8.5 KEARNY CODE § 5-8.9
AO:190
§ 5-8.9. Renewal of License. [1973 Code § 64-9; Ord. No. 11-24-82;
Ord. No. 1-12-83]
For a new license subsequent to an initial license, application shall be made
by November 1 of the preceding year. The application shall be in the same
form as if the application were an original application. License fees in the
amount of the original license shall be charged for each successive license
unless a new fee has been duly established, in which case the new fee shall
be charged.
§ 5-8.10. Application Requirements. [1973 Code § 64-10; Ord. No.
11-24-82; Ord. No. 1-12-83]
§ 5-8.11. Location. [1973 Code § 64-11; Ord. No. 11-24-82; Ord. No.
1-12-83]
a. Application Information. An original and two copies of the application
for the license set forth in subsection 5-8.2 must be filed together with
the appropriate fees therefor, with the Town Clerk, who shall have 30
days to issue or deny same. The application shall contain the following
information:
1. Name and address of the applicant.
2. Name under which the place of business is being operated and the
location of same.
3. Type of alcoholic beverages sold, if applicable.
4. Name and address of the person from whom each such device is to
be purchased, rented, or otherwise obtained.
5. Description of each device to be licensed, including for each device
the name of the manufacturer, model number and serial number.
6. Copies of agreements governing the acquisition and installation of
the devices if leased, documents of title if owned.
7. Information indicating whether the distributor, the applicant, or
any person connected with the operation of the place of business
wherein the device is to be installed has ever been convicted of any
crime or convicted of the violation of any statute, ordinance or
regulation pertaining to gambling or gaming in any jurisdiction.
8. The Mayor and Town Council may request of any applicant
additional information supplementing the information given in the
application.
9. The truth of the information submitted in any application under this
section shall be sworn to, and any willful misstatement therein
shall be considered a violation of this section and shall subject the
offender to the penalties provided herein.
§ 5-8.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-8.11
AO:191
§ 5-8.12. Penalties. [1973 Code § 64-12; Ord. No. 11-24-82; Ord. No.
1-12-83]
§ 5-8.13. Decal Control Numbers. [1973 Code § 64-13; Ord. No.
11-24-82; Ord. No. 11-28-84]
Every device shall have a decal prominently displayed on the device
showing the control number that has been assigned to the machine by the
Vice Squad of the Kearny Police Department. Any transfer of the decal
control numbers will be accompanied by a transfer fee of $5 payable
through the Kearny Vice Squad.
§ 5-9. VENDING MACHINES.
§ 5-9.1. Applicability. [1973 Code § 110-36; Ord. No. 8-9-78]
a. No devices subject to this section may be operated within 500 feet of a
school or house of worship.
b. No premises shall be issued licenses for a device if such premises are
located in the following zones as referenced in the Town of Kearny
Zoning Ordinance: R-1, R-2, R-3, R-2A.
c. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit nonconforming premises with
coinoperated amusement devices as defined in subsection 5-8.1 which
are already lawfully in existence at the adoption of this section from
continuing to operate.
a. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable for the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section
1-5.
1. Each and every day in which a violation of any provision of this
chapter exists shall constitute a separate violation.
b. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent any
proceeding for the suspension or revocation of license.
a. The provisions of this section shall apply to machines owned and
operated exclusively for the sale of merchandise where the element of
neither chance nor skill is involved.
b. The provisions of this section shall also apply to any machines which are
maintained or operated in premises which are licensed for use by the
holder of a Plenary Retail Consumption License or Club License, issued
under and pursuant to N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. provided 1 that such
premises are not located within 200 feet of a school, church or other
educational or religious institution, and 2 that no more than two such
machines are maintained or operated in any one licensed premises.
§ 5-8.11 KEARNY CODE § 5-9.2
AO:192
§ 5-9.2. License Fee. [1973 Code § 110-37]
There is hereby imposed upon any person owning and operating any
vending machine, an annual license fee in the amount of $50 per machine.
§ 5-9.3. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 110-37.1; Ord. No.
8-9-78; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, upon conviction
thereof, shall be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-10. (RESERVED)18
§ 5-11. ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.
§ 5-11.1. Overnight Residential Off-Street Parking Permits. [Ord.
No. 2004-(O)-48; Ord. No. 2012-22; Ord. No. 2016-31]
§ 5-12. (RESERVED)
§ 5-13. LOUDSPEAKERS; AMPLIFIERS.
§ 5-13.1. Permit Required. [1973 Code § 102-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate or maintain a sound truck,
or mechanical loudspeaker or amplifying system, either from a stationary
position or on a truck or other moving vehicle, for advertising or other
purposes, in the Town of Kearny, without first having obtained a permit from
the Chief of Police.
§ 5-13.2. Authorization to Issue Permit. [1973 Code § 102-2]
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to issue such permit upon payment
of the permit fee of $1 by the applicant after the filing of a proper
application with the Chief of Police, setting forth the name and address of
the applicant, the purpose for which the permit shall be issued, and the
period of time for which the permit, after granted, shall be made.
a. There shall be an administrative fee of $125 payable to the Town Clerk
for the processing of applications and issuance of an overnight
residential off-street parking permit to any resident.
b. No administrative fee shall be refunded in the event of revocation or
surrender of any such permit.
18.Editor's Note: Former Section 5-10, Amusement Rides, previously codified herein and
containing portions of 1973 Code §§ 51-1 — 51-7, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance
No. 2007-(O)-35.
§ 5-9.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-13.3
AO:193
§ 5-13.3. Term of Permit; Nontransferable. [1973 Code § 102-3]
Every such permit shall remain in force and be valid only for the time
and purpose therein stated, and shall apply only to the person, firm or
corporation to whom granted, and shall not be transferable.
§ 5-13.4. Exhibition of License. [1973 Code § 102-4]
Any person, firm or corporation to whom such permit may be granted is
hereby required to exhibit such permit whenever called upon so to do.
§ 5-13.5. Permits Subject to Rules and Regulations. [1973 Code
§ 102-5]
Any permits granted hereunder shall be under the regulation and control
of the Police Department, and shall be subject to such regulations as may
be issued from time to time by the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall
not issue such a permit where the same may cause injury to the health or
welfare of any person or persons, and he shall not issue such a permit for
use on any general, primary or special election day during the hours that
the polls are open if the permit is to be used in behalf of any political party
or candidate for elective office, and he shall not issue such a permit for use
after 6:00 p.m.
§ 5-13.6. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 102-6; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, upon conviction
thereof, shall be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-14. PUBLIC DANCES.
§ 5-14.1. Permit Required. [1973 Code § 67-1]
No person, society, club, association, organization, firm or corporation shall
conduct a public dance in the Town of Kearny without having first obtained
a permit to do so from the Chief of Police.
§ 5-14.2. Application for Permit. [1973 Code § 67-2]
Application for a permit to conduct a public dance shall be made in writing
to the Chief of Police at least 10 days prior to the date upon which the dance
will be held. The application shall set forth the date, time and place at which
the dance will be held and the name and address of the person, society, club,
association, organization, firm or corporation conducting the dance.
§ 5-14.3. Issuance; Denial; Appeal. [1973 Code § 67-3]
a. The Chief of Police shall, within five days from the date of receiving an
application, as set forth in subsection 5-14.2, notify the applicant, in
writing, whether the permit is granted or denied, and failure to notify
the applicant within the period of five days shall raise a conclusive
§ 5-13.3 KEARNY CODE § 5-14.3
AO:194
§ 5-14.4. Police Officer in Attendance. [1973 Code § 67-4]
A Police Officer, furnished by the Chief of Police shall be in attendance
during the time a public dance is being conducted. The person, society,
club, association, organization, firm or corporation obtaining the permit to
conduct the public dance shall, for the services of the Police Officer, pay the
fee established by the Chief of Police.
§ 5-14.5. Hours. [1973 Code § 67-5]
All music at any public dance conducted in the Town shall cease at 1:30 a.m.
§ 5-14.6. Exceptions. [1973 Code § 67-6]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to dances held in: a. public
schools under the supervision of the Board of Education of the Town of
Kearny, b. parochial schools under the supervision of responsible heads
of the parochial schools, c. churches or on church property under the
supervision of the responsible heads of the churches or, d. premises owned
by the person, society, club, association, organization, firm or corporation
conducting the dance.
§ 5-14.7. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 67-7; New]
Any person, society, club, association, organization, firm or corporation
violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof,
be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-15. BODY ART PROCEDURES.19
presumption that the permit was granted. If the permit is denied, the
applicant may, upon two days' notice to the Chief of Police, appeal to
the Town Council, and the Council shall hear the appeal in a summary
manner and may affirm or reverse the action of the Chief of Police. If
the Council reverses the action of the Chief of Police, a permit shall
immediately issue to the applicant.
b. Before hearing the appeal, the Town Council shall cause a notice of the
date, time and place of the hearing to be published at least once in a
newspaper published and circulated in the municipality, if there be one,
and if not, in a newspaper printed in the County and circulating in the
municipality. If there be only one such publication, the same shall be at
least one week prior to the time fixed for the hearing, and if there be
more than one publication the first shall be at least one week prior to
the time fixed for the hearing.
19.Editor's Note: Former Section 5-15, Tattoo Parlors; Tattooists, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance No. 1996-O-21, was amended in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 2002-O-48.
§ 5-14.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-15.1
AO:195
§ 5-15.1. Regulation. [Ord. No. 2002-O-48]
All body art procedures, including among other things piercing, tattooing,
permanent cosmetics and ear piercing, shall be regulated under the New
Jersey State Sanitary Code (N.J.A.C. 8:27-1 et seq.).
§ 5-15.2. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 2002-O-48]
All applications for permit pursuant to N.J.A.C. 8:27-1 shall be made to the
Kearny Board of Health.
§ 5-15.3. Term. [Ord. No. 2002-O-48]
All permits shall be for one year, or less if applied after February 1 of a
calendar year, and shall expire on February 1 of each year.
§ 5-15.4. Fees. [Ord. No. 2002-O-48]
The fee for permits shall be as follows:
Ear piercing $50
Body piercing $100
Tattoo parlor $250
Permanent cosmetics and any other
procedures
$250
§ 5-15.5. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2002-O-48]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be subject to
the penalties provided by N.J.S.A. 26:1A-10 and all other applicable laws.
§ 5-16. through § 5-18. (RESERVED)
§ 5-19. FOOD AND DRINK ESTABLISHMENTS; ON-PREMISES
CONSUMPTION.
§ 5-19.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 98-23]
As used in this section:
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean and include places of pool, billiards, bowling,
saloon, cafe, bar, grill, restaurant, room, car, wagon or other sort or nature
wherein food or drink, or both, is sold to be consumed on the premises in
the Town, other than strictly soda, water and ice cream, private boarding
places or eating-place service.
§ 5-19.2. License Required; Fee. [1973 Code § 98-24]
No person shall pursue the business or occupation of selling food or drink,
or both, to be consumed on the premises in the Town as applied in
subsection 5-19 until the owner, lessee or proprietor shall have obtained
§ 5-15.1 KEARNY CODE § 5-19.2
AO:196
from the Town Council a license to carry on or conduct the business and
paid to the Town Clerk a fee of $5 for such privilege.
§ 5-19.3. Investigation and Approval by Board of Health. [1973
Code § 98-25]
Each application for a license to sell food or drink, or both, to be consumed
on the premises shall be referred to the Board of Health of the Town for
investigation, and no licenses shall be granted unless the Board of Health,
after investigation, shall approve the license application in writing.
§ 5-19.4. Granting of Licenses; Revocation, Suspension. [1973 Code
§ 98-26]
The granting of any such license shall be at the discretion of the Town
Council which license shall be signed by the Mayor and Town Clerk, bearing
date of issue, name of person or persons as licensed, purpose for which
granted and location of room or building wherein the business or
occupation is authorized to be carried on or conducted, and it shall not be
transferable or valid to authorize the licensee to carry on or conduct the
business or occupation in any place or location other than that set forth
in the license. The Council may, for good or sufficient reason, revoke any
such license; provided, however, the licensee or licensees shall be given or
afforded opportunity to be heard and permitted to show cause why such
action should not be taken.
§ 5-19.5. Cleanliness; Obstructions to Windows Prohibited. [1973
Code § 98-27]
All rooms or places shall be kept clean and well and brightly lighted at all
times, day or night, and the windows thereof shall be so constructed and
of clear, plain glass, free of curtains, shades, screens or any obstruction
whatever, as to afford a free, full and clear view of the entire interior from
the street or office or corridor of the building wherein located.
§ 5-19.6. Expiration Date of License. [1973 Code § 98-29]
All licenses issued under this section shall expire annually on December 31.
§ 5-19.7. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 98-28; New]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-20. MOBILE RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 5-20.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 98-30; Ord. No. 5-13-87]
As used in this section:
§ 5-19.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-20.1
AO:197
MOBILE RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean and include any
movable restaurant, truck van, trailer, cart or other movable unit in or on
which food or beverage is stored, transported or prepared for resale or
distribution at temporary locations.
§ 5-20.2. License Required. [1973 Code § 98-30; Ord. No. 5-13-87]
No person, firm or corporation shall operate a mobile retail food
establishment within the Town of Kearny unless all licenses required by the
Town are obtained. Such licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place in
such establishment.
§ 5-20.3. Regulatory Standards. [1973 Code § 98-30; Ord. No.
5-13-87]
§ 5-21. through § 5-24. (RESERVED)
§ 5-25. GARAGE SALES AND SIMILAR TYPE SALES.
§ 5-25.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2012-57; Ord. No. 2018-41]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
a. All mobile retail food establishments must meet the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 8:24, Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food and
Beverage Vending Machines.
b. No person shall operate a mobile retail food establishment unless that
food offered for sale is obtained from an approved commissary or other
fixed food establishment as defined in N.J.A.C. 8:24. This establishment
must have received a satisfactory rating in the month prior to licensing
and be approved by the Kearny Health Department.
c. No mobile food establishment shall park or stand on any property in the
Town of Kearny without providing approved rubbish facilities to prevent
the accumulation of litter.
d. A hand wash sink with an adequate supply of hot and cold running
water shall be provided for each vehicle engaged in food preparation.
e. No mobile retail food establishment shall park or stand on any property
commercial or private, in the Town of Kearny for the purpose of vending
food without first obtaining written permission of the owner thereof and
filing a copy of the aforesaid with the Kearny Health Department. This
letter must state that the mobile operator has access to restrooms.
f. The mobile retail establishment operator shall successfully complete a
food handler's course approved by the Kearny Health Department.
g. All mobile retail food establishments shall meet all other local
requirements.
§ 5-20.1 KEARNY CODE § 5-25.1
AO:198
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean one or more rooms, designed, occupied
or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with one kitchen
and sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for
exclusive use of a single family maintaining a household.
GARAGE SALES — Shall mean all sales open to the public at large held on
premises the seller owns or on premises where he or she resides for the
purpose of disposing of tangible personal property. They include, but not
by way of limitation, sales denominated "garage," "lawn," "house," "estate,"
"auction," "yard," "attic," porch," "room," "backyard," "patio," or "rummage"
sales and other like sales. Flea Markets shall not be governed by this
Section 5-25 but instead shall be subject to the provisions of Town Code
Section 4-26.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Shall mean any property which is the subject
of a "garage sale," typically, but not by way of limitation, used household
or personal articles such as furniture, tools, clothing or such other items
acquired in the normal course of living or in maintaining a residence.
§ 5-25.2. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 2012-57]
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale within the
Town without first obtaining a permit from the Town Clerk. A permit may be
issued only to the owner or resident of the premises on which the sale is to
be conducted.
§ 5-25.3. Restrictions. [Ord. No. 2012-57]
The issuance of permits shall be restricted by dwelling units. No more
than three permits per dwelling unit shall be issued in any one calendar
year no matter how many persons occupy the particular dwelling unit. No
garage sale shall be permitted for more than two days which days shall be
consecutive.
§ 5-25.4. Application for Permit. [Ord. No. 2012-57]
Any person seeking to obtain a garage sale permit shall, at least one
week before the proposed date, complete and submit to the Town Clerk
an application for the issuance of a permit and shall pay the required fee.
The application shall be on a form established by the Town which may
be modified from time to time and shall contain at least the following
information:
a. The location of the proposed sale.
b. The dates and times of the proposed sale.
c. The names of the owners of the premises on which the proposed sale is
to be conducted.
§ 5-25.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-25.4
AO:199
§ 5-25.5. Fee. [Ord. No. 2012-57]
The fee for each garage sale license shall be $25. The fee shall be
nonrefundable but may be applied to an alternate date if the original date
has to be postponed because of rain or other natural element.
§ 5-25.6. Application; Issuance of Permit. [Ord. No. 2012-57]
The Town Clerk shall receive the application and accept the required filing
fee and if, upon review of the application, the Clerk finds it to be in
compliance with the requirements of this section, shall issue the permit. The
permit shall be prominently displayed on the premises upon which the sale
takes place.
§ 5-25.7. Hours. [Ord. No. 2012-57]
All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m.
§ 5-25.8. Display. [Ord. No. 2012-57]
The property offered for sale may be displayed in a driveway or in a garage,
or in the rear yard or lawn of the premises for which a permit has been
issued. No property shall be displayed or otherwise placed on any sidewalk,
road, highway, street or public right-of-way.
§ 5-25.9. Signage. [Ord. No. 2012-57]
No signs for advertising a sale or directing customers are to be posted on
any place other than the premises where the sale is to be held. The sign
shall be limited to two feet by two feet in size and shall not be placed on the
premises earlier than one week before the sale and must be removed within
24 hours after the sale has terminated.
§ 5-25.10. Nontransferability of Permit. [Ord. No. 2012-57]
No permit shall be transferable by the permittee to any other person, nor
shall the place of the sale be changed without cancellation of the permit and
d. If the proposed sale is not being conducted by the owners of the
premises, the name of the residents at that address who will be
conducting the sale, the applicant.
e. The number of days of the sale.
f. The date and nature of any past sale.
g. A certification that the items to be sold are owned by the applicant or
being sold with the consent and authorization of the owner.
h. A certification by the applicant that all of the information in the
application is true and known to the applicant to be true.
§ 5-25.4 KEARNY CODE § 5-25.10
AO:200
issuance of a new permit, upon application and payment of the required fee
for the new location.
§ 5-25.11. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2012-57]
§ 5-25.12. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2012-57]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
§ 5-25.13. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2012-57]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not less than $50 nor more than $500 or be
imprisoned for a period not to exceed 10 days for each violation. Each day
on which a violation of an ordinance exists shall be considered a separate
and distinct violation and shall be subject to imposition of a separate penalty
for each day of the violation.
§ 5-26. CONCRETE BLOCK MANUFACTURERS OR SALES.
§ 5-26.1. License Required. [1973 Code § 65-1]
It shall not be lawful for any person or persons or corporation to
manufacture or sell concrete block, or conduct such business or to use any
a. This section shall be enforced by the Police Department.
b. The permittee and the owner of the premises, if the permittee is not the
owner, shall be responsible for the maintenance of good order and
decorum on the premises during the hours of the sale.
c. The permittee and the owner shall quell any loud or boisterous conduct
on the premises and see to it that no vehicles impede the passage of the
traffic on any roads or streets in the area of the premises.
a. The Town Wide Yard and Sidewalk Sale hosted by the Urban Enterprise
Zone Development Corporation in conjunction with the Mayor and
Council.
b. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of
competent jurisdiction.
c. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
d. Sales by any bona fide, charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural
or other organization or association organized not for profit which has
been granted an exemption by resolution of the Mayor and Council. The
production of a certified copy of a certificate of incorporation pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 15A:1-1 et seq. shall be presumptive evidence of the right of
such organization to apply for the exemption.
§ 5-25.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-26.1
AO:201
place or places or premises in which or at which the business is carried
on or conducted, without having obtained a license from the Construction
Official.
§ 5-26.2. Application. [1973 Code § 65-2]
The Construction Official is hereby authorized to issue any such license
upon written application therefor signed by the applicant, giving names and
addresses of applicants and place where the business is to be conducted,
and upon the payment by the applicant to him of the proper fee therefor, as
hereinafter provided; if the applicant shall be a corporation, a statement of
the residence of the registered agent of the corporation and the names of
the officers thereof; if the applicant shall be a partnership, the names of the
partners interested in the business and their respective addresses.
§ 5-26.3. Term of License. [1973 Code § 65-3]
Every such license shall remain in force and be valid only for the time
therein expressed, except that all licenses shall terminate at 12:00 midnight
of the last day of each year for which the license was issued, and shall apply
only to the person or persons or corporation to whom granted and shall not
be transferable.
§ 5-26.4. Exhibition of License. [1973 Code § 65-4]
Any person or corporation to whom such license is granted, as herein
provided, is hereby required to exhibit such license whenever requested so
to do.
§ 5-26.5. License Fee. [1973 Code § 65-5]
The license fee under this chapter shall be $10 per year.
§ 5-26.6. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 65-6; New]
Any person or persons or corporation violating this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-27. FLORISTS.
§ 5-27.1. License Required. [1973 Code § 79-1]
It shall not be lawful for any person to carry on or conduct the business of
florist or use any place or places for such purposes, or sell flowers or plants
of any description, without first having obtained a license from the Town
Clerk so to do.
§ 5-27.2. Authority to Issue License. [1973 Code § 79-2]
The Town Clerk is hereby authorized to issue any such license upon the
payment by the applicant of the proper fee therefor, as hereinafter provided.
§ 5-26.1 KEARNY CODE § 5-27.3
AO:202
§ 5-27.3. Term of License; Nontransferable. [1973 Code § 79-3]
Every such license shall remain in force and be valid only for the time
therein expressed, except that all licenses shall terminate at 12:00 midnight
of the last day of each year for which the license was issued, and shall apply
only to the person or persons or corporation to whom granted, and shall not
be transferable.
§ 5-27.4. Exhibition of License. [1973 Code § 79-4]
Any person to whom such license is granted, as herein provided, is hereby
required to exhibit such license whenever requested so to do.
§ 5-27.5. (Reserved)
Former subsection 5-27.5 pertaining to license fees for florists, previously
codified herein and containing portions of 1973 Code § 79-5 and Ordinance
No. 2004-(O)-27, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2012-22.
§ 5-27.6. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 79-6; New]
Any person or persons or corporation violating this section or any portion
thereof shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-28. MOTOR VEHICLE SALES AND STORAGE.
§ 5-28.1. License Required. [1973 Code § 53-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any vacant lot or land in the Town
of Kearny for the display or storage for sale of used or new motor vehicles
without first obtaining a license therefor, as herein provided.
§ 5-28.2. Separate Licenses Required; Nontransferable. [1973 Code
§ 53-2]
Whenever two or more vehicles are displayed or stored for sale in or on
any such vacant lots or land, a license as herein provided shall be required,
and a separate license shall be required for each separate place of business
upon which the business is conducted; and the license shall authorize the
licensee to conduct the business on the premises specified in the license,
and the license shall not be transferable to any other premises, nor shall the
license be assignable or transferable in any manner.
§ 5-28.3. Application. [1973 Code § 53-3]
Every applicant for a license to engage in this business shall file with the
Superintendent of the Fire Prevention Bureau a written application signed
by the applicant or applicants, which application shall state:
§ 5-27.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-28.3
AO:203
§ 5-28.4. Compliance; Issuance. [1973 Code § 53-4]
a. The name and address of the applicant, and, if a firm or corporation, the
names and addresses of the officers and the registered agent or the
partners.
b. The place of previous employment or occupation of the applicant or
applicants, and whether or not the applicant or applicants have been
convicted of a crime.
c. The detailed nature of the business to be conducted.
d. The exact location of the place where the business is to be located and
carried on, including a description by metes and bounds of the vacant
lots or land to be used in the business, and the application shall be
accompanied by a survey of the plot to be used, showing the existing or
proposed entrance or entrances to the premises where the business is
to be conducted.
e. If the applicant is not the owner of the site where the business is to be
conducted, the property owner's consent to the conduct of the business
shall be endorsed on the application.
a. Every application received by the Superintendent of the Fire Prevention
Bureau shall be delivered by him to the Town Clerk with a written
report indicating if the proposed business complies with the Fire
Prevention Code of the Town of Kearny, and thereafter the Town Clerk
shall refer the application to the Construction Official, who shall submit
a written report to the Town Clerk indicating if the proposed business
complies with the Zoning Ordinance and thereafter the Town Clerk
shall submit the application to the Mayor and Town Council together
with the written reports of the Superintendent of the Fire Prevention
Bureau and the Construction Official.
b. All applications for licenses must be approved by the Mayor and Town
Council and, after approval, the Town Clerk shall issue the license to
the applicant upon payment of the license fee set forth in subsection
5-28.5. The Mayor and Council shall be guided by the following
standards in deciding upon approval or disapproval of an application for
a license:
1. The applicant, if an individual, or its officers and directors if a
corporation, or the members if a firm, shall be 21 years of age or
over; of good moral character; and must not advocate or be a
member of any party, group or organization that advocates
subversive practices designed to overthrow, destroy or sabotage
the government of the United States.
2. The applicant's premises, and use thereof, must be in compliance
with the Zoning Ordinance and all other rules, regulations,
ordinances and laws.
§ 5-28.3 KEARNY CODE § 5-28.4
AO:204
§ 5-28.5. License Fees. [1973 Code § 53-5; Ord. No. 8-10-88]
The annual fee for such licenses shall be the sum of $500, and such licenses
shall be effective from the date of issue to December 31 of the year in
which the license is issued, and upon the expiration of any license granted
hereunder, the licensee shall make application to the Town Council for an
annual renewal of the license to conduct the business for the following year
from January 1 to December 31 of each year.
§ 5-28.6. Storage on Sidewalk or Street Prohibited. [1973 Code
§ 53-6]
No motor vehicle displayed or stored for sale shall be placed on the sidewalk
or street or any part thereof.
§ 5-28.7. Manufacturer's Serial Number. [1973 Code § 53-7]
No licensee or his agent shall knowingly buy, sell, receive, dispose of,
conceal or have in his possession any motor vehicle from which the
manufacturer's serial number or any other number or identification mark
has been removed, defaced or covered or destroyed for the purpose of
concealing the identity of such vehicle.
§ 5-28.8. Number of Locations Limited. [1973 Code § 53-8; Ord. No.
9-20-79; Ord. No. 4-12-83; Ord. No. 1996-32]
Not more than one location in the Town of Kearny shall be granted to
each applicant licensed hereunder, nor shall any more than 15 licenses be
issued and outstanding at any one time; provided however that the within
stated numerical limitation shall apply only to those areas presently zoned
as "commercial" in the Town of Kearny. In the R-2A Zone, only one license
shall be permitted to be issued.
3. In determining the moral character of applicants, as set forth in
paragraph a.1, above, the Mayor and Town Council shall consider:
(a) Penal history. All convictions, the reasons therefor, and the
demeanor of the applicant subsequent to his release.
(b) License history. The license history of the applicant; whether
such person, in previously operating in this or another state
under a license has had such license revoked or suspended; the
reasons therefor, and the demeanor of the applicant
subsequent to such action.
(c) General personal history. Such other facts relevant to the
general personal history of the applicant as they shall find
necessary to a fair determination of the eligibility of the
applicant.
§ 5-28.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-28.9
AO:205
§ 5-28.9. Proximity to Residential Dwellings. [1973 Code § 53-9]
No motor vehicle shall be displayed, stored, parked or located for sale or
exchange under the license issued hereunder within five feet of any building
occupied for residential purposes, nor within five feet of any school, church
or place of assembly.
§ 5-28.10. Lighting. [1973 Code § 53-10]
Any such vacant lot or land licensed hereunder, when used after sundown,
may be illuminated with electric lights which shall be installed and
constructed in such a manner as to deflect the lights from the public
highway and from any adjacent building or buildings. No unshaded string
of lights or unshaded streamers shall be permitted under this section. The
purpose of this provision is to eliminate the glare of lights on the public
highways in the Town of Kearny and on or in adjacent buildings.
§ 5-28.11. Pennants, Streamers or Banners Unlawful. [1973 Code
§ 53-11]
It shall be unlawful to use, hang or post any pennants, streamers or banners
in or upon any premises licensed hereunder.
§ 5-28.12. Extinguishment of Lights. [1973 Code § 53-12]
All lights on any premises licensed hereunder shall be extinguished not later
than 10:00 p.m. each day.
§ 5-28.13. Fencing Required. [1973 Code § 53-13]
Within 10 days after any license is granted hereunder, that portion of
the area included in the license shall be enclosed by a fence, wall, pipe
fence, chain fence, wooden structure or barrier, except a solid wooden
fence, which fence, structure or barrier shall be not less than three feet in
height nor more than six feet in height, and shall be of sturdy permanent
construction, and must be approved by the Construction Official; and the
fence, structure or barrier shall be set back at least one foot from every
property line adjoining the licensed area; and there shall be no opening or
entrance or exit in such fence, structure or barrier, except where the street
curb has been lowered in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Street Department and the Town Engineer, and such opening or openings
shall not exceed in number or width the portions of the curb so lowered. All
such fences, structures or barriers shall be at all times maintained and kept
in proper repair during the licensed period.
§ 5-28.14. Hours of Operation. [1973 Code § 53-14]
The hours during which any premises licensed hereunder may be used for
the conduct of such business shall be: On weekdays, from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m., and on Sundays from 12:00 noon to 7:00 p.m.
§ 5-28.9 KEARNY CODE § 5-28.15
AO:206
§ 5-28.15. Purpose. [1973 Code § 53-15]
This section is deemed necessary and proper for the protection of persons
and property, and for the preservation of the public safety and welfare of
the Town of Kearny, and to reduce traffic congestion in the public streets.
§ 5-28.16. Raising Revenue. [1973 Code § 53-16]
This chapter is passed for the purpose of raising revenue and regulating the
business herein referred to.
§ 5-28.17. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 53-17]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this section, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-29. JUNK COLLECTION.
§ 5-29.1. License Required. [1973 Code § 93-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to pick up or collect
junk, discarded material or other waste material in the Town of Kearny
without first obtaining a license and pay the license fee herein prescribed.
§ 5-29.2. Application Issuance. [1973 Code § 93-2]
Any person, firm or corporation desiring a license under this section shall
apply, in writing, to the Town Clerk on a form prepared by the Town Clerk,
which application for the license shall contain the name and address of the
person desiring the same, and shall set forth the nature of the business to
be conducted by the licensee in the Town of Kearny. Upon the filing of such
application, the Town Clerk and the Chief of Police shall investigate and
verify the facts therein stated. After such investigation and approval by the
Chief of Police and the Town Council, the license shall be issued and shall
be evidenced by a plate, badge or other means of identification.
§ 5-29.3. (Reserved)
Former subsection 5-29.3 pertaining to license fees for junk collection,
previously codified herein and containing portions of 1973 Code § 93-3, was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2012-22.
§ 5-29.4. Hours of Business. [1973 Code § 93-4]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation licensed hereunder
to engage in the collection of junk, discarded material or waste materials
in the Town of Kearny except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. each weekday, and the collection of junk, discarded materials or waste
materials in the Town of Kearny is prohibited on Sundays.
§ 5-28.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-29.5
AO:207
§ 5-29.5. Investigations. [1973 Code § 93-5]
Any person associated with or employed by any license hereunder shall be
subject to investigation by the Town Clerk and Chief of Police, and shall not
engage in such business in the Town of Kearny unless approved by the Chief
of Police and the Town Council after such investigation.
§ 5-29.6. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 93-6; New]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-30. MOVIE THEATERS; THEATERS.
§ 5-30.1. License Required. [1973 Code § 100-3]
It shall be unlawful for any proprietor or manager of, or any other person
or corporation, to open or keep open any motion-picture theater, playhouse
or amusement hall, or place of similar nature, for the purpose of displaying
motion pictures, or the exhibiting of any plays therein, or to give any
performance commonly called the "vaudeville act," or recital of any
description, or exhibition of similar nature, within the Town of Kearny,
without first obtaining a license for the same from the Town of Kearny
permitting the same.
§ 5-30.2. License Fees. [1973 Code § 100-4; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-27
§ 2]
The fee for such license shall be the sum of $250 per year, which year shall
commence on June 1 of each year running to June 1 of the following year.
§ 5-30.3. Nontransferable. [1973 Code § 100-5]
No such license obtained from the Town of Kearny shall be transferable in
any event without first securing permission in writing from the Governing
Body of the Town of Kearny authorizing such transfer.
§ 5-30.4. Maintenance and Operation Regulations. [1973 Code
§ 100-1]
Every person, firm or corporation owning, operating or maintaining a
motion-picture theater in the Town of Kearny shall maintain proper and
orderly conduct of its patrons during each and every performance therein,
and shall enforce all State and local legislation concerning the maintenance
and operation of such motion-picture theaters; and every person, firm or
corporation owning, maintaining or operating a motion-picture theater in
the Town of Kearny shall employ and maintain, at the expense of such
person, firm or corporation, a Special Police Officer in each of such motionpicture
theaters in the Town, and it shall be the duty of such Special
Police Officer to be in attendance at each and every performance and to
§ 5-29.5 KEARNY CODE § 5-30.4
AO:208
maintain proper and orderly conduct of the patrons during each of such
performances.
§ 5-30.5. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 100-6; § 100-2;
New]
Any person, firm or corporation violating or assisting in the violation of
the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to
the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. Each opening, as defined
in subsection 5-30.1 or each exhibition or performance as defined in
subsection 5-30.1 shall be considered a separate violation of this section.
§ 5-31. POOL HALLS; BILLIARD PARLORS.
§ 5-31.1. License Required. [1973 Code § 113-1]
It shall not be lawful for any person to carry on or conduct a pool or billiard
parlor or business within the Town of Kearny, or use any premises for such
purposes, for profit, without having first obtained a license from the Town
Clerk.
§ 5-31.2. Application; Fee; Issuance. [1973 Code § 113-2; Ord. No.
2012-22]
The Town Clerk is hereby authorized to issue any such license upon the
payment to him/her of the sum of $50 provided:
§ 5-31.3. Display of License. [1973 Code § 113-3]
Each and every applicant licensed shall display, where the business is
conducted, the license in a prominent and conspicuous place.
§ 5-31.4. Open to Inspections. [1973 Code § 113-4]
The place where the business is carried on shall at all times be open to
inspection and shall be under the control and regulation of the Chief of
Police, and he is hereby authorized to make and promulgate such further
a. A written application for such license shall be filed with the Clerk 10
days prior to the next meeting of the Town Council, which the
application shall be signed by the applicant and shall state the name of
the applicant and the persons intending to conduct the business, their
age and residence and, if the applicant is an incorporated company, the
names of the officers responsible for the conduct of the business.
b. The Chief of Police approves in writing the application.
c. The Town Council approves the application.
d. The applicant shall agree to conduct the business and premises in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
§ 5-30.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-31.4
AO:209
rules and regulations with respect to the business as shall be reasonable
and proper for the maintenance of the peace and good morals of the Town.
§ 5-31.5. Exceptions. [1973 Code § 113-5]
This section shall not be considered as affecting any organization, fraternal
order or other private association which maintains, operates or has pool or
billiard tables for the use of members only.
§ 5-31.6. Place of Business Open to View. [1973 Code § 113-6]
The interior of the place or premises where the business is carried on at any
and all times shall be open to full view by the public from the street or hall
or corridor of the place or premises where the business is conducted.
§ 5-31.7. (Reserved)20
§ 5-31.8. Location Restricted. [1973 Code § 113-8]
No license shall be issued to conduct the business where the place in which
it is intended to conduct the same shall be below the surface of the adjoining
street.
§ 5-31.9. Revocation, Suspension. [1973 Code § 113-9]
Any license granted pursuant to the terms of this section may be revoked
by resolution of the Town Council upon hearing and for due cause, such as
failure to comply with any of the provisions of this section, but in the event
that any license is revoked, the proportionate part of the license fee which
the unexpired period of the license bears to the entire period for which the
license is issued shall thereupon be returned to the licensee.
§ 5-31.10. Minors Prohibited. [1973 Code § 113-10; Ord. No.
2006-(O)-60 § 15]
No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted to play pool or
billiards in any place licensed hereunder.
§ 5-31.11. Gambling, Disorderly Conduct. [1973 Code § 113-11]
No games of chance, gaming, gambling, playing for money among
contestants or any other such practice or disorderly conduct shall be
permitted in any such licensed place.
20.Editor's Note: Former subsection 5-31.7, Operation on Sunday Prohibited, previously
codified herein and containing portions of 1973 Code § 113-7 was repealed in its entirety
by Ordinance No. 2006-(O)-60.
§ 5-31.4 KEARNY CODE § 5-31.12
AO:210
§ 5-31.12. Term of License; Nontransferable. [1973 Code § 113-12]
The license fee under this section shall be $10 for one year, and all licenses
shall expire at midnight, December 31, of each year, and shall apply only to
the person or persons to whom granted and shall not be transferable.
§ 5-31.13. Renewal. [1973 Code § 113-13]
Applications for renewal shall be made to the Town Clerk 10 days prior to
the last meeting of the Town Council of each year, and may be granted when
approved by the Chief of Police and the Council and the payment of the
aforesaid license fee and compliance with this section.
§ 5-31.14. Hours of Operation. [1973 Code § 113-14]
Such licensed pool or billiard business shall not be carried on between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 5-31.15. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 113-15; New]
Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-32. PRECIOUS METAL AND OTHER SECONDHAND GOODS
DEALERS.21
§ 5-32.1. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. No. 2016-28]
The purpose and intent of this section is to assist law enforcement officials
and victims of crime in recovering stolen precious metals and other
secondhand goods by requiring minimum identification, reporting,
maintenance and distribution criteria for licensed dealers in these goods.
No person shall use, exercise, or carry on the business, trade, or occupation
of the buying, selling, or pawning of precious metals or other secondhand
goods without complying with the requirements of this section in the exact
manner described herein.
§ 5-32.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2016-28]
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — Shall mean a current valid New Jersey
Driver's License or Identification Card, a current valid photo driver's license
issued by another US state, a valid United States Passport, or other
verifiable US Government issued identification, which will be recorded on
the receipt retained by the dealer and subsequently forwarded to the local
police department on request.
DEALER — Shall mean any person, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation, or other entity who, either wholly or in part, engages in or
21.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: 1973 Code §§ 114-1 — 114-6; Ord. 1-14-81; Ord.
3-25-81; Ord. No. 2011-21. Ord. No. 2016-28 amended Section 5-32 in its entirety.
§ 5-31.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-32.2
AO:211
operates any of the following trades or businesses: the buying for purposes
of resale of precious metals, jewelry, or other secondhand goods as defined
herein; pawnbrokers as defined herein; itinerant businesses as defined
herein. For the purposes of this ordinance, transient buyers, as defined
herein, are subject to the same licensing and reporting requirements as any
other dealers.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — Shall mean a dealer who conducts business
intermittently within the municipality or at varying locations.
MUNICIPAL CLERK — Shall mean the Town Clerk of the Town of Kearny,
Hudson County, New Jersey.
PAWNBROKER — Shall mean any person, partnership, association or
corporation: lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other
than choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness;
purchasing personal property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated
price; or doing business as furniture storage warehousemen and lending
money on goods, wares or merchandise pledged or deposited as collateral
security.
PRECIOUS METALS — Shall mean gold, silver, platinum, palladium, and
their alloys as defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.
PUBLIC — Shall mean individuals and retail sellers, not to include
wholesale transactions or transactions between other merchants.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Shall mean every transaction conducted
between a dealer and a member of the public in which precious metals,
jewelry, or any other secondhand goods as defined herein are purchased or
pawned.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Shall mean used goods such as antiques, gold,
silver, platinum, or other precious metals, jewelry, coins, gemstones, gift
cards, any tools, telephones, typewriters, word processors, GPS devices,
computers, computer hardware and software, television sets, radios, record
or stereo sets, electronic devices, musical instruments, sporting goods,
automotive equipment, collectibles, game cartridges, DVDs, CDs, and other
electronically recorded material, firearms, cameras and camera equipment,
video equipment, furniture, clothing, and other valuable articles.
SELLER — Shall mean a member of the public who sells or pawns used
goods such as precious metal, jewelry, or other secondhand goods to a
dealer.
TRANSIENT BUYER — Shall mean a dealer, as defined herein, who has not
been in a registered retail business continuously for at least six months at
any address in the municipality where the Dealer is required to register or
who intends to close out or discontinue all retail business within six months.
§ 5-32.3. License Requirement for Dealers. [Ord. No. 2016-28]
No person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity shall engage in the business of buying, selling, or pawning of precious
§ 5-32.2 KEARNY CODE § 5-32.3
AO:212
metals or other secondhand goods, as defined above, within the jurisdiction
of the municipality, without having first obtained a license therefore from
the Municipal Clerk, which license shall bear a number issued by the
Municipal Clerk. The application for a license to the Municipal Clerk shall
set forth the name, date of birth, and address of the dealer, whether or
not he or she is a citizen of the United States, and whether or not he or
she has ever been convicted of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s),
or municipal ordinance violation(s), and the date(s) thereof. In the case of
a corporation, the above information must be provided for all officers and
stockholders of the corporation. In the case of a partnership, the above
information must be provided for all partners of a partnership. In the case
of a limited liability company, the above information must be provided for
all the members of the limited liability company. Advertising in any print or
electronic media or by sign that any of those articles or secondhand goods
referred to in subsection 5-32.2 above are being bought in any location
within the municipality shall constitute engaging in business as a dealer
of secondhand goods for purposes of this chapter. No person, partnership,
limited liability company, corporation or other entity shall place or cause to
be placed any advertisement for purchase of such articles or goods without
stating in the advertising the license number issued to a person or entity
by the municipality. In any print advertisement, the license number shall
appear in type no smaller than eight point in the lower-right-hand corner
of the advertisement. In any advertisement in electronic media, the license
number shall be visually or audibly stated. Failure to state or indicate the
license number shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to
the penalties established in subsection 5-32.9.
§ 5-32.4. Application Process for Dealers; Approval or Denial. [Ord.
No. 2016-28]
a. Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this section, the
Municipal Clerk shall refer such application to the Chief of Police, who
shall make an investigation of the prospective licensee, pursuant to this
section for the purpose of determining the suitability of the applicant
for licensing. The investigation shall include, but shall not be limited to
the following:
1. The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of those articles or goods referred to in subsection 5-32.2
above, although nothing in this section shall be construed to
warrant denial of a license solely on the basis of lack of experience;
2. The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which shall be made among credible sources, which sources shall
be disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license;
3. Any criminal record of the applicant including any past convictions
for any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or municipal
ordinance violation(s) within this or any other jurisdiction. The
Chief of Police may, as part of the application process, require a
fingerprint criminal background check through the Federal Bureau
§ 5-32.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-32.4
AO:213
of Investigation, Criminal Justice Information Services Division,
which may require an additional fee from the applicant.
4. The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of precious metal or
other secondhand goods, and other factors bearing on whether the
licensed business will be of a fixed and permanent nature. This
section shall not be construed to require denial of any license solely
on the grounds that the business is not from a fixed location or that
the applicant is a transient buyer or itinerant business, however
applicants who fall under the category of a transient buyer or
itinerant business must state with specificity on the license
application the business address where transaction records
required by subsection 5-32.6d of this section will be stored as well
as the location where purchased goods will be retained during the
mandatory inspection period required under subsection 5-32.6a.
b. The Chief of Police shall complete any investigation pursuant to this
section within 30 days of the submission of the application to the
Municipal Clerk, fully completed by the applicant. If a criminal record
check has been requested within the thirty-day period and has not been
received by the Chief of Police within that period, the Chief of Police
may, if all other factors are satisfactory, recommend a conditional
issuance of the license subject to the finding regarding criminal record.
c. The Chief of Police shall, upon completion of the investigation,
recommend "grant" or "denial" of the license to the Municipal Clerk,
who shall grant or deny the license. Any recommendation of the Chief of
Police shall be in writing and, in the case of a recommendation of
denial, shall state fully and specifically the reasons for said
recommendation. If the Municipal Clerk accepts the recommendation
of the Chief of Police to deny any license, the applicant shall be notified
in writing within 10 days of such denial and the Clerk shall forward to
the applicant a statement of the reason or reasons for such denial.
d. Grounds for recommending denial of license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to a dealer in secondhand goods. A license may be denied if the
investigation reveals a conviction of the applicant or any of its principal
officers or employees of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s) in
which deceit or misrepresentation is an element; or any conviction of
any crime(s), disorderly persons offense involving theft or the receiving
of stolen goods, regardless of whether the applicant was a principal,
accessory before the fact, after the fact, or a coconspirator; or any prior
municipal ordinance violation(s) by the applicant or any of its principal
officers or employees in this or any other jurisdiction. A license may be
denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate an ability to satisfactorily
comply with the electronic reporting requirements specified in
§ 5-32.4 KEARNY CODE § 5-32.4
AO:214
§ 5-32.5. Identification of Seller; Recordkeeping Requirements for
Dealers. [Ord. No. 2016-28]
For every reportable transaction between a dealer and the public, the
dealer shall be required to do as follows:
subsection 5-32.5, the retention and inspection requirements of
subsection 5-32.6, or any other portion of this section. Upon receipt of
the recommendation of the Chief of Police, the Municipal Clerk shall
issue or deny the license accordingly.
e. Whenever any application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be
entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel appointed by the Chief
of Police, at which time the applicant shall be permitted to introduce
such evidence as may be deemed relevant to such denial. Any applicant
exercising the right to appeal must file a written notice of appeal within
10 days of receiving written notice of denial of a license to act as a
dealer of secondhand goods.
f. No license shall be assignable by the dealer.
a. Require of each person selling or pawning precious metals or other
secondhand goods acceptable identification as defined above in
subsection 5-32.2.
b. Require each seller to execute a "Declaration of Ownership," which
shall contain the following certification: "My signature confirms that I
am the sole legal owner of and am legally authorized to sell the goods
being sold. By signing below I certify that I did not obtain and do not
possess the identified goods through unlawful means. I am the full age
of 18 years and the identification presented is valid and correct."
c. Record and issue to each person selling or pawning such goods on a
sequentially numbered receipt:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the purchaser,
including the clerk or employee of the licensee making the
purchase;
2. The name, address, date of birth, and telephone number of the
seller or sellers;
3. A photographed recording of the seller in a format acceptable to
the Chief of Police, along with a physical description of the seller,
including height and weight (approximate), hair color, eye color,
facial hair, if any, etc.;
4. A photographed recording of the seller's presented acceptable
identification, as set forth in subsection 5-32.2, in a format
acceptable by the Chief of Police;
5. A photographed recording of all items sold in a format acceptable
by the Chief of Police. When photographing, all items must be
§ 5-32.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-32.5
AO:215
positioned in a manner that makes them readily and easily
identifiable.
6. The receipt number;
7. A detailed, legible description of the item(s) and the manufacturer
and model of the item(s) if known; in the case of jewelry, the
descriptions must include style, length, color, design, and stones, if
any; any identifying marks, including numbers, dates, sizes,
shapes, initials, names, monograms, social security numbers
engraved thereon, serial numbers, series numbers, or any other
information, which sets apart the particular object from others of
like kind;
8. The price paid for the purchase or pawn of the item(s);
9. If precious metals, the net weight in terms of pounds Troy,
pennyweight (Troy) or kilograms/grams; fineness in terms of karats
for gold, and sterling or coin for silver, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
51:5-1, N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.;
10. The time and date of the transaction.
d. The information outlined in paragraph c above, must additionally be
electronically documented through the use of an electronic database
system authorized by the Chief of Police. Installation and training in this
software will be made mandatory as of the effective date of this section
and licensing will be conditional upon compliance with proper use of
the system as described herein. These records shall be subject to the
inspection of any authorized Police Officer or any sworn law
enforcement officer acting in the performance of their duty as set forth
in paragraph f below. Through the use of applicably required computer
equipment, and using the electronic format approved by the Chief of
Police, every dealer shall enter all reportable transactions into the
electronic database by the end of the close of business on the same date
as the purchase or receipt of property for pawn or consignment. The
information entered must contain all pertinent information outlined in
paragraph c above.
e. In the event of a database failure, or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police within 24 hours from the
date of purchase. In the event that paper forms are used, the dealer is
responsible to enter all transaction information set forth in paragraph c
above into the database as soon as possible upon the dealer's
equipment being repaired or replaced, or the database coming back
into service. Failure by the dealer to properly maintain computer
equipment in a reasonable fashion, or failure by the dealer to replace
faulty computer equipment, may result in the dealer being cited for a
violation of this section and subsequently being subject to the penalties
for doing so including revocation of the dealer's license as described in
subsection 5-32.6.
§ 5-32.5 KEARNY CODE § 5-32.5
AO:216
§ 5-32.6. Retention; Revocation; Other Restrictions. [Ord. No.
2016-28; Ord. No. 2016-54]
f. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the Police Department to examine any database, book,
ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to the reportable
transactions of precious metals or other secondhand goods, as well as
the articles purchased or received and, where necessary, relinquish
custody of those articles as provided in subsection 5-32.6. Itinerant
businesses and transient buyers will be responsible for notifying the
Chief of Police of the address where these records and articles will be
stored.
a. All precious metals and other secondhand goods purchased, received
for pawn, or received for consignment as described above, before
reselling or otherwise disposing of the same, shall be retained and
made available for inspection by the Chief of Police or designee thereof
at the designated business address for a period of at least 15 business
days from the date the transaction information is actually reported to
the Chief of Police in the approved manner described above in
subsection 5-32.5 except for jewelry, which must be maintained for at
least 15 business days or for the statutory period provided in N.J.S.A.
2C:21-36(d). All precious metal or other secondhand goods subject to
inspection must remain in the same condition as when purchased or
received for pawn and shall not be sold, disposed of, changed, modified,
or melted by the dealer until the 15 business day retention period has
expired. Itinerant businesses and transient buyers will be responsible
for notifying the Chief of Police of the location where the purchased
item(s) are being held.
b. Upon probable cause that goods held by a dealer are stolen, and
providing that the seller signed the mandatory statement required by
subsection 5-32.5b upon the sale of those goods, a law enforcement
officer with jurisdiction should charge the seller with theft by deception
under N.J.S.A. 2C:20-4 on behalf of the dealer, who shall be considered
the "victim" of the offense for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3. The
officer shall seize the goods, provide the dealer with a receipt, and issue
a criminal complaint against the seller for theft by deception and any
other criminal charges for which the officer has probable cause that the
seller has committed. If convicted of theft by deception and if so found
by an order of a court of valid jurisdiction, the seller will be responsible
for providing restitution to the dealer under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-2 for the
amount paid by the dealer to the seller for the stolen goods.
c. If market conditions would create a hardship on the dealer by holding
precious metals or other secondhand goods for such period, the dealer
may present the property to the Chief of Police in order that it may be
photographed and, if deemed necessary by the Chief of Police, an
investigation may be implemented. The Chief of Police shall have the
§ 5-32.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-32.6
AO:217
authority to grant the dealer a waiver of the requirement under this
section.
d. In addition to all other reporting requirements, every dealer shall
maintain for at least five years, a written record of all purchases of
precious metals and other secondhand goods in the form prescribed in
subsection 5-32.5c.
e. No dealer shall purchase any item covered by this section from any
person under the age of 18 or in the absence of providing prior
notification of such purchase to the Chief of Police or business designee
identifying the individual from whom such purchase is to be made and
the item to be purchased.
f. Suspension. The Chief of Police or a designee thereof is hereby
empowered to temporarily suspend for cause any dealer's license and
rights to operate there under. This penalty shall be in addition to any
fines and penalties the dealer may incur pursuant to subsection 5-32.9
of this section.
1. Grounds for Suspension. The following shall constitute grounds for
suspension: violation of any provisions of this section, including
failure to comply with any training or fees associated with the
electronic database software system in use by the municipality;
violation of any other statute, regulation, or local ordinance; or any
other illegal, improper, or fraudulent activity.
2. Procedure for Suspension. Upon determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a suspension is warranted, the Chief of
Police or a designee thereof shall issue a written notice of
suspension of license to the offending dealer and to the Municipal
Clerk, which shall set forth the grounds for the suspension and
notify the dealer of his or her right to appeal pursuant to paragraph
h below. A temporary suspension shall issue immediately, pending
the outcome of any appeal taken. Suspended dealers must
immediately cease engaging in the business of purchasing for
resale, receiving for pawn, and/or selling of precious metals and/or
other secondhand goods in the municipality until reinstatement.
3. Reinstatement. Suspended dealers may be reinstated only when
the grounds leading to the suspension have, in the determination of
the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee, been cured, corrected,
or appropriately rectified; or if reinstatement is deemed
appropriate by the three-person panel appointed by the Chief of
Police, upon the timely filing of an appeal as provided in paragraph
h.
g. Revocation. A license issued under this section may be revoked by the
Municipal Clerk upon written recommendation from the Chief of Police
or the Chief's designee that the dealer is no longer qualified, capable or
competent to comply with the requirements of this section. This penalty
§ 5-32.6 KEARNY CODE § 5-32.6
AO:218
§ 5-32.7. Nonapplicability. [Ord. No. 2016-28]
shall be in addition to any fines and penalties the dealer may incur
under subsection 5-32.9.
1. Grounds for Revocation. The following shall constitute grounds for
revocation: a third violation under this section; a second violation
under this section less than one year after an earlier violation
under this section; conviction for a criminal offense within this or
any jurisdiction; or multiple violations of any other regulations or
local ordinances within this or any jurisdiction.
2. Procedure for Revocation. Upon a determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a revocation is warranted, the Chief of
Police or the Chief's designee shall so report to the Municipal Clerk
in writing. A temporary suspension will immediately and
automatically issue, if one is not already in effect, pending the
outcome of the charge. A three-person panel, appointed by the
Chief of Police, shall review the stated grounds for revocation and
the panel shall issue an appropriate disposition of either
suspension, revocation, or reinstatement. If the panel determines
that revocation is the appropriate disposition, it shall set forth the
grounds for the same in writing in the form of a notice of
revocation, which shall be provided to the dealer. The notice shall
advise the dealer of the right to appeal. If the panel determines that
suspension is the appropriate disposition, it shall provide the
dealer with a notice of suspension that shall advise the dealer of the
right to appeal. Following revocation, the dealer must relinquish
his or her license and must immediately and indefinitely cease
operating as a dealer of precious metals or other secondhand goods
within the municipality.
h. Appeal. Any applicant wishing to appeal an issuance of a suspension or
revocation shall be entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel,
appointed by the Chief of Police, at which time the applicant shall be
permitted to introduce such evidence as may be deemed relevant to
such suspension or revocation. Any applicant exercising the right to
appeal must file a written notice of appeal within 10 days of receiving
written notice of revocation or suspension of license.
i. A dealer shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business, provided that he or she notifies the Municipal Clerk, in
writing, of the street address of said new location.
a. This section shall not apply to purchases made by dealers from
wholesalers or other legitimate suppliers, but shall only apply to those
purchases made from the public which includes other retailer sellers.
The dealer shall keep records of all wholesale purchases for a period of
six months from the date of such purchase, which records shall be
opened to investigation by the Kearny Police Department or any sworn
law enforcement officer in the performance of their duties.
§ 5-32.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-32.7
AO:219
§ 5-32.8. Fees; Period of License Validity. [Ord. No. 2016-28; Ord.
No. 2016-54]
A nonrefundable fee for initial application and license for a pawnbroker or a
dealer in precious metals or other secondhand goods, as covered under this
b. The following are exempt from the requirements of this section:
1. Garage Sales: As used in this section, a garage sale is defined as
the sale of used personal property by the lawful residents of
residentially zoned property that is not conducted on a periodic or
ongoing basis. A garage sale shall be deemed to be periodic or
ongoing if a garage sale is held by the lawful resident of
residentially zoned property more than five days in any consecutive
ninety-day period;
2. Judicial sales or sales by executors or administrators;
3. Auctions of real estate;
4. The occasional sale, purchase, or exchange of coins or stamps by a
person at his permanent residence or in any municipally owned
building who is engaged in the hobby of collecting coins or stamps
and who does not solicit the sale, purchase, or exchange of such
coins or stamps to or from the general public by billboard, sign,
handbill, newspaper, magazine, radio, television, or other form of
printed or electronic advertising.
5. Sales conducted by governmental, civic, patriotic, fraternal,
educational, religious or benevolent organizations which have been
in active and continuous existence for at least one year prior to the
holding of the sale, or which are incorporated as a not for profit
corporation by the State;
6. Sales or purchases which are regulated by the licensing laws of the
State of New Jersey, including automobile dealers, used parts
dealers and automotive parts recyclers;
7. Antique Dealers: As used in this section, an antique dealer is
defined as one who derives 75% of his/her gross sales each year
from the sale of antiques and/or primitives. As used in the section,
an antique or primitive is defined as an old and valuable art object
or article no longer in production that is at least 50 years old. As
used in this section, the term "sale" does not include an exchange,
trade, or swap of items;
8. Clothing That Has a Value Under $1,000: As used in this section,
clothing is defined as anything people wear including but limited to
shirts, blouses, t-shirts, pants, slacks, skirts, dresses, gowns,
jackets, coats, outerwear, under garments, hats, and scarves.
Clothing as used in this section also includes shoes, boots,
handbags, purses, belts, and other fashion accessories.
§ 5-32.7 KEARNY CODE § 5-32.8
AO:220
chapter, is $50. The annual renewal fee for a license is $250. These fees are
separate from and in addition to any fees the dealer must pay in relation to
the mandatory electronic database system designated by the Chief of Police,
as provided by subsection 5-32.5d of this chapter. Payments are to be made
in the manner directed by the Municipal Clerk. A license is valid for a oneyear
period from the date of its issuance.
§ 5-32.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2016-28]
Violation of any provision of this section by any dealer shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not in excess of the limitations of N.J.S.A.
40:49-5 or by a term of imprisonment or a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days in addition to a suspension or revocation of operating
license as provided in subsections 5-32.6f and g above. Each and every
violation shall be considered a separate violation. Each violation shall result
in an additional suspension period. Any person who is found guilty of
violating the provisions of this section within one year of the date of a
previous violation and who was fined for the previous violation may be
sentenced by the court to an additional fine as a repeat offender and,
in addition, may be subject to revocation proceedings as provided in
subsection 5-32.6g. The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender shall
not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided herein,
and same shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the
violation of this section.
§ 5-32.10. Time Limit for Conformance; Repealer; Severability.
[Ord. No. 2016-28; Ord. No. 2016-54]
§ 5-33. TOWING.
a. Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity engaging in the business of a pawnbroker, or a dealer in precious
metals or other secondhand goods shall conform to the provisions of
this section by January 10, 2017.
b. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
c. Nothing contained in this section is intended to replace any pre-existing
statutory requirements governing pawnbrokers, as in N.J.S.A. 45:22-1
et seq., the sale of precious metals as in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq., the sale
of secondhand jewelry as in N.J.S.A. 2C:21-36 et seq., or any other
statutory provision regarding any subject matter discussed herein.
d. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ 5-32.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-33.1
AO:221
§ 5-33.1. Licenses. [Ord. No. 1998-(O)-15 § I; Ord. No. 2012-12 § 1;
Ord. No. 2012-22]
a. License Required. In compliance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49, no person,
persons, partnership or corporation shall engage in the business of
operating wreckers or tow trucks for the purpose of municipal police
towing within the Town without first obtaining a license as provided for
herein.
b. Application Procedure.
1. Applicants for a license under this section must meet all the
qualifications set forth herein and shall file with the Town Clerk, in
duplicate, a sworn application in writing, on a form furnished by
the Clerk, which must contain the following information:
(a) The full name and address of the applicant. If the application is
made by a corporation, it shall state the names and addresses
of the registered office and the name of the registered agent; if
made by a partnership, the name and address of each partner.
(b) The year, make and type of each tow truck and/or wrecker to
be used in the towing service, its vehicle identification number,
license plate number and the name of the registered owner.
(c) The address where the tow trucks and/or wreckers are
regularly garaged; available telephone numbers for service 24
hours per day, seven days per week; and the names, addresses
and motor vehicle driver's license numbers of all operators.
(d) The address of the garage or storage area to which vehicles
shall be towed.
2. The application for a license shall be accompanied by certificates of
insurance for the required coverages set forth in subsection
5-33.1c, 2, issued by a company in good standing and certified to do
business in the State of New Jersey. Each certificate, prior to
execution of the license by the Town pursuant to subsection
5-33.1d, 3, must contain an endorsement providing for 30 days'
notice of cancellation or nonrenewal, and stating that the Town of
Kearny and the licensee shall receive, in writing, 30 days' notice of
cancellation or nonrenewal by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The municipality shall be named as an additional
insured under the liability portion of any and all insurance
coverage.
3. Each applicant shall execute an Indemnification/Hold Harmless
Agreement in the form provided by the Town Clerk, which form
shall be attached to the application for a license. The licensee is
required to defend and hold harmless the Town of Kearny for
liability from any and all obligations, liabilities, judgments, claims
and demands for personal injuries and damages to property which
§ 5-33.1 KEARNY CODE § 5-33.1
AO:222
may arise out of the performance of municipal police towing. The
licensee shall save harmless the municipality from all actions at
law for any infringements of patent rights of tools, equipment,
apparatus or methods used by him.
c. Qualifications of Licensee.
1. Each licensee shall meet the following standards and qualifications:
(a) The licensee must have a garage and storage area which, if not
located within the Town of Kearny, shall be located in towns
east of the Passaic River, and west of the Hackensack River, but
not more than one mile from the boundaries of the Town of
Kearny. For purposes of this section, "storage area" is any lot,
area or place, indoors or outdoors, wherein a minimum of 50
motor vehicles towed from the Town of Kearny can be placed
and/or stored, which area is equipped with lighting, is
surrounded entirely by a fence adequate for protection of
vehicles, and is in an area where storage of vehicles is a
permitted use according to the Zoning Ordinance of the
municipality in question, or where said use has been approved
by the local land use board. No outdoor storage area is
required. However, if a licensee uses an outdoor storage area,
in addition thereto said licensee must have an indoor storage
area for holding vehicles for evidence and/or processing by the
Police Department, so as to ensure that said vehicles shall not
be tampered with. All vehicles held for such purposes must be
stored indoors.
(b) A person retrieving his vehicle shall be able to transact all
business, including the pickup of the vehicle and payment of
fees, at the same location. Said location shall have a clean
waiting room and access to a public phone. Vehicles shall be
available for pickup at said location between the hours of 8:30
a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, and from 8:30 a.m.
to 12:30 p.m. on Saturdays, or upon special request by the
Police Department.
2. The licensee must maintain the following insurance policies:
(a) Workers' compensation insurance, in accordance with the
requirements of the law of the State of New Jersey;
(b) Public liability insurance in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 single limit, to indemnify the municipality and the
public against any loss due to injuries, accidents or damage of
any nature or character whatsoever, when such damage is the
result of any act or omission of the licensee, his agents or
employees, in the performance of or due to the execution of the
work to be performed in connection with the license for
municipal police towing;
§ 5-33.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-33.1
AO:223
(c) Automobile and garage liability insurance with limits of not
less than $1,000,000 for each occurrence;
(d) Garage keepers primary liability insurance in an amount not
less than $50,000 for any one auto or $250,000 for any one loss
with deductibles of no greater than $500 for comprehensive
and collision.
(e) Umbrella coverage with a limit of $2,000,000 per occurrence
excess over the general liability and garage liability.
3. The licensee must meet all the requirements of Title 39 of the New
Jersey Revised Statutes, Motor Vehicle Rules and Regulations.
4. The licensee must own or lease, and have in operation at all times
certain equipment, which shall be available to answer a call at a
location within the boundaries of the Town of Kearny when so
dispatched by the Kearny Police Department. Said equipment shall
include:
(a) At least two one ton tow trucks with one ton chassis and four
ton crane and wheel lifts.
(b) At least two wrecker/tow trucks with a boom rating of at least
25 tons, of such construction and capacity that they will be
able to tow any type of vehicle. Said tow trucks must also be
equipped with a passenger seat. One wrecker/tow truck shall
have 25,000 pounds under each wheel lift. Alternatively,
licensee may contract with a subcontractor, who shall be on
call 24 hours a day with such equipment.
(c) One flatbed type tow truck which is at least 26 feet, measured
bumper to bumper.
(d) In addition to the vehicle required in the preceding
paragraphs, a flatbed trailer and truck (for the removal of
heavily damaged trucks, buses, etc.) with a gross vehicle
weight (GVW) of 80,000 pounds. Alternatively, licensee may
contract with a subcontractor, who shall be on call 24 hours a
day with such equipment.
(e) An air cushion recovery system with a minimum of two air
cushions. Alternatively, licensee may contract with a
subcontractor, who shall be on call 24 hours a day with such
equipment.
(f) A forklift for unloading cargo or cleaning up cargo spilled on
the roadway with a minimum rating of 7,000 pounds.
Alternatively, licensee may contract with a subcontractor, who
shall be on call 24 hours a day with such equipment.
(g) All subcontractors referred to in this paragraph are subject to
the terms and conditions in this section and Guidelines for the
§ 5-33.1 KEARNY CODE § 5-33.1
AO:224
Public Auction of Vehicles Towed By the Kearny Police
Department.
(h) Equipment for jump starts, the changing of flat tires, and
portable heavy-duty lighting.
(i) One large broom and shovel in each vehicle.
(j) Steering wheel lock for towing vehicles from the rear.
(k) Tow-sling type tow bar to prevent any part of the crane metal
from touching the towed vehicles.
(l) Safety flares for night work.
5. The name, address and phone number of licensee shall be
conspicuously displayed on each vehicle listed in this section.
6. Licensee must have available 24 hours a day, seven days a week,
including holidays, at least three employees with commercial
drivers licenses, and appropriate endorsements for operation of the
equipment listed in subsection 5-33.1c, 4, above.
7. Wrecker/tow trucks shall have two-way radio capabilities with their
dispatching center on a twenty-four-hour a day basis.
8. Licensee must maintain a telephone number where the licensee
may be reached 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
9. Licensee must accept at least one major credit card.
10. Any person, company or corporation applying for a municipal
police towing license must have maintained a towing business for a
minimum period of one year and must be of known good reputation
in the field of wrecking and towing.
d. Investigation of Applicant: Denial or Issuance of License.
1. Upon receipt of an application for a municipal police towing
license, the original shall be referred by the Town Clerk to the Chief
of Police, who shall cause to be made an investigation of the
qualifications and facilities of the applicant. The Chief of Police
shall also investigate the driving record of the applicant and all
persons employed by the applicant as drivers or operators of
towing vehicles and, as he deems necessary for the protection of
the public health, welfare and safety, the moral character of the
applicant.
2. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's qualifications
and/or the persons employed by the applicant as drivers or
operators of the towing vehicles, are found to be unsatisfactory, or
if it is found that the issuance of a license to the applicant would
present danger to the public health, welfare or safety, the Chief of
Police shall indicate his disapproval on such application, and his
§ 5-33.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-33.1
AO:225
reasons for said disapproval and return the application to the
Town Clerk, who shall notify the applicant in writing that his/her
application is disapproved and the reasons for said disapproval.
3. The applicant is responsible for ensuring that the applicant and his/
her employees remain qualified pursuant to this section throughout
the duration of the license. Failure of the applicant to do so will be
cause for suspension or revocation of the license.
4. If, as a result of such investigation, the qualifications of the
application are found to be satisfactory, and it is found that the
issuance of a license to the applicant will not present a danger to
the public health, welfare and safety, the Chief of Police shall
endorse his approval on the application, and return the application
to the Town Clerk, who shall upon payment of the prescribed fee,
and receipt of the certificates of insurance set forth in subsection
5-33.1c, 2, execute and deliver to the applicant a license which
shall be posted at his place of business for public inspection.
e. License Form.
1. Any license issued pursuant to this section shall contain the
signature of the Town Clerk and the seal of the municipality and it
shall show the name and address of the applicant, the date of
issuance and the length of time it shall be operative.
2. The Town Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued and all
complaints received, if any, concerning such licensee. The Town
Clerk shall send a copy of the license to the Kearny Police
Department for filing.
f. Duration of License, Annual Fee, Renewal.
1. Each license issued shall be for a period commencing on the date of
issuance and terminating on December 31 of the same year of
issuance.
2. The fee for a municipal towing license shall be prorated according
to the effective date of such license, and based on the annual fee of
$350, which shall be paid to the Town Clerk.
3. All licensees who wish to renew their licenses shall submit to the
Town Clerk an application for renewal of license, together with the
annual license fee, a minimum of 30 days prior to the expiration
date of the current license, which date shall be no later than
December 1 of each year. The application for renewal shall be on
the same form as the original application, but shall be
conspicuously marked "Renewal."
g. Licenses Nontransferable. The licensee shall not assign, transfer,
convey, sublet or otherwise dispose of the license to any other person or
§ 5-33.1 KEARNY CODE § 5-33.1
AO:226
legal entity. Violation of this provision shall be sufficient cause for
cancellation of the contract and revocation of the license.
h. Duties and Responsibility of Licensee.
1. The licensee shall be available 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
2. The licensee, upon receiving a call for service from the Kearny
Police Department, must respond to the scene within 20 minutes. If
there is no response within 20 minutes, the Kearny Police
Department may notify another licensed tower to respond to the
scene and cancel the original tower. The Kearny Police Department
will have the discretion to lessen the 20 minute time period in the
event of exigent circumstances at the time of the incident. In the
event another licensed tower is called under this subsection,
neither the Town nor the vehicle owner/operator will be
responsible for any damages incurred by the original tower that
failed to or could not respond in time.
3. Broken glass and debris shall be cleaned by the driver of the
wrecker/tow truck from the scene of an accident to which he is
summoned. If the driver does not remove the debris from the scene
of the accident, he may be subject to a fine of not less than $25 nor
more than $50, as provided for by N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.8, and/or liability
for breach of contract.
4. Under appropriate circumstances, and with due consideration for
safety, the licensee shall transport the driver of the vehicle to be
towed, at no additional cost to the owner of the vehicle.
5. Vehicles shall be towed and stored in a safe manner so as to
prevent any damage to such vehicles.
6. The licensee shall be responsible for any valuables left in or on
motor vehicles in his custody.
7. The licensee shall post in a conspicuous place at the storage area
both the State and municipal rates for towing.
8. The licensee shall provide the Kearny Police Department with the
following information on vehicles unclaimed over 10 days: the year,
make, color, vehicle identification number, state of registration,
registration number, name and address of owner (if available), and
the Police Department case number for the incident resulting in the
towing of the subject vehicle.
9. All wreckers/tow trucks used and employed in towing of vehicles
shall be kept in a clean, good working condition.
10. The sale of abandoned vehicles will be governed by the standards
set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 to N.J.S.A. 39:10A-7, and guidelines
developed by the Kearny Police Department. From the proceeds of
a public auction, the Town of Kearny shall first be entitled to
§ 5-33.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-33.1
AO:227
reimbursement for its administrative expenses. The tower shall
then be entitled to its reasonable towing and storage fees. The
Town of Kearny will then be entitled to any remaining proceeds.
11. The licensee shall pay a fee of $20 for each "junk title" and/or
resale title applied for by the municipality to cover the cost of the
title and administrative processing.
12. All licensees shall be required to comply at all times with all State
and local laws.
13. The licensee shall, when performing under this license, follow the
lawful directions of the officers of the Kearny Police Department,
agents or representatives of the Town of Kearny.
14. Upon request from the Kearny Police Department, the licensee
shall remove abandoned truck trailers, roll-off dumpsters, or
anything related thereto, from the public right-of-way or public
property. The Town of Kearny shall be responsible for the
reasonable disposal fees of the contents of the trailer, dumpster, or
other related item.
i. Suspension or Revocation of Licenses.
1. Licenses issued under this section may be suspended or revoked by
the Chief of Police for violations of any terms or conditions of this
section, the Guidelines for the Public Auction of Vehicles Towed By
the Kearny Police Department, the application submitted by
licensee or for good cause.
2. Notice of hearing for suspension or revocation of a license shall be
given in writing, setting forth the grounds of the complaint and the
time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be served personally
upon the licensee or mailed by registered letter to the licensee at
his last known address at least five days prior to the date set for the
hearing.
3. In the event of a suspension or revocation of a license, the Chief of
Police shall report his findings and reasons therefor to the Mayor
and Council.
j. Appeal of Suspension or Revocation of Licenses.
1. Any licensee aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or the
Town Clerk in the denial of an application for a license as provided
in this section shall have the right of appeal to the Mayor and
Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Mayor and
Council within 14 days after notice of the action has been mailed to
the licensee's last known address, a written statement setting forth
fully all the facts why the action of the Chief of Police or Town Clerk
was improper. The Mayor and Council or their designee shall set a
time and place for hearing on such appeal and notice of such
§ 5-33.1 KEARNY CODE § 5-33.1
AO:228
§ 5-33.2. Towing Activity. [Ord. No. 1998-(O)-15 § II; Ord. No.
2012-12]
hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as he
was notified for the hearing of suspension, revocation or denial of
application as outlined as above.
2. The decision and order of the Mayor and Council on such appeal
shall be final and conclusive.
a. Use of Towers; Rotational Shifts.
1. The Chief of Police shall maintain a revolving list of licensed towers
to provide service where needed, and shall instruct all on-duty
officers to call those listed in alphabetical order on a rotational
basis.
2. The Chief of Police or his designee reserves the right, under
extenuating or emergent circumstances, to deviate from the
rotational list of licensees due to a specific type of equipment and/
or expertise required, and in addition, due to a large volume of
required vehicles to be towed, to contact more than one licensed
tower to respond to the scene.
3. All owners or operators of disabled vehicles must first be advised,
whenever feasible, under traffic safety guidelines, that they have a
right to call a tower of their own choosing and direct the towing
vehicle to remove the damaged vehicle to a garage or storage area
of their own choosing.
4. Nothing in this section shall prevent the owner or the operator of
an automobile from contacting a tower of his own choice to remove
his vehicle from the public streets or highways of the municipality
after it has become disabled or otherwise inoperable by virtue of
accident or other reason. Said owner or operator shall have a
reasonable time within which to select a tower of his choice to
remove the vehicle from the public roadways of the municipality.
After expiration of a reasonable period of time, the Kearny Police
Department shall have the motor vehicle removed.
5. In the absence of emergent or hazardous conditions, "reasonable
time" shall be a period not in excess of 45 minutes. The discretion
of the police officer involved at the scene shall be controlling as to a
determination of conditions requiring immediate removal of
vehicles involved, as per subsection 5-33.2b, 7.
6. No individual owner or operator of a wrecker shall respond to the
scene of an auto accident except upon notification by the officer in
charge of the Police Department or his designee or upon request of
the driver or owner of the vehicle involved.
§ 5-33.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-33.2
AO:229
7. Each rotational shift, as referenced above shall commence on
Saturday at 10:00 p.m. and end on the following Saturday at 10:00
p.m.
b. Towing Rates, Fee Cards.
1. Towing rates and other charges for all police-directed towing of
automobiles, vans, pickup trucks, motorcycles, scooters, and/or
mopeds, which were involved in an accident, recovered after
having been stolen, or impounded at police direction (said
impoundment shall include but not be limited to vehicles which
have been utilized in the commission of a crime, as well as those
vehicles in violation of the parking prohibitions set forth in Chapter
7 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Code of Town of Kearny,
1997) shall be payable by the vehicle owner as set forth in Schedule
A and B attached hereto and made part hereof. 22
(a) Schedule A: is applicable to Light Tows which includes all
motorcycles, scooters, compact cars, sedans, small SUVs and
pickup trucks and mini vans up to a gross vehicle weight of
5,500 lbs. and Medium Tows which includes all SUVs, vans,
minivans, mini-buses, and pickup trucks, or equivalent, with a
gross vehicle weight between, 5,501 lbs. and 11,500 lbs.
(b) Schedule B: is applicable to Heavy Tows which includes all
vehicles above 11,500 lbs.
(c) Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall
have the meaning indicated:
HYDRAULIC FLATBED CAR CARRIER — Commercial motor
vehicle designed exclusively to transport motor vehicles that
have become disabled, wrecked, recovered stolen and police
impounded by removing vehicles from roadway level up onto a
hydraulic bed for transporting purposes.
TOW TRUCK — Commercial motor vehicle designed
exclusively to lift motor vehicles that have become disabled,
wrecked, recovered stolen and police impounded by means of
lifting from the front or rear by the following methods:
TOWING — When a tow truck and/or a hydraulic flat bed car
carrier takes in its possession the care, control and custody
of a motor vehicle by the removal and transportation of an
automobile from a highway, street or other public or private
road, or a parking area, or from a storage facility, and other
services normally incident thereto, but does not include
(1) Sling type: mechanical or hydraulic.
(2) Wheel lift type: mechanical or hydraulic.
22.(Schedules A and B are included as attachments to this chapter.)
§ 5-33.2 KEARNY CODE § 5-33.2
AO:230
recovery of an automobile from a position beyond the right-ofway
or berm, or from being impaled upon any object within the
right-of-way or berm.
WINCHING — The process of moving a motor vehicle by the
use of additional chains, nylon slings and additional lengths of
winch cable from a position that is not accessible for direct
hook up by conventional means for towing or loading onto a
tow vehicle from a position beyond the right-of-way or berm, or
from being impaled upon any object within the right-of-way or
berm, including overturned motor vehicles.
2. The fees for the process of winching, as defined in this section, are
set forth in Schedule A and B.
3. The services set forth in Schedule A and B shall not exceed the fees
as stated and shall remain in full force and effect until a change is
passed.
4. Any and all municipal owned vehicles will be towed by the licensee
for a rate not to exceed $50 for light and medium tows and $150 for
a heavy tow for the first mile and $2 (light and medium) and $3
(heavy) for each additional mile. There shall be no additional
charges for municipal vehicles beyond what is stated in this
section.
5. A bulk rate fee for the towing of multiple motor vehicles
necessitated by an order from the Office of Emergency
Management (OEM) or the Town's designation of any emergency
event shall be limited to $65 per vehicle towed for light and
medium tows. There shall be no additional charges for bulk rate
fees for light and medium tows beyond what is stated in this
section.
6. On any occasion that the licensee is directed by the police to
respond to a location, but upon arrival his/her services are not
required, at the discretion of the licensee, a call out fee not to
exceed $35 for light and medium tows and $100 for heavy tows may
be charged to the owner/driver of the vehicle.
7. On any occasion that the highest ranking officer on duty deems an
incident to be a hazard or emergent in nature, said officer is
empowered to direct the licensee to respond to the scene of said
incident and to take the appropriate action to ensure the public
safety and welfare. The owner/operator of the involved motor
vehicle will be advised at the time of the incident that the motor
vehicle will be impounded at the scene at police direction, and
stored until the appropriate payment for the directed services are
paid to the licensee.
8. Towing service to a location other than the licensee's storage area,
when requested by the motor vehicle owner or driver, shall be at a
§ 5-33.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-33.2
AO:231
§ 5-33.3. Administration. [Ord. No. 1998-(O)-15 § III]
The Governing Body hereby designates the Kearny Police Department
generally and the Chief of Police in particular, as its agents to supervise the
enforcement of the terms and provisions of this section and the rules and
regulations adopted hereunder.
§ 5-33.4. Applicability. [Ord. No. 1998-(O)-15 § IV]
This section shall not apply to towers not providing towing service for the
Kearny Police Department.
§ 5-33.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 1998-(O)-15 § V]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the penalty provision set forth in Section 1-5 of
rate agreed upon by both the licensee and motor vehicle owner or
driver.
9. Fee cards conspicuously indicating the maximum rates for towing
and storage of a vehicle within the municipality shall be kept in the
possession of the drivers of all tow trucks/wreckers and presented
to the driver or owner of any vehicle to be towed.
10. All towers' bills shall be submitted to the Kearny Police Department
the Tuesday immediately following the Saturday which ends the
tower's service week.
c. Payment. All charges made by any licensee shall be paid by the owner
or operator or any person, firm or corporation claiming the right to
possession of any vehicle towed or stored by the licensee as provided
for in Appendix A and B. The municipality shall not be liable for the
payment of any sum to the licensee which may be due on account of
towing or storage.
d. Storage. Storage will be payable at the rate set forth in Schedule A and
B; however, vehicles released within four hours of being towed shall not
be charged a storage fee.
e. Prohibited Activities. The practice of cruising with a tow truck is
forbidden. Furthermore, no licensee or one acting on his/her behalf or
for his/her benefit shall pay an emolument to any third person not
involved in the accident or to any Police Officer for information as to the
location of any accident or soliciting the employment of the licensee for
any accident or soliciting the employment of the licensee's service, nor
shall a licensee or one acting on his/her behalf give any gratuities, fees,
or other compensation or gifts to any members of the Police
Department. No solicitation for automobile repairs shall be made by a
licensee at the scene of an accident or within 48 hours of the release of
the automobile owner from any hospital.
§ 5-33.2 KEARNY CODE § 5-33.5
AO:232
the Revised General Ordinances of the Town of Kearny, 1997; and may be
subject to imposition of penalties pursuant to N.J.A.C. 11:3-38.5.
§ 5-33.6. Fee Schedules Not to Be Exceeded. [Ord. No. 2012-12;
Ord. No. 2012-41]
The towing fees hereinafter set forth in Schedules A and B shall govern
Municipal Police Towing within the Town and shall at no time be exceeded.
§ 5-34. BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS.
§ 5-34.1. Who Must Register. [Ord. No. 2003-(O)-49 § 1]
§ 5-34.2. Application for License. [Ord. No. 2003-(O)-49 § 2]
a. Every person, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity engaged in
the business of construction, erecting, altering, repairing, restoring,
reproofing, residing, remodeling, renovating, rehabilitation, moving or
demolishing the whole or any part of any buildings or structures, or
engaged in the construction and installation of swimming pools, or
engaged in the business of erecting or altering signs, or the installation
of central air conditioning or heating systems, or engaged in the
construction or replacement of driveways or sidewalks, for any of which
a permit is required by the applicable ordinances of the Town of Kearny,
shall be required to first obtain a license as provided herein if any of
such services is to be performed for a fee.
b. This section shall not apply to:
1. The owner or occupant of a building or structure who performs any
of the work set forth in paragraph a of this subsection if such owner
or occupant intends to do and supervise his or her own work;
2. Any person or authorized representative who is performing such
work for a governmental entity;
3. Any employee of a contractor duly licensed under this section; or
4. Any electrical or plumbing contractor performing work for which a
license is required under New Jersey State law and who holds a
valid license to perform such work.
a. Applications for a license required by subsection 5-34.1 shall be made
to the Construction Official on a form to be furnished by the
Construction Code Department.
b. The application shall set forth the following information:
1. The applicant's name, business name and business address.
2. Whether the applicant is an individual, a partnership, a corporation
or any other entity and, if another entity, a full explanation and
description thereof.
§ 5-33.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-34.2
AO:233
3. If the applicant is an individual, the applicant's residence address
and date of birth.
4. If the applicant is a partnership, the full names, residence
addresses and dates of birth of each partner.
5. If the applicant is a corporation or other entity:
(a) In the case of a corporation, the date and state of incorporation
and, unless the corporation is a publicly traded corporation,
the full names, residence addresses, dates of birth of each
officer and each stockholder, the name and address of its
registered agent in New Jersey and the address of its principal
office. The term "stockholder," as used herein, means and
includes any person owing or having an interest, either legal or
equitable, in 10% or more of the stock issued and outstanding
of the applicant corporation. The term "officer" as used herein,
means and includes the president, vice presidents, secretary
and treasurer of a corporate applicant.
(b) In the case of another entity, the full names, residence
addresses, dates of birth of each person owning or having an
interest, either legal or equitable, aggregating in value of 10%
or more of the total capital of said entity, the name and address
of its registered agent, if any, and the address of its principal
office.
6. Whether the applicant or any partners, officers or stockholders
thereof have ever been convicted of a crime and, if so, the name of
the person convicted, the date of the conviction, the crime or
charge involved and the disposition thereof, or whether any of the
aforementioned persons have violated any State, County or
municipal ordinances or regulations on construction or demolition,
as defined herein, including the Uniform Construction Code and, if
so, the date and subject of the violation and the penalty imposed.
7. The number of years the applicant has been in business at its
present business address or at any prior location, including the
addresses of such prior locations, if any.
8. The applicant's training and experience in the class or classes in
which the applicant desires to be licensed and the names of the last
(3) municipalities where work requiring a building permit was
performed by the applicant.
9. The class in which the applicant desires to be licensed, selecting
one or more of the classes designated in subsection 5-34.5 hereof.
c. Upon receipt of such application, authorized personnel of the
Construction Code Department shall review the same to confirm the
truthfulness of the matters contained in the application and for the
§ 5-34.2 KEARNY CODE § 5-34.2
AO:234
§ 5-34.3. Fee. [Ord. No. 2003-(O)-49 § 3]
purpose of obtaining a copy of any police record which the applicant, or
any partner, officer or stockholder, may have.
d. The Construction Official shall determine if the character and business
responsibility of the applicant, or any partner, officer or stockholder
thereof, is satisfactory on the basis of the information supplied and if
the training and experience of the applicant are sufficient to protect the
citizens of the Town of Kearny from commercially unreasonable and
unsafe work. If the Construction Official so determines, he or she shall
cause a license to be issued to the applicant, unless the application of
the report of the Police Department or other evidence presented to the
Construction Official shall disclose any of the following:
1. A conviction for a crime involving moral turpitude.
2. Prior violations of the statues, ordinances or regulations relevant to
the construction, erection, alteration, repair, restoration,
reproofing, residing, moving or demolition of any building,
structure, swimming pool, central air conditioning or heating
system, driveway or sidewalk, sign, billboard or part thereof.
3. A determination of previous fraudulent acts of conduct.
4. A record of continual breaches of contract.
5. Evidence of bad character.
6. Failure to demonstrate training or experience in the class in which
the applicant seeks to be licensed.
7. Grounds similar to those listed above, which reasonably would
cause the Construction Official to determine that the character and
business responsibility of the applicant, or any partner, officer or
stockholder thereof, is not satisfactory.
a. Upon filing such application, the applicant shall pay to the Construction
Code Department a fee of $100 for such license or for relicensing after
revocation of a license previously issued to such applicant in
accordance with the provisions of subsection 5-34.11 hereof; provided,
however, that if the applicant demonstrates that he or she does not
employ, at any time, more than one person, the fee shall be $50.
b. The term of such license shall expire on December 31 of the calendar
year in which such license is issued except in the case of licenses issued
in calendar year 2003, in which case such licenses shall expire on
December 31, 2004.
c. Such license shall be renewed by the Construction Official upon
payment by the applicant of an annual renewal fee of $50 except in the
case of an applicant who demonstrates that he or she does not employ,
at any time, more than one person, in which case the annual renewal
§ 5-34.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-34.3
AO:235
§ 5-34.4. Standards. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-49 § 4]
All work shall be done in accordance with the Uniform Construction Code
of the State and must be done in a good and workmanlike manner.
§ 5-34.5. Classes of Licenses. [Ord. No. 2003-(O)-49 § 5]
For the purpose of this section, there shall be the following classes for
licensing:
fee shall be $30. The licensee must make an application for renewal not
earlier than 90 days before the commencement of the calendar year for
which such renewal is sought and not later than the commencement
of the calendar year for which such renewal is sought. Upon failure to
renew any license on or before March 31 of the immediately succeeding
calendar year, any subsequent license shall be construed to be a new or
original license, subject to the filing of a new application in accordance
with the provisions of subsection 5-34.2 hereof and to the payment of
the fee specified in subsection 5-34.3a.
a. General Contractor or Builder. A contractor who is proficient in the
construction of a building or structure and the alteration, addition to or
repair of any building or structure. This class of contractor shall be
equipped to handle such work either by and through the contractor's
organization or appropriate subcontractors and, in the latter event,
shall be completely responsible for the subcontractors' work.
b. Roofing and Siding Contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the
business of or who is proficient in the applying of roofing and siding
materials to existing or new buildings or structures.
c. Demolition Contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the business of
or who is proficient in the demolition of any building or structure, in
whole or in part.
d. Moving Contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the business of or
who is proficient in the moving of any building or structure.
e. Swimming Pool Contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the business
of or who is proficient in the installation of swimming pools, their
equipment and appurtenances.
f. Sign or Billboard Contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the
business of or who is proficient in the erection, alteration or
maintenance of signs or billboards.
g. Central Air Conditioning or Heating System Contractor. A contractor
who is engaged in the business of or who is proficient in the installation
of central air conditioning or heating systems.
§ 5-34.3 KEARNY CODE § 5-34.5
AO:236
§ 5-34.6. Revocation of Registration. [Ord. No. 2003-(O)-49 § 6]
§ 5-34.7. Procedure for Revocation of License or Other Disciplinary
Action. [Ord. No. 2003-(O)-49 § 7]
h. Sidewalk or Driveway Contractor. A contractor who is engaged in the
business of or who is proficient in the construction or replacement of
sidewalks or driveways.
i. Miscellaneous Contractor. A contractor who is proficient in work of a
special character, as determined by the Construction Official.
a. The Construction Official shall have the power, in addition to all other
powers provided for in this section, to revoke the license of any
contractor licensed hereunder, or to deny the renewal of the license of
any contractor licensed hereunder, who shall be guilty of or responsible
for any one or more of the following acts or omissions or conduct:
1. Fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining a license.
2. Violation of the Uniform Construction Code of the State of New
Jersey or of any other ordinance or statute which governs the
activities or nature of work performed by the contractor.
3. Filing of a petition in bankruptcy.
4. History of failure to perform in a timely manner or complete his or
her contracts.
5. Practice of fraud or bad faith in his or her business transactions.
b. Any person, firm or corporation whose license hereunder has been
revoked three times by the Construction Official shall be presumed not
able or proficient in his or her trade and shall be ineligible to apply for a
license under this section for a period of five years from the most recent
license revocation by the Construction Official.
a. The Construction Official or any contractee or contractor may prefer
charges against any license under the terms of this section by the filing
of a written complaint signed by the person preferring such charges
with the Construction Code Department. The complaint shall contain a
statement of facts setting forth the specific charges relating to the
violation of this section or of any other applicable ordinance.
b. No later than 30 days after the filing of a complaint in the manner and
form herein prescribed, the Construction Official shall investigate the
charges and determine whether there is probable cause that a violation
has occurred.
c. If the Construction Official finds that there is probable cause that a
violation has occurred, the Construction Official shall forthwith issue a
notice directing the licensee, within 14 calendar days after service of
the notice, to appear before the Construction Official, answer the
§ 5-34.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-34.7
AO:237
§ 5-34.8. Appeals. [Ord. No. 2003-(O)-49 § 8]
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Construction Official pursuant
to subsection 5-34.7f shall have a right of appeal to the Construction Code
Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Construction
Code Board of Appeals within 30 calendar days after notice of the action
complained of, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the
appeal. The Construction Code Board of Appeals shall set a time and place
for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to
the appellant, by certified mail sent to the appellant's last known address, at
least seven calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. The decision
and order of the Construction Code Board of Appeals on such appeal shall
be final and conclusive.
§ 5-34.9. Notices. [Ord. No. 2003-(O)-49 § 9]
Whenever notice is required to be given under this section, such notice
may be effected by personal service upon any principal or agent of the
contractor, or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last address
listed in the Construction Code Department. It shall be the duty of each
registered contractor to keep the Town advised of any change of address.
charges and show cause, if any, why his or her license should not be
suspended or revoked.
d. A copy of the charges, together with the notice showing the time and
place of hearing, shall be served upon the licensee at least seven
calendar days before the date fixed for the hearing. The licensee shall
be notified by certified letter and notice of the hearing shall be
published in a newspaper circulating in the Town of Kearny. At the
hearing, the licensee shall have the right to appear personally or by
counsel to cross-examine witnesses and to produce witnesses and
evidence in his behalf.
e. Failure of the licensee to appear may be deemed to be an admission of
the truthfulness of the charges in the complaint. The license thereupon
may be suspended, pending any hearing that the Construction Official
may order; provided, however, that the Construction Official shall have
the power in the event of such failure to answer, to suspend or revoke
the license without further evidence other than the charges filed and
without further hearing.
f. Whenever the Construction Official after a hearing shall determine that
a licensee is in violation of this section or another applicable ordinance
or statute, the Construction Official may (1) issue an order directing the
charged licensee to remediate such violation, fixing a reasonable time
within which such remediation shall be made or accomplished, (2) if the
violation constitutes fraud or some other criminal act, refer the matter
to the Police Department, (3) file an action in the Municipal Court for
the imposition of a fine pursuant to subsection 5-34.10, and/or (4)
suspend or revoke the license.
§ 5-34.7 KEARNY CODE § 5-34.9
AO:238
Upon failure of a contractor to comply with this requirement, any notice
returned, with notation "unknown," "moved," or "not claimed," shall be
deemed proper service of all notices required by this section.
§ 5-34.10. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2003-(O)-49 § 10]
Any person or persons or their agents, servants or employees who shall
violate any of the provisions of this section, and any person, firm or
corporation violating or assisting in the violation thereof, shall upon
conviction thereof in the Municipal Court of the Town of Kearny be subject
to a fine of not less than $200 nor more than $500 or imprisonment for a
period not to exceed 90 days or both. Every day that such person or persons
or their agents or employees shall fail to comply with the provisions of
this section shall constitute a separate and additional offense against the
provisions thereof.
§ 5-34.11. Reregistration after Revocation. [Ord. No. 2003-(O)-49
§ 11]
Any person, partnership, firm or corporation or other entity whose license
has been revoked under the provisions of this section may have his, her or
its license restored upon filing with the Construction Code Department the
following:
§ 5-35. RAFFLE AND BINGO LICENSING.
§ 5-35.1. Issuing Authority. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-21 § 1]
The Town Clerk is hereby delegated the authority to act as the "issuing
authority" to approve the granting of raffle and bingo licenses.
§ 5-35.2. Licensing Fees. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-45; Ord. No. 2012-22;
Ord. No. 2017-4]
a. A certification that the acts, events or occurrences that were the basis
for the revocation of the license have been remediated or corrected.
b. Proof that all losses, if any, caused by the acts or omissions for which
the license was revoked have been fully satisfied and that all conditions
imposed by the Construction Official have been complied with.
c. Payment of a reregistration fee as provided in subsection 5-34.3a.
hereof.
a. Bingo and Raffle Licenses.
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:47-4.10(b), the following licensing fees shall be
paid to the Town, by a check made payable to the Town, at the time any
application under the Bingo Licensing Law or the Raffles Licensing Law
is filed with the Town:
§ 5-34.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-35.2
AO:239
§ 5-36. MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPIES.
§ 5-36.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-31 § 5-36.1]
As used in this section:
MASSAGE, BODYWORK, AND SOMATIC THERAPIES — Shall mean any
systems of activity of structured touch which include, but are not limited
to, holding, applying pressure, positioning and mobilizing soft tissues of
the body by manual technique and use of visual kinesthetic, auditory and
palpating skills to assess the body for purposes of applying therapeutic
massage, bodywork or somatic principles. Such application may include,
but is not limited to, the use of therapies such as hellotherapy or
hydrotherapy, the use of moist hot and cold external applications, external
application of herbal or topical preparations not classified as prescription
1. For a bingo license: $10 for each occasion on which any game or
games of bingo are to be conducted under the license.
2. For instant raffle games awarding cash or merchandise as a prize:
$20 for each day on which instant raffle tickets are to be sold or
offered for sale under the license.
3. The license fees set forth in paragraphs a,1 and 2 shall not apply to
any application for which no fee is payable to the Legalized Games
of Chance Control Commission.
4. The license fees set forth in paragraphs a,1 and 2 are in addition to
any fees payable to the Legalized Games of Chance Control
Commission.
b. Pull Tab Machines.
"Pull Tab Machines," other gambling games of like kind, and all instant
raffle games shall be deemed to be on premises raffles pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 5:8-5, N.J.A.C. 13:47-4.10 and N.J.A.C. 13:47-4.9 and may be
operated only pursuant to an annual license issued by the Town.
1. Each such license will expire on December 31 of the year in which
it is issued and, to continue the operation, the license must be
renewed annually for each following year.
2. The Town's annual license fee shall be:
(a) For for-profit entities - $750;
(b) For not-for-profit entities including, but not by way of
limitation, veterans associations, senior citizen associations,
educational associations and religious associations - $100.
3. Payment of the aforesaid fee shall not exempt any organization
from payment of any fee due to the Legalized Games of Change
Control Commission.
§ 5-35.2 KEARNY CODE § 5-36.1
AO:240
drugs, explaining and describing myofascial movement, self-care and stress
management as it relates to massage, bodywork and somatic therapies.
Massage, bodywork, and somatic therapy practices are designed to affect
the energetic system of the body for the purpose of promoting and
maintaining the health and well-being of the client. Massage, bodywork and
somatic therapies shall not include the diagnosis or treatment of illness,
disease, impairment, or disability.
§ 5-36.2. Prohibition; Exception for Other Licensed Facilities; Hours
of Operation. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-31 § 5-36.2]
§ 5-36.3. Types of Licenses Required. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-31
§ 5-36.3]
§ 5-36.4. Requirements for Licensure or Compliance. [Ord. No.
2006-(O)-31 § 5-36.4]
a. As of the effective date of this section, the offering or performing of any
massage, bodywork, or somatic therapies for compensation is hereby
banned in the Town of Kearny unless same is properly licensed as
required under this section.
b. This section shall not apply to properly licensed and operated hospital,
medical, osteopathic, chiropractic, and medical-affiliated physical
therapy facilities.
c. All facilities that are properly licensed under this section shall be
prohibited from accepting customers for any service except from
Monday through Saturday from 8:00 a.m. until 9:00 p.m.
a. Massage, Bodywork or Somatic Therapist License. All persons
performing or engaging in rendering the services of massage,
bodywork or somatic therapies shall be required to be licensed by the
Kearny Health Department.
b. Non-Therapist Employee License. All other agents, servants,
employees, or persons located at, engaged by, or employed by a person,
entity, or business that offers massage, bodywork or somatic therapies,
except for clients of or visitors to the place of business, shall be
required to be licensed by the Kearny Health Department.
c. Establishment License. All owners and/or operators of a business or
entity that offers massage, bodywork or somatic therapies shall be
required to be licensed by the Kearny Health Department.
a. Requirements for Massage, Bodywork, or Somatic Therapist License. A
massage, bodywork or somatic therapist license shall not be issued
unless the applicant meets the following conditions:
1. Is at least 18 years of age:
2. Is of good moral character:
§ 5-36.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-36.4
AO:241
3. Has not been convicted of any type of crime of the first, second, or
third degree that is less than 10 years old:
4. Has not been convicted of any crime of the fourth degree, any
offence, quasi criminal offense, or Sanitary Code violation that is
less than 10 years old and is of a sexual nature, involves moral
turpitude, or relates to the business of massage, bodywork, or
somatic therapies:
5. Has obtained a certification as provided under N.J.S.A. 45:11-53 et
seq. from the State of New Jersey licensing agency known as the
Massage, Bodywork and Somatic Therapy Examining Committee, a
part of the New Jersey Board of Nursing within the State Division of
Consumer Affairs.
6. Meets one of the following criteria:
(a) Successful completion of a minimum of 500 hours in class
study in the field of massage, bodywork, and somatic therapies
as approved by the Massage, Bodywork and Somatic Therapy
Examining Committee of the New Jersey Board of Nursing; or
(b) Successful completion of the written examination offered by
the National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and
Bodywork or a substantially equivalent examination approved
by the Massage, Bodywork and Somatic Therapy Examining
Committee of the New Jersey Board of Nursing.
7. Completes and submits an application to the Kearny Health
Department, with the application to be signed in front of a
representative of the Health Department during their hours of
operation. The application, among other things, states the address
wherein the license is to be used, requires a detailed description of
the applicant, revelation of any criminal history within or without
the State of New Jersey, fingerprinting by the Kearny Police
Department, and prior residence and employment history for at
least 10 years;
8. For applicants who reside or have resided outside of the State of
New Jersey at any time in the three years preceding the
application, they shall be required to provide documentation from a
governmental agency in the other state(s) showing results of a
fingerprint criminal check in the other state(s), which shall be
dated no later than 30 days before the date of the application;
9. Submits two clear full-faced photographs of the applicant taken no
more than 30 days before the submission of the application;
10. Submits a certification from a duly licensed physician of the State
of New Jersey stating that the physician has examined and tested
the applicant and that the applicant is free from contagious and
§ 5-36.4 KEARNY CODE § 5-36.4
AO:242
communicable diseases, such examination to occur no later than 30
days before the submission of the application; and
11. Complies with any other terms of this section or any other
applicable State Statute or Town ordinance.
b. Requirements for Licensure as Non-Therapist Employee. A nontherapist
employee license shall not be issued unless the applicant
meets the following conditions:
1. Is at least 18 years of age;
2. Is of good moral character;
3. Has not been convicted of any type of crime of the first, second, or
third degree that is less than 10 years old;
4. Has not been convicted of any crime of the fourth degree, any
offense, quasi-criminal offense, or Sanitary code violation that is
less than 10 years old and is of a sexual nature, involves moral
turpitude, or relates to the business of massage, bodywork, or
somatic therapies;
5. Completes and submits an application to the Kearny Health
Department, with the application to be signed in front of a
representative of the Health Department during their hours of
operation. The application, among other things, states the address
wherein the license is to be used, requires a detailed description of
the applicant, revelation of any criminal history within or without
the State of New Jersey, fingerprinting by the Kearny Police
Department, and prior residence and employment history for a
least 10 years;
6. For applicants who reside or have resided outside of the State of
New Jersey at any time in the three years preceding the
application, they shall be required to provide documentation from a
governmental agency in the other state(s) showing results of a
fingerprint criminal check in the other state(s), which shall be
dated no late than 30 days before the date of the application;
7. Submits two clear full-faced photographs of the applicant taken no
more than 30 days before the submission of the application; and
8. Complies with any other terms of this section or any other
applicable State statute or Town ordinance.
c. Requirement for Establishment License. Each applicant for an
establishment license shall meet the following conditions:
1. Is at least 18 years of age;
2. Is of good moral character;
§ 5-36.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-36.4
AO:243
3. Has not been convicted of any type of crime of the first, second, or
third degree that is less than 10 years old;
4. Has not been convicted of any crime of the fourth degree, any
offense, quasi-criminal offense, or Sanitary Code violation that is
less than 10 years old and is of a sexual nature, involves moral
turpitude, or relates to the business of massage, bodywork, or
somatic therapies;
5. Completes and submits an application to the Kearny Health
Department, with the application to be signed in front of a
representative of the Kearny Health Department during their hours
of operation. The application, among other things, states the
address wherein the license is to be used, lists the names and
addresses of all persons having an interest (ownership, pecuniary
or otherwise) in the business operation, requires a detailed
description of the applicant, revelation of any criminal history
within or without the State of New Jersey, fingerprinting by the
Kearny Police Department, and prior residence and employment
history for at least 10 years;
6. For applicants who reside or have resided outside of the State of
New Jersey at any time in the three years preceding the
application, they shall be required to provide documentation from a
governmental agency in the other state(s) showing results of a
fingerprint criminal check in the other state(s), which shall be
dated no later than 30 days before the date of the application;
7. Submits two clear full-faced photographs of the applicant taken no
more than 30 days before the submission of the application;
8. Completes and submits a written physical description of the
property and facilities and written floor plan and interior design
showing the layout of the facilities which shall be subject to the
approval of the Kearny Board of Health so as to ensure adequate
and sanitary facilities;
9. Completes and submits a written acknowledgement that each
business owner/applicant has received a copy of this section; and
10. Complies with any other terms of this ordinance or any other
applicable State statute or Town ordinance.
d. The applicant for an establishment license shall:
1. In the case of individual owner(s), each owner shall be required to
apply and comply with this section.
2. In the case of a corporate owner, the corporate president or
corporate registered agency shall be required to apply and comply
with this section.
§ 5-36.4 KEARNY CODE § 5-36.4
AO:244
§ 5-36.5. Issuance or Denial of License. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-31
§ 5-36.5]
If any part of an application for licensure is not completed satisfactorily, the
Kearny Health Officer shall deny the issuance of the license applied for.
Upon successful completion of the application process, the Kearny Health
Officer shall approve and issue the license and/or identification cards
applied for.
§ 5-36.6. Term, Expiration, and Renewal of Licenses. [Ord. No.
2006-(O)-31 § 5-36.6]
§ 5-36.7. Other Conditions Attached to Licenses. [Ord. No.
2006-(O)-31 § 5-36.7]
3. In the case of a limited partnership title owner, the general partner
shall be required to apply and comply with this section.
4. In the case of a partnership, all partners shall be required to apply
and comply with this section.
5. It is the intent of this section that all persons with authority to make
decisions with respect to the business entity and operation shall be
required to meet the terms of this license.
a. Licenses shall run from date of issuance to December 31. Any license
issued pursuant to this section shall expire on December 31 of the year
of issuance.
b. All persons and entities licensed pursuant to this section shall be
required to annually renew the applicable licenses. Annual renewal
shall require the licensee to reapply and to complete such application
forms as shall be required by the Kearny Health Officer, including
annual fingerprinting.
c. All persons or entities applying or reapplying for a license under this
section shall be required to complete their parts of the application
process within 45 days of the initial submission of the application. If
such application is not completed within 45 days, the applicant shall be
required to restate the application process.
a. Any license issued or renewed under this section is personal to the
licensee and nontransferable to any other person or entity.
b. Any sale or transfer of a licensed establishment shall automatically
terminate the establishment license and trigger a requirement that the
new business entity apply for licensure.
c. Any license issued or renewed under the section shall not be construed
to grant a certificate of occupancy or continued certificate of occupancy
§ 5-36.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-36.7
AO:245
§ 5-36.8. Responsibilities of Licensees. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-31
§ 5-36.8]
§ 5-36.9. Fees. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-31 § 5-36.9; Ord. No. 2008-O-27]
or approval for the use of any premises or location as required under
any other applicable Town ordinance or State statute or regulation.
a. All licenses and identification cards issued pursuant to this section shall
be displayed in a prominent place at the business establishment.
b. Therapists shall not diagnose or treat classified diseases or other
medical conditions and shall not practice spinal or other joint
manipulations.
c. Each therapist licensee shall be required to wear a clean outer
garment. Before working on each client, the therapist shall thoroughly
clean his or her hands with hot running water and anti-bacterial soap.
All surfaces wherein a client's exposed skin may come in contact shall
be thorough cleaned and maintained clean between clients.
d. Each licensee (therapist, non-therapist, and establishment) shall be
deemed responsible for the clean, safe, and lawful business operation
on the premises.
e. No person shall disrobe at any time while in the presence of customers
or clients at the premises. No person shall perform any acts of a sexual
nature at any time at the premises.
f. No establishment licensee or business operator or owner shall allow
any person to be in its employ or at its premises as a therapist or
employee if that person has failed to apply or reapply for a license or
has been denied licensure under this section.
g. No establishment licensee or business operator or owner shall allow
any unlawful activities to occur at the premises.
h. The violation of any law at the premises shall be grounds for the
revocation of all licenses issued to persons or entities operation at the
premises.
a. Upon submission of the initial application, each applicant shall pay a fee
for processing of the application as follows:
1. Therapist application: $25.
2. Non-therapist employee application: $25.
3. Establishment application: $100.
b. The initial application is approved, for a license to be issued and for the
annual renewal of each license, each licensee shall pay an annual fee as
follows:
§ 5-36.7 KEARNY CODE § 5-36.9
AO:246
§ 5-36.10. Additional Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-31
§ 5-36.10]
The Town Health Officer and/or the Mayor and Council of the Town of
Kearny may make such other reasonable rules and regulations as may be
necessary to ensure the effective operation of this section. Such additional
rules and regulations shall not be in contradiction to this section, and shall
be maintained for public dissemination at the Department of Health and the
Town Clerk's Office.
§ 5-36.11. Right to Inspect. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-31 § 5-36.11]
The Kearny Health Department, Division of Fire Safety, Zoning Code Official
and Police Department shall have the right and authority to inspect the
places of business that are regulated under this section to ensure
compliance with this section and such other law, rules and regulations that
may apply, including the State Sanitary code as per N.J.S.A. 26:1A-9 and the
State Fire and Building Codes, and to ensure the health, safety, and welfare
of the citizens of the Town of Kearny and of the clients of and visitors to
therapy establishments.
§ 5-36.12. Immediate Denial of Application or Revocation of
License. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-31 § 5-36.12]
1. Therapist license: $100.
2. Non-therapist license: $25.
3. Establishment license: $500.
In addition to the fees set forth in paragraph a and b, whenever
a fingerprint check is required an applicant or licensee shall pay
a fee for obtaining a State fingerprint check, equal to the rate
permitted by the State for such a check.
a. A conviction of any applicant or licensee as follows shall constitute
grounds for an immediate denial of any pending application and/or an
immediate revocation of any issued license, regardless of whether or
not the conviction has been expunged:
1. Any type of crime of the first, second, or third degree that is less
than 10 years old; or
2. Any crime of the fourth degree or any offense, quasi-criminal
offense or Sanitary Code violation that is less than 10 years old and
is of a sexual nature, involves moral turpitude, or relates to the
business of massage, bodywork, or somatic therapies.
b. There shall be no necessity for a hearing should such a conviction exist
or occur. The Kearny Health Officer shall issue a written decision citing
the reason for the denial or revocation.
§ 5-36.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-36.12
AO:247
§ 5-36.13. Actions for Imposition of Fines or Suspension or
Revocation of Licenses. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-31 § 5-36.13]
c. For convictions that are more than 10 years old, same shall be
considered as a relevant factor in deciding to issue, renew or revoke
any license, together with all other information gathered during the
application or license period.
a. A license and licensee may be fined, suspended or revoked based upon
the following:
1. Charges of any type of crime of the first, second, or third degree;
or
2. Charges of any crime of the fourth degree or any offense, quasicriminal
offense or Sanitary Code violation that is of a sexual
nature, involves moral turpitude or relates to the business of
massage, bodywork, or somatic therapies; or
3. Violation of a Town ordinance or other applicable laws, rules and
regulations.
b. The Kearny Health Officer may issue warnings, temporarily suspend
any license for up to 15 days, and/or impose a fine of not more than
$250 without the necessity for a hearing. Such warning, suspension, or
fine shall be made known to the licensee(s) as soon as possible by giving
written notice of same to the licensee(s) in person or by certified mail to
the licensee(s) at the business establishment connected to the license.
c. Any licensee aggrieved by any of the above actions of the Kearny Health
Officer shall have the right of appeal to the Mayor and Council. Such
appeal shall be taken by the aggrieved licensee by filing a written
statement setting forth fully all the facts why the action of the Officer
was improper. The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the Town
Clerk no later than 14 calendar days after the aggrieved action.
d. The Mayor and Council shall set a time and place for de novo hearing on
such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant
and to the Health Officer.
e. The decision and order of the Mayor and Council on such appeal shall
be final and conclusive.
f. The Kearny Health Officer may also temporarily suspend any license
pending the holding of a hearing before the Kearny Municipal Court.
Such temporary suspension shall be made known to the licensee(s) as
soon as possible by giving written notice of same to the licensee(s) in
person or by certified mail to the licensee(s) at the business
establishment connected to the license.
g. Upon the filing of a complaint with the Kearny Municipal Court the
Health Officer shall give notice, in writing, setting forth the grounds of
§ 5-36.12 KEARNY CODE § 5-36.13
AO:248
§ 5-36.14. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-31
§ 5-36-14]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than $500 and not more
than $1,000 per violation, be punished by imprisonment in the County jail
for a period not to exceed 180 days, or both. Each violation of any of the
provisions of this section shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and
distinct offense.
§ 5-37. SIDEWALK SALES.
§ 5-37.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-55A § 2]
There are hereby established procedures, rules and regulations governing
the licensing of sidewalk sales in the Town of Kearny.
§ 5-37.2. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-55A § 2]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, corporation,
association or organization of any kind (hereinafter collectively referred to
as "person") to erect or maintain stands or showcases or display or sell
merchandise on or from the sidewalks of this Town, or to place any article,
substance or thing upon the sidewalks of the Town in any manner so as to
encumber the same unless such person shall hold a currently valid permit
issued pursuant to the terms of this section.
§ 5-37.3. Minimum Unobstructed Sidewalk. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-55A
§ 2]
No permit shall be issued hereinunder unless the permittee shall
demonstrate that a minimum of six feet of unobstructed sidewalk surface
will be available for pedestrian traffic around or through such sidewalk
sale and that such sale be directly in front of a retail or commercial
establishment. The term "directly in front" of shall be construed to mean
the area represented by an extension of such side of the store occupied
by the retail or commercial establishment projected directly to the curbline
immediately in front thereof.
the complaint, the remedy sought, and advising the licensee that he or
she will be afforded the opportunity to be heard and to present evidence
against the complaint. Such notice shall be served personally upon the
licensee(s) or mailed by certified mail to the licensee(s) at the last
known address at least seven days before the date set for the hearing.
h. Any revocation decision by the Kearny Municipal Court shall result in a
prohibition against reapplication by the licensee for a period of at least
five years.
§ 5-36.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-37.4
AO:249
§ 5-37.4. Location. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-55A § 2]
No sidewalk sale shall be authorized for any location other than in the C3
Commercial Zones along Kearny Avenue, Midland Avenue and the Belleville
Turnpike.
§ 5-37.5. Permit Application; Fee; Signature. [Ord. No.
2006-(O)-55A § 2; Ord. No. 2012-22]
§ 5-37.6. Review of Application. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-55A § 2]
The Town Clerk will forward complete applications to the Zoning Official
who will review the application for compliance with the terms of this
section. The Zoning Official will act upon same within 10 business days of
the submittal of the application. If the application is not in compliance, the
Zoning Official will so notify the applicant within said 10 business days of
the submission and specifically detail the area in which the application lacks
compliance with the requirements of this section. The applicant shall have
five days to correct any deficiency in the application. If the applicant fails to
do so, the application shall be deemed rejected.
a. An application for the permit shall be made to the Town Clerk not less
than 30 days in advance of the designated sale date and shall be signed
by the applicant. The application shall contain the following
information:
1. The name, residence address and telephone number of each
individual, owner, partner or, if a domestic corporation, the names,
residences, addresses and telephone numbers of the directors and
officers owning a 10% or greater interest in the corporation and the
chief operating executive of the corporation and, if a nondomestic
corporation, the name, residence address and telephone number of
the managing officer for service of process within the State of New
Jersey.
2. A scaled drawing of the property indicating the location of items
which are located or will be located in the public way.
3. A copy of the trade, corporate, business or fictitious name upon
which the applicant intends to do business pursuant to this section.
4. The name and address of the person owning the premises, if other
than the applicant, and the consent of the owner of the premises to
the application.
b. There shall be no fee charged by the Clerk for this application and
permit for Town-sponsored events. For owner-sponsored events the fee
shall be $25.
c. Applicants shall be limited to no more than two sidewalk sale days per
month.
§ 5-37.4 KEARNY CODE § 5-37.7
AO:250
§ 5-37.7. Issuance of Permit; Display. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-55A § 2]
If the application complies with this section, the Zoning Official shall issue a
permit strictly subject to the terms and conditions of this section. During the
course of the sidewalk sale, the applicant shall prominently post the permit
on the premises immediately contiguous to the sidewalk area being utilized
by the applicant pursuant to the permit so that it is plainly visible from the
sidewalk and the street which is immediately contiguous to the sidewalk in
front of the applicant's premises which are covered by the permit.
§ 5-37.8. Indemnification Agreement. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-55A § 2]
a. No permit required by this section shall be granted to any person to
operate a sidewalk sale until such person shall have filed with the Town
of Kearny an indemnification agreement wherein the applicant agrees
to defend and indemnify the Town of Kearny, its agents, servants,
representatives or employees from any or all claims, damages,
judgment costs or expenses, including attorneys' fees, which they or
any of them may incur or be required to pay because of any personal
injury, including death, or property damage suffered by any person or
persons as a result of or related in any way to the operation and
maintenance of the sidewalk sale for which the permit is issued.
b. No permit required by this section shall be issued or continued in
operation until the applicant shall have filed with the Town of Kearny an
insurance policy or policies of a company duly licensed to transact
business under the insurance laws of this State, with coverage limits of
at least $100,000 per person and $1,000,000 per accident, insuring
against loss from liability imposed by law upon the distributor for
damages on account of bodily injury or death suffered, and in the sum of
$50,000 against loss on account of property damage suffered by any
person or persons as a result of an accident occurring by reason of the
ownership, control or maintenance of the sidewalk sale, and no permit
shall continue effective unless such insurance shall remain in full force
and effect, during the entire term of the permit. Such insurance policy
shall provide for the payment of any final judgment recovered by any
person on account of the ownership, maintenance and control of such
sidewalk sale, or any fault in respect thereto, and shall be for the
benefit of any person suffering loss, damage or injury as aforesaid.
Each insurance policy shall provide that neither the distributor, nor its
insurer, shall have any right to subrogation against the Town of Kearny.
Each insurance policy shall provide primary coverage for any and all
losses and shall be drafted so as to protect all parties.
The applicant shall have the Town of Kearny added as an additional
insured on the insurance policies required by this subsection.
§ 5-37.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-37.9
AO:251
§ 5-37.9. Vending Machines Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-55A § 2]
No vending machines of any kind are permitted on the exterior of any
building operating a sidewalk sale.
§ 5-37.10. Clearing and Cleaning of Sidewalk Space. [Ord. No.
2006-(O)-55A § 2]
The permittee agrees at the end of the permit period, or in the event the
permit is revoked, that the permittee, at his/her own cost and expense,
will vacate the sidewalk space and promptly remove the property placed
thereon. Failure to do so shall immediately grant to the Town of Kearny the
right to remove any property on the sidewalk, and the permittee agrees to
reimburse the Town for the cost of removing and storing same. Permittee
shall also, at the end of the permit period, clean up all debris, display boxes
and any other material, garbage or litter from the sidewalk space utilized by
the permittee during the sidewalk sale and shall return it to the condition
that it was immediately preceding the sidewalk sale.
§ 5-37.11. Scope of Permit. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-55A § 2]
The permit granted herein shall only permit the sale of goods, articles or
merchandise which are customarily or usually sold by the permittee in the
permittee's retail or commercial establishment to which the sidewalk sale
area is immediately contiguous as defined in subsection 5-37.7 hereinabove.
The permit granted herein shall not relieve the permittee from obtaining
any and all permits required by any other ordinance, State statute, rule or
regulation, including but not limited to food products tobacco or any other
regulated items.
§ 5-37.12. Hours of Operation. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-55A § 2]
During the months of June, July and August, sidewalk sales may be
conducted no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and no later than 8:00 p.m. During all
other months of the year, sidewalk sales may be conducted no earlier than
8:00 a.m. and no later than 6:00 p.m.
§ 5-37.13. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-55A § 2]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to
a fine of not less than $50 nor exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment for a
period not exceeding 90 days, or both, and each and every day in which said
violation exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 5-38. DONATION CLOTHING BINS.
§ 5-38.1. Application Fee; Term; Number of Bins Restricted;
Maintenance of Area. [Ord. No. 2012-44]
a. N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et seq. as codified in subsection 5-38.2, governs the
placement and use of donation clothing bins. Any amendments
§ 5-37.9 KEARNY CODE § 5-38.1
AO:252
§ 5-38.2. Placement and Use Regulations. [Ord. No. 2012-44]
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60. Solicit, solicitation and appropriate municipal
agency defined.
For the purposes of P.L.2007, c. 209 (C.40:48-2.60 et seq.), "solicitation"
or "solicit" means the request, directly or indirectly, for money, credit,
property, financial assistance, or other thing of any kind or value.
Solicitation shall include, but not be limited to, the use or employment of
canisters, cards, receptacles or similar devices for the collection of money
or other thing of value. A solicitation shall take place whether or not
the person making the solicitation receives any contribution. "Appropriate
municipal agency" means the agency determined by resolution of the
municipal governing body.
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.61. Donation clothing bins; requirements for
placement for solicitation purposes.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person shall
place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin, for solicitation purposes,
unless all of the following requirements are met:
a. The person has obtained a permit, valid for a specified period of
time, from the appropriate municipal agency within the
municipality in which the donation clothing bin will be placed, in
accordance with the following:
(1) In applying for such a permit, the person shall include:
(a) The location where the bin would be situated, as
precisely as possible;
hereafter made to the statute shall thereby become a part of this
section.
b. The Construction Code Office be and hereby is designated as the
"appropriate municipal agency" referred to in the N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60 et
seq.
c. The application fee and renewal fee shall be $25 for each.
d. No fee, however, shall be required of any IRS sec. 501 (c)(3) entity,
provided that satisfactory proof of its standing as such is submitted to
the Construction Code Office.
e. The term of a permit shall be one year from the date of issuance.
f. No more than two donation clothing bins shall be located at one time on
any one tax lot or on any combination of contiguous tax lots of the same
owner.
g. The person placing, using or employing a clothing donation bin shall
maintain the bin and the area surrounding the bin such that there shall
be no accumulation of clothing or other donations outside the bin.
§ 5-38.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-38.2
AO:253
(b) The manner in which the person anticipates any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin would
be used, sold, or dispersed, and the method by which
the proceeds of collected donations would be allocated
or spent;
(c) The name, and telephone number of the bona fide
office required pursuant to subsection b of this section,
of any entity which may share or profit from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin; and
(d) Written consent from the property owner to place the
bin on his property;
(2) The appropriate municipal agency shall not grant an
application for a permit to place, use, or employ a donation
clothing bin if it determines that the placement of the bin
could constitute a safety hazard. Such hazards shall include,
but not be limited to, the placement of a donation clothing
bin within 100 yards of any place which stores large
amounts of, or sells, fuel or other flammable liquids or
gases;
(3) The appropriate municipal agency may impose a fee for such
application, not to exceed $25, to offset the costs involved in
enforcing P.L.2007, c. 209 (C.40:48-2, 60 et seq.);
(4) An expiring permit for a donation clothing bin may be
renewed upon application for renewal and payment of any
fee imposed by the appropriate municipal agency for such
renewal, not to exceed $25 annually, to offset the costs
involved in enforcing P.L.2007, c. 209 (C.40:48-2.60 et seq.).
Such application shall include:
(a) The location where the bin is situated, as precisely as
possible, and, if the person intends to move it, the new
location where the bin would be situated after the
renewal is granted and written consent from the
property owner to place the bin on his property;
(b) The manner in which the person has used, sold, or
dispersed any clothing or other donations collected via
the bin, the method by which the proceeds of collected
donations have been allocated or spent, and any
changes the person anticipates it may make in these
processes during the period covered by the renewal;
and
(c) The name, and telephone number of the bona fide
office required pursuant to subsection b of this section,
of any entity which shared or profited from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin, and of
any entities which may do so during the period covered
by the renewal; and
§ 5-38.2 KEARNY CODE § 5-38.2
AO:254
(5) The permit number and its date of expiration shall be clearly
and conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the donation
clothing bin, in addition to the information required
pursuant to subsection c of this section;
b. The person, and any other entity which may share or profit from
any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, maintains a
bona fide office where a representative of the person or other
entity, respectively, can be reached at a telephone information
line during normal business hours for the purpose of offering
information concerning the person or other entity. For the
purposes of this subsection, an answering machine or service
unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide office; and
c. The following information is clearly and conspicuously displayed
on the exterior of the donation clothing bin:
(1) The name and address of the registered person that owns
the bin, and of any other entity which may share or profit
from any clothing or other donations collected via the bin;
(2) The telephone number of the person's bona fide office and, if
applicable, the telephone number of the bona fide office of
any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing
or other donations collected via the bin;
(3) In cases when any entity other than the person who owns
the bin may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin, a notice, written in a clear
and easily understandable manner, indicating that clothing
or other donations collected via the bin, their proceeds, or
both, may be shared, or given entirely to, an entity other
than the person who owns the bin, and identifying all such
entities which may share or profit from such donations; and
(4) A statement, consistent with the information provided to the
appropriate municipal agency in the most recent permit or
renewal application pursuant to subparagraph (b) of
paragraph (1) of subsection a of this section and
subparagraph (b) of paragraph (4) of subsection a of this
section, indicating the manner in which the person
anticipates any clothing or other donations collected via the
bin would be used, sold, or dispersed, and the method by
which the proceeds of collected donations would be
allocated or spent.
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.62. Duty of municipality to investigate complaints
relating to clothing donation bins; violations; penalties.
§ 5-38.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-38.2
AO:255
The appropriate municipal agency within the municipality in which a
donation clothing bin has been placed shall receive and investigate, within
30 days, any complaints from the public about the bin. Whenever it appears
to the appropriate municipal agency that a person has engaged in, or is
engaging in any act or practice in violation of section 2 of P.L.2007, c. 209
(C.40:48-2.61), the person who placed the bin shall be issued a warning,
stating that if the violation is not rectified or a hearing with the appropriate
municipal agency is not requested within 45 days, the bin will be seized or
removed at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and any clothing
or other donations collected via the bin will be sold at public auction or
otherwise disposed of. In addition to any other means used to notify the
person who placed the bin, such warning shall be affixed to the exterior of
the bin itself.
In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violation or request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the warning,
the appropriate municipal agency may seize the bin, remove it, or have
it removed, at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and sell
at public auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the donations collected
via the bin shall be paid to the chief financial officer of the municipality.
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.63. Additional penalties for violation; remedies.
In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by the laws
of this State, any person who violates any provision of P.L.2007, c. 209
(C.40:48-2.60 et seq.) which results in seizure of the donation clothing bin
shall be:
a. Subject to a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The
appropriate municipal agency may bring this action in the
municipal court or Superior Court as a summary proceeding
under the "Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," P.L.1999, c. 274
(C.2A:58-10 et seq.), and any penalty monies collected shall be
paid to the chief financial officer of the municipality; and
b. Deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin
for solicitation purposes pursuant to section 2 of P.L.2007, c. 209
(C.40:48-2.61). A person disqualified from placing, using, or
employing a donation clothing bin by violating the provisions of
P.L.2007, c. 209 (C.40:48-2.60 et seq.) may apply to the
appropriate municipal agency to have that person's eligibility
restored. The appropriate municipal agency may restore the
eligibility of a person who:
(1) Acts within the public interest; and
(2) Demonstrates that he made a good faith effort to comply
with the provisions of P.L.2007, c. 209 (C.40:48-2.60 et seq.)
and all other applicable laws and regulations, or had no
fraudulent intentions.
N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.64. Effective date; application of act.
§ 5-38.2 KEARNY CODE § 5-38.2
AO:256
This act shall take effect on the first day of the thirteenth month following
enactment, and shall apply to all donation clothing bins in place on the
effective date of this act and all donation clothing bins placed subsequent
to the effective date of this act, but appropriate municipal agencies may
take such anticipatory acts in advance of that date as may be necessary for
the timely implementation of this act upon its effective date.
§ 5-39. through § 5-50. (RESERVED)
§ 5-38.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-39
AO:257

ARTICLE II
Business Regulations
§ 5-51. GASOLINE FILLING AND SERVICE STATIONS.
§ 5-51.1. Purpose. [1973 Code § 84-1; Ord. No. 7-8-87; Ord. No.
4-27-88]
It shall be the purpose of this section to reduce the opportunity for robbery,
theft, assaults and other criminal activity, to occur at all night filling
stations, and also to ensure the peace, quiet and comfort of neighborhoods
abutting residential and commercial zones in the Town of Kearny, by
eliminating traffic, lights, noise and activity during the hours of 12:00
midnight to 6:00 a.m. prevailing time, and further to otherwise protect the
peace, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town of Kearny.
§ 5-51.2. Definitions. [1973 Code § 84-2; Ord. No. 7-8-87; Ord. No.
4-27-88]
As used in this section:
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION OR GASOLINE STATION — Shall mean
any building or place of business where gasoline, fuel, oil and grease,
batteries, tires or automobile accessories are supplied and dispensed
directly to members of the public in automobiles, or where minor repair
service is rendered to automobiles.
RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL ZONE — Shall mean any zone designated
on the zoning map or in the zoning ordinance of the Town of Kearny as R-1,
R-2, R-3, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, or C-5.
§ 5-51.3. Prohibited Hours of Sale. [1973 Code § 84-3; Ord. No.
7-8-87; Ord. No. 4-27-88]
No automobile service or gasoline station shall open or engage in business
operations involving the sale or dispensing of fuel, oil, goods or services of
any nature during the hours of 12:00 midnight to 6:00 a.m. of the following
morning in any residential or commercial zone of the Town of Kearny.
§ 5-51.4. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 84-4; Ord. No.
7-8-87; Ord. No. 4-27-88; New]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-52. PARKING LOTS ACCESSORY TO RETAIL STORES.
§ 5-52.1. Uniformed Security Guard Required. [1973 Code § 107-1]
The owner or operator of any store in the Town of Kearny engaged in the
retail sale of goods to the public having accessory thereto a parking lot for
the use of customers with provision for 100 or more motor vehicles shall
§ 5-51 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-52.1
AO:259
employ a uniformed security guard for the parking lot, to be present upon
same during all hours the retail store is open for business.
§ 5-52.2. Unlawful to Operate in Violation. [1973 Code § 107-2]
It shall be unlawful to operate any such parking lot as designated in
subsection 5-52.1 except as heretofore provided.
§ 5-52.3. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 107-3; New]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-53. TRUCK-STOP PARKING FACILITIES.
§ 5-53.1. Operation Requirements. [1973 Code § 131-1]
The owner or operator of any parking lot in the Town of Kearny used in
conjunction with facilities catering principally to truck traffic and known as
a "truck stop," with a parking capacity in excess of 30 vehicles, shall:
§ 5-53.2. Definitions. [1973 Code § 131-2]
As used in this section:
FOOTCANDLE — Shall mean a unit of illumination equivalent to that
produced by a standard candle at a distance of one foot.
LINE — Shall mean the visible delineation of spaces on the lot so as to
provide for the systematic parking of vehicles, whereby all trucks will be
parked side by side, in rows of no more than two trucks one behind the
other.
a. Enclose the parking lot with a fence of a minimum height of seven feet.
b. Provide a supervised entrance and exit thereon with sufficient lighting
to illuminate the entire parking area.
c. Provide a uniformed security guard who shall be in attendance at the
parking lot at all times.
d. Pave and line the parking lot for parking purposes.
e. Maintain a registration system thereon which shall be made available to
the Police and Fire Departments of the Town of Kearny, and which shall
provide therein the following information:
1. Daily record of all motor vehicles parking in the area with
registration and description of all motor vehicles.
2. Driver's license number, state and name of the operators of the
vehicles with time of entry and departure.
§ 5-52.1 KEARNY CODE § 5-53.2
AO:260
SUFFICIENT LIGHTING —
SUPERVISED — Shall mean the presence of a uniformed guard at each
entrance and exit at all times.
TRUCK STOP — Shall mean a facility used by carriers primarily for the
temporary parking of trucks during transit; provided, however, that such
definition shall not apply to service stations or diners.
§ 5-53.3. Compliance Required. [1973 Code § 131-3]
It shall be unlawful to operate any parking lot as heretofore defined in
subsection 5-53.2, except as heretofore provided.
§ 5-53.4. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 131-4; New]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-54. JUNKYARDS, MOTOR-VEHICLE JUNKYARDS.
§ 5-54.1. Fencing Requirements. [1973 Code § 93-7]
No place shall hereafter be licensed as a junkyard or as a motor vehicle
junkyard unless the premises for which a license is sought shall have a
suitable fence or enclosure completely surrounding the premises, which
fence or enclosure must be of solid construction and must be constructed at
a minimum height of six feet; and the person conducting such junkyard or
motor-vehicle junkyard shall at all times maintain the premises in a safe and
sightly manner with due regard to the health, safety and general welfare of
the vicinity in which the junkyard or motor-vehicle junkyard is located.
§ 5-54.2. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 93-8; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-55. LAUNDRIES, CLEANING OR DYEING.
§ 5-55.1. Hours of Operation. [1973 Code § 96-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct any laundry,
launderette, cleaning or dyeing business where articles are processed in or
For general lot area, one minimum average maintained horizontal
footcandle.
a.
For entrances, exits and loading zones, two minimum average
horizontal footcandles.
b.
For pump service areas, 10 minimum average maintained horizontal
footcandles.
c.
§ 5-53.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-55.1
AO:261
on any premises in the Town of Kearny after the hour of 12:00 midnight nor
before the hour of 7:00 a.m. on all days.
§ 5-55.2. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 96-2; New]
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-56. BARBERSHOPS.
§ 5-56.1. (Reserved)23
§ 5-56.2. Interior View Unobstructed. [1973 Code § 55-2]
The clear interior view of every barbershop or other place wherein the
business of shaving, haircutting and other barbering is carried on within the
Town of Kearny shall be in no way obstructed by screens, non-transparent
glass, shades, blinds, doors, shutters or merchandise or any other articles
placed therein, so that the entire interior of every barbershop or other place
wherein the business of shaving, haircutting or other barbering is carried
on shall be open to full view from the public street.
§ 5-56.3. Hours of Business. [1973 Code § 55-3; Ord. No.
2006-(O)-60 § 17]
No barbershop shall be open for business before the hour of 7:00 a.m. nor
shall remain open after 10:00 p.m. Nothing herein contained shall be held
or construed to prohibit the rendering of service to any person or persons
already within the barbershop before the hour fixed for closing.
§ 5-56.4. Soliciting Trade After Closing Hour. [1973 Code § 55-4]
No person, partnership or corporation engaged in the business aforesaid
shall solicit any trade or business in connection therewith after the hour
fixed for closing as set forth in subsection 5-56.3.
§ 5-56.5. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 55-5; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-57. BEAUTY SHOPS.
§ 5-57.1. (Reserved)24
23.Editor's Note: Former subsection 5-56.1, Closed on Certain Holidays, previously codified
herein and containing portions of 1973 Code § 55-1, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 2006-(O)-60.
24.Editor's Note: Former subsection 5-57.1, Closed on Certain Holidays, previously codified
herein and containing portions of 1973 Code § 55-6 and Ordinance No. 11-24-82, was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-(O)-60 § 18.
§ 5-55.1 KEARNY CODE § 5-57.2
AO:262
§ 5-57.2. Hours of Business. [1973 Code § 55-7; Ord. No.
2006-(O)-60 § 18]
No beauty shop shall be open for business before the hour of 7:00 a.m. nor
shall remain open after the hour of 10:00 p.m. Nothing herein contained
shall be held or construed to prohibit the rendering of service to any person
or persons already within the beauty shop before the hour fixed for closing.
§ 5-57.3. Soliciting Trade After Closing Hours. [1973 Code § 55-8]
No person or persons, firm, partnership or corporation engaged in the
aforesaid business shall solicit any trade or business in connection
therewith after the hours fixed for closing as hereinbefore set forth.
§ 5-57.4. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 55-9; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-58. through § 5-69. (RESERVED)
§ 5-57.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-58
AO:263

ARTICLE III
Taxicabs and Taxis
§ 5-70. TAXICABS.
§ 5-70.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 129-1]
As used in this article:
TAXICAB — Shall mean a motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business
of carrying passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of less than seven
persons and not operated on a fixed route.
§ 5-70.2. Taxi Owner's License Required. [1973 Code § 129-2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit a taxicab owned or
controlled by him to be operated upon the streets of the Town of Kearny
without having first obtained a taxi owner's license pursuant to the
provisions of this article.
§ 5-70.3. Taxi Driver's License Required. [1973 Code § 129-3]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab or permit a taxicab
owned or controlled by him to be operated upon the streets of the Town
of Kearny unless the driver of the taxicab shall have a taxi driver's license
issued pursuant to the provisions of this article.
§ 5-70.4. Application for Taxi Owner's License. [1973 Code § 129-4]
An application for a taxi owner's license shall be addressed to the Mayor
and Town Council and filed with the Town Clerk. The application shall be
verified under oath and shall furnish the following information:
a. The name and address of the applicant, if an individual; if a corporation,
the names and addresses of its officers and directors; and if a
partnership, the names and addresses of all partners.
b. Age of the applicant, if an individual; if a corporation, the ages of its
officers and directors; and if a partnership, the ages of all partners.
c. The citizenship of the applicant, if an individual; if a corporation, the
date and state of incorporation and the citizenship of its officers and
directors; and if a partnership, the citizenship of all partners.
d. A statement indicating whether or not the applicant was ever convicted
of a crime; and if the applicant is a corporation, setting forth whether
any of its officers or directors were ever convicted of a crime; and if a
partnership, setting forth the information as to all partners.
e. The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers.
§ 5-70 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-70.4
AO:265
§ 5-70.5. Public Hearing; Application Review. [1973 Code § 129-5]
f. Facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that public
convenience and necessity require the granting of the taxi owner's
license.
g. The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant
and the location of proposed depots and terminals.
h. A description of the vehicle or vehicles for which the license is sought,
including make, year, color, serial number, passenger capacity and
insignia, if any, to be used.
i. A schedule of the fares proposed to be charged.
j. Such other information as the Mayor and the Town Council of the Town
of Kearny may from time to time require as being in the interest of
public safety.
a. Upon the filing of an application, the Mayor and Town Council shall fix a
time and place for a public hearing thereon. Notice of such hearing
shall be given to the applicant and to all persons to whom taxi owner's
licenses have been theretofore issued. Due notice shall also be given
the general public by publishing a notice of such hearing at least seven
days but not more than 14 days before the hearing in a newspaper
circulating in the Town of Kearny.
b. Every applicant must be at least 21 years of age. If the applicant is a
corporation, the officers and directors must be at least 21 years of age,
and if a partnership, all partners must be at least 21 years of age;
provided, however, that this age requirement shall not be applicable to
any taxi driver so employed as such in the Town of Kearny on the
effective date of this chapter.
c. If the Mayor and Town Council finds that further taxicab service in the
Town of Kearny is required by the public convenience and necessity,
and that the applicant is fit, willing and able to perform such public
transportation and to conform to the provisions of this article and the
rules promulgated by the Mayor and Council, then the taxi owner's
license shall be issued upon payment of the required license fee as
hereinafter set forth and compliance with all other provisions of this
article.
d. In making the above findings, the Mayor and Town Council shall take
into consideration the number of taxicabs already in operation, whether
existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need, the
probable effect of increased service on local traffic conditions, and the
character, experience and responsibility of the applicant.
§ 5-70.4 KEARNY CODE § 5-70.6
AO:266
§ 5-70.6. Fees; Insurance; Vehicle Inspections. [1973 Code § 129-6;
§ 112-1; Ord. No. 10-10-95; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-27 § 2]
No taxi owner's license shall be issued until the following requirements are
complied with:
§ 5-70.7. Application for Taxi Driver's License. [1973 Code § 129-7]
a. Payment of fee of $60 for each taxicab for the term of one year or
fraction thereof. The yearly term shall run from the first day of June to
the first day of June the following year. A license for every year
thereafter shall issue upon the payment of $50 unless the license for the
preceding year has been revoked or the applicant is unable to qualify
for the license under the provisions of this article.
b. All applicants must comply with the applicable provisions of N.J.S.A.
48:16-1 et seq., as amended and supplemented, which requires liability
insurance to be provided in a sum of not less than $10,000 to satisfy all
claims for damages by reason of bodily injury to or the death of any one
person, resulting from an accident, and a sum of not less than $20,000
to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of bodily injuries to or the
death of all persons on account of any such accident.
c. Every vehicle to be licensed must be thoroughly examined and
inspected by the Police Department and found to be in safe operating
condition for the transportation of passengers, clean in appearance and
in a sanitary condition, to be evidenced by a certificate to that effect
from the Police Department. The vehicle shall be subject to spot checks
at any reasonable hour by the Police Department.
a. An application for a taxi driver's license shall be addressed to the Mayor
and Town Council and filed with the Town Clerk. Such application shall
be verified under oath and shall contain the following information:
1. The name, address, age and citizenship of the applicant.
2. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has ever been
convicted of a crime.
3. The names and addresses of at least two residents of the Town of
Kearny who have known the applicant for a period of at least two
years and who will vouch for the sobriety, honesty and general good
character of the applicant.
4. The experience of the applicant in the transportation of
passengers.
5. The educational background of the applicant.
6. A concise history of his employment.
b. Every applicant for a taxi driver's license shall be at least 21 years of
age; provided, however, that this age requirement shall not be
§ 5-70.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-70.7
AO:267
§ 5-70.8. Investigation of Applicant; Fees. [1973 Code § 129-8; Ord.
No. 2004-(O)-27 § 2]
Before an application for a taxi driver's license is finally passed upon,
the Police Department shall conduct an investigation of each applicant,
and a report of such investigation, with a copy of the traffic and police
record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application for
the consideration of the Mayor and Town Council. The Mayor and Council
shall, upon consideration of the application and the reports and certificates
required to be attached thereto, approve or reject the application. Upon
approval of an application for a taxi driver's license, the Mayor and Council
shall issue a license to the applicant upon the payment of a fee of $25, which
license shall bear the name, address, color, age, signature and photograph
of the applicant. Such license shall be in effect for the remainder of the
license year, ending on the first day of January. A license for every year
thereafter shall issue upon the payment of $25, unless the license for the
preceding year has been revoked or the applicant is unable to qualify as a
taxi driver under the provisions of this article. The Chief of Police may issue
a temporary license pending approval of a permanent license.
§ 5-70.9. Display of Identification; License and Inspection
Certificate Required. [1973 Code § 129-9]
Every taxi driver operating a taxicab must display in a suitable frame, or
frames, attached to the rear of the front seat of his taxicab, his taxi driver's
license, picture and inspection certificate.
§ 5-70.10. Revocation, Suspension. [1973 Code § 129-10]
A taxi owner's license or a taxi driver's license issued under the provisions
of this article may be revoked or suspended by the Mayor and Town Council
if the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this Town,
discontinued operations for more than 30 days, violated any ordinances
of the Town of Kearny or the laws of the State of New Jersey or the
United States of America. Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder
applicable to any taxi driver employed as such in the Town of Kearny
on the effective date of this article and the holder of a State driver's
license issued by the State of New Jersey. Every applicant must be
in good health with good eyesight, of good character, with knowledge
of the traffic regulations and geography of the Town of Kearny and
able to read and write the English language. He must furnish with this
application a certificate from a reputable physician certifying that in
his opinion the applicant is not afflicted with any disease or infirmity
which might make him an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver, and he must
also furnish with his application two recent identification photographs
of himself, approximately 1 1/2 by 1 1/2 inches in size, and a copy of
his fingerprints taken by the Police Department of the Town of Kearny;
and the applicant must furnish such other information as the Mayor and
Town Council may from time to time require.
§ 5-70.7 KEARNY CODE § 5-70.10
AO:268
shall be given notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an
opportunity to be heard.
§ 5-70.11. Inspection of Vehicles. [1973 Code § 129-11]
Every vehicle operating under this article shall be inspected by the Police
Department every three months or at such other interval as shall be
established by the Mayor and Town Council to ensure the continued
maintenance of safe operating conditions and that each vehicle is clean
and sanitary. No license issued under this article shall be sold, assigned,
mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the consent of the Mayor and
Council.
§ 5-70.12. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 129-13; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 5-70.13. Soliciting or Pickup of Passengers Within the Town by
Taxi and Limousine Operators. [Ord. No. 2009-21 §§ 1 — 3]
§ 5-70A. LIMOUSINES AND CAR SERVICES.
All Limousines
§ 5-70A.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2009-19]
LIMOUSINE — Shall mean that term as defined by N.J.S.A. 48:16-13 and
shall include car services.
PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS — Shall mean the location of the main
place of business of the limousine service where the limousine service is
conducted, where limousines are dispatched, or where limousine drivers
report for duty.
a. No operator of a taxi or limousine may solicit or pickup passengers
within the Town for a fee or other consideration unless he or she has
been licensed pursuant to subsection 5-70.7 et seq. or Section 5-70A of
the Town Code, except for State-licensed limousine operators who are
picking up passengers pursuant to a prearrangement.
b. In the absence of a writing in the possession of the operator of a
limousine which shall contain the name and address of the passenger or
prospective passenger, the date and time of the engagement, the origin
of the journey, the destination and the amount of the prearranged fare,
the transportation shall be presumed not to have been prearranged.
c. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable for a penalty prescribed in subsection 1-5.1
of this Code and his or her license to operate within the Town of Kearny
may be revoked for up to five years by the Mayor and Council at the
request of the Police Department.
§ 5-70.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-70A.2
AO:269
§ 5-70A.2. Limousine License Required. [Ord. No. 2009-19]
§ 5-70A.3. Insurance Required. [Ord. No. 2009-19]
§ 5-70A.4. Permit from Clerk. [Ord. No. 2009-19]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-18.1, no limousine shall provide service from one
point in the Town to another point in the Town unless the owner thereof
shall have first obtained a permit to do so from the Town Clerk. When
issued, the said permit shall apply to all limousines operated by that owner
and providing intra-municipal service within the Town.
§ 5-70A.5. Requirements for a Permit. [Ord. No. 2009-19; Ord. No.
2012-22]
An applicant for a permit must meet the following requirements:
a. No limousine shall be operated along any street in the Town unless it
bears license plates issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:3-19.5, has a
certificate issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-17, complies with N.J.S.A.
39:8-1, and also complies with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-13
through N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.3b, inclusively.
b. This provision shall not apply to a limousine registered in another state
which has been engaged to perform an interstate transport.
a. No limousine shall be operated along any street in the Town until the
owner of the limousine shall have filed with the clerk of the municipality
where the limousine owner's principal place of business is located an
insurance policy as provided for by N.J.S.A. 48:16-14.
b. When a limousine owner's principal place of business is in the Town of
Kearny, the limousine owner shall file the required insurance policy
with the Town Clerk. Upon the filing of the required insurance policy
and the payment of a fee in the amount of $50, the Town Clerk shall
issue in duplicate a certificate of compliance showing the owner has
complied with the terms and provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-17.
Limousines Providing
Intra-Town Services
a. Payment of a fee of $75 for the term of one year or fraction thereof. The
yearly term shall run from the first day of June to the last day of May of
the following year.
b. The Clerk shall issue a decal to the applicant for each limousine the
permittee owns which provides intra-municipal services within the
Town. The said decal shall be affixed to the rear window of each
limousine.
c. The applicant shall also file for a license to operate pursuant to N.J.S.A.
48:16-17 with the Clerk of the municipality where the applicant's
§ 5-70A.2 KEARNY CODE § 5-70A.5
AO:270
§ 5-70A.6. Operators Must Be Licensed. [Ord. No. 2009-19]
All operators of the limousines permitted pursuant to this section must be
licensed by the State to operate a limousine and must provide proof of that
State licensure to the Clerk and to any police officer who requests it.
§ 5-70A.7. Prearrangement. [Ord. No. 2009-19]
A permit under this section shall not excuse the licensee from the
requirement that it may provide prearranged transportation only.
§ 5-70A.8. Exclusion. [Ord. No. 2009-19]
Sections 5-70A.4 through 5-70A.6 shall not apply to limousine service which
originates in another municipality and terminates in Town, or which
originates in Town and terminates in another municipality, but all such
service must be by prearrangement.
§ 5-70A.9. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2009-19]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall upon
conviction thereof be liable for a penalty as prescribed by subsection 1-5.1
of this Code and his or her license to operate may be revoked for up to five
years by the Mayor and Council at the request of the Police Department.
§ 5-70B. ESTABLISHMENT AND OPERATION OF TAXI OR
LIMOUSINE DISPATCH CENTERS. [Ord. No. 2009-20]
principal place of business is located if that principal place of business
is not Kearny.
d. Every vehicle to be permitted shall be inspected by the Kearny Police
Department and must be found to be safe, in operating condition for the
transportation of passengers and in a sanitary condition before a permit
is issued.
a. For purposes of this section, a dispatch center is a location in the Town
of Kearny from which taxis and/or limousines are dispatched
telephonically, electronically or otherwise.
b. For pickups or dropoffs in Kearny, a dispatch center may dispatch only
taxis licensed under Town Code Section 5-70 and State licensed
limousines whose principal place of business is in Kearny.
c. The owners of all limousines dispatched from the dispatch center shall
comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16-14, 48:16-17, 48:16-18,
48:16-18.1.
d. No taxi dispatch center or limousine dispatch center shall be
established in the Town unless the owner or operator of the dispatch
center shall have been licensed pursuant to Section 5-70 or Section
5-70A of the Town Code or N.J.S.A. 48:16-17 et seq., whichever is
§ 5-70A.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-70B
AO:271
§ 5-71. MOTION PICTURE FILMING.
§ 5-71.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 1999-0-18 § 1]
§ 5-71.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1999-0-18 § 2; Ord. No. 2002-O-47]
FILMING — Shall mean the taking of still or motion pictures either on film
or videotape or similar recording medium, for commercial or educational
purposes intended for viewing on television, in theaters, on the internet or
for institutional uses. The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to
include the filming of news stories within the Town of Kearny.
MAJOR MOTION PICTURE — Shall mean any film for which the budget
is at least $1,000,000 or any film which is financed and/or distributed
by (i) a major motion picture studio, including, but not limited to, any of
the following: Universal Pictures, Warner Brothers (including New Line
Cinema, Castle Rock Cinema and Turner Production Company), Paramount,
applicable. Proof of such licensing shall be maintained on the premises
at all times.
e. No vehicle may be dispatched from a dispatch center unless the
operator of the vehicle has been licensed pursuant to subsection 5-70.7
of the Code or N.J.S.A. 48:16-22.1 et seq. Proof of such licensing shall be
maintained at all times on the premises in Kearny and in the vehicle.
f. All taxis dispatched from the dispatch center shall bear registration
license plates issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:3-19. All limousines
dispatched from a dispatch center shall bear registration license plates
issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:3-19.5.
g. The owner and/or operator of the dispatch center shall maintain at the
dispatch center for limousines a log containing the name and address of
the passenger or prospective passenger, the date and time of the
arrangement, the origin of the journey, the destination and the amount
of the prearranged fare. All limousines dispatched from the dispatch
center shall also maintain a log with the same information in the vehicle
at all times.
h. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon
conviction, be liable for a penalty as prescribed by subsection 1-5.1 of
this Code and his or her license to operate within the Town of Kearny
may be revoked for up to five years at the request of the Police
Department by the Mayor and Council.
a. The Mayor and Council of the Town of Kearny recognize that the filming
of motion pictures within the Town of Kearny has been increasing and
will continue to increase in the future.
b. The production of motion pictures within the Town of Kearny requires
various regulations to preserve the general health, safety and welfare
of Kearny inhabitants.
§ 5-70B KEARNY CODE § 5-71.2
AO:272
20th Century Fox, Columbia/TriStar, Disney, MGM-United Artists, or any
successor-in-interest to any of the foregoing, or (ii) a major television
network or cable television provider.
PUBLIC LANDS — Shall mean any and every public street, highway,
sidewalk, square, public park or playground, or any other public place
within the Town of Kearny which is within the jurisdiction and control of the
Town of Kearny.
§ 5-71.3. Permits. [Ord. No. 1999-0-18 § 3; Ord. No. 2002-O-47; Ord.
No. 2004-(O)-05]
§ 5-71.4. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 1999-0-8 § 4]
a. No person or organization shall film or permit filming on public lands
within the Town of Kearny without first having obtained a permit from
the office of the Town Clerk, located at Town Hall in the Town of Kearny.
A permit shall be required even if filming occurs wholly on private lands
if public lands are utilized in connection therewith during filming. Said
permit shall set forth the approved location of such filming and the
approved duration of such filming by specific reference to day or dates.
Said permit must be readily available for inspection by Town of Kearny
officials at all times at the site of the filming.
b. All permits shall be applied for and obtained from the office of the Town
Clerk during normal business hours. Applications for such permits shall
be in a form approved by the Town Clerk and be accompanied by a
permit fee in the amount established by this section. The Town Clerk
shall forward copies of all applications to the Town Administrator and
Governing Body upon receipt.
c. If a permit is issued and, due to inclement weather or other good cause,
filming does not in fact take place on the dates specified, the Town
Clerk may, at the request of the applicant, issue a new permit for
filming on other dates subject to full compliance with all other
provisions of this section. No additional fee shall be paid for this permit.
a. No permits shall be issued by the Town Clerk unless applied for prior to
five days before the requested shooting date; provided, however, that
the Town Administrator may waive the five-day period if, in his or her
judgment, the applicant has obtained all related approvals and adjacent
property owners or tenants do not need to be notified.
b. No permit shall be issued for filming upon public lands unless the
applicant shall provide the Town of Kearny with satisfactory proof of the
following:
1. Proof of insurance coverage as follows:
(a) For bodily injury to any one person in the amount of $500,000
and any occurrence in the aggregate amount of $1,000,000;
and
§ 5-71.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-71.4
AO:273
(b) For property damage, each occurrence, in the aggregate
amount of $300,000.
2. An agreement in writing whereby the applicant agrees to indemnify
and save harmless the Town of Kearny from any and all liability,
expense, claim or damages resulting from the use of public lands.
3. The hiring of an off-duty Town of Kearny Police Officer for the times
indicated on the permit, when deemed necessary by the Town
Administrator.
c. The holder of the permit shall take all reasonable steps to minimize
interference with the free passage of pedestrians, and traffic over
public lands and shall comply with all lawful directives issued by the
Town of Kearny Police Department with respect thereto. The holder of a
permit shall on each day of film shooting or production leave the
location(s) used in a satisfactory condition free of debris and rubbish.
Further, when deemed necessary by the Town Administrator, the holder
of the permit shall hire, at its sole expense, a waste removal service to
remove on a daily basis all debris and rubbish resulting from its film
shooting or production.
d. The holder of a permit shall conduct filming in such a manner as to
minimize the inconvenience or discomfort to adjoining property owners
attributable to such filming and shall, to the extent practicable abate
noise and park vehicles associated with such filming off the public
streets. The holder shall avoid any interference with previously
scheduled activities upon public lands and limit to the extent possible
any interference with normal activity on such public lands. Where the
applicant's production activity, by reason of location or otherwise, will
directly involve and/or affect any businesses, merchants or residents,
these parties shall be given written notice of the filming at least three
days prior to the requested shooting date(s) and informed that
objections may be filed with the Town Clerk, which objections will form
part of the applicant's application and be considered in the review of
the same. Proof of service of notification to adjacent owners shall be
submitted to the Town Clerk at least two days before the requested
shooting date.
e. All filming must be completed within 1/2 hour after sunset, unless
approved in advance by the Town Administrator. In no event, however,
shall an applicant be allowed to film in a residential area after 10:00
p.m.
f. The Town Administrator may refuse to issue a permit whenever he or
she determines, on the basis of objective facts and after a review of the
application and consultation with the Town of Kearny Police
Department, Town of Kearny Fire Department and such other
Departments of the Town of Kearny that the Town Administrator shall
reasonably deem necessary that filming at the location and/or the time
set forth in the application would violate any law or ordinance or would
§ 5-71.4 KEARNY CODE § 5-71.4
AO:274
§ 5-71.5. Fees. [Ord. No. 1999-O-18 § 5; Ord. No. 2002-O-47; Ord.
No. 2012-22]
unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjoining
properties, unreasonably impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic or otherwise endanger the public's health, safety or welfare.
Further, Town of Kearny reserves the right to require one or more onsite
patrol persons in situations where the proposed production may
impede the proper flow of traffic or in any other way jeopardize the
public safety, the cost of said patrol person to be borne by the applicant
as a cost of production. Where existing electrical power lines are to
be utilized by the production an on-site licensed electrician may be
similarly required if the production company does not have a licensed
electrician on staff.
g. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the Town Administrator denying
or revoking a permit or a person requesting relief pursuant to
paragraph h of this subsection 5-71.4 may appeal to the Town Council.
A written notice of appeal setting forth the reasons for the appeal shall
be filed with the Town Administrator. An appeal from the decision of the
Town Administrator shall be filed within 10 days of the Town
Administrator's decision. The Town Council shall set the matter down
for a hearing within 30 days of the day on which the notice of appeal
was filed. The decision of the Town Council shall be in the form of a
resolution. A resolution supporting the decision of the Town Council
shall be adopted at the first regularly scheduled public meeting of the
Town Council after the hearing on the appeal unless the appellant
agrees, in writing, to a later date for the decision. If such a resolution is
not adopted within the time required, the decision of the Town
Administrator shall be deemed to be reversed and a permit shall be
issued in conformity with the application or the relief pursuant to
paragraph h of this subsection 5-71.4 shall be deemed denied.
h. The Town Council may authorize a waiver of any of the requirements or
limitations of this section whenever it determines that strict compliance
with such limitations will pose an unreasonable burden upon the
applicant and that a permit may be issued without endangering the
public's health, safety and welfare.
i. Copies of the approved permit will be sent to the Police and Fire
Departments before filming takes place and to the New Jersey Film
Commission. The applicant shall permit the Fire Prevention Bureau or
other Town of Kearny inspectors to inspect the site and the equipment
to be used. The applicant shall follow all safety instructions issued by
the Fire Prevention Bureau or other Town of Kearny inspectors.
j. In addition to any other fees or costs mentioned in this section, the
applicant shall reimburse the Town of Kearny for any lost revenue, such
as parking meter revenue, repairs to public property or other revenues
that the Town of Kearny was prevented from earning because of the
filming.
§ 5-71.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-71.5
AO:275
§ 5-71.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 1999-0-18 § 6]
Any person violating this section or rules and regulations contained herein
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000 per day or imprisonment for
a term not to exceed 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 5-71.7. Applicability of Other Ordinances. [Ord. No. 1999-0-18 § 7]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way any
other power of the Town of Kearny to define and declare nuisances and to
cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise.
§ 5-72. SIDEWALK CAFES.
§ 5-72.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2000-0-09 § 1; Ord. No. 2002-O-53A
§ 1]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RESTAURANT — Shall mean, for purposes of this section, an establishment
which has all of the following characteristics: (1) it is engaged primarily
in the preparation on premises of food to be served for consumption on
premises; (2) it shall have on premises a full kitchen with a ventilation
control and fire protection system as set forth in National Fire Prevention
Association Code 96 and International Mechanical Code 2000; (3) it shall
be operating subject to and in compliance with all of the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq. (also known as "Chapter XII of the New Jersey State
Sanitary Code") and N.J.S.A. 24:15-1 et seq. and the provisions of National
Fire Prevention Code 96 and International Mechanical Code 2000.
a. A basic filming permit fee of $100 per permit term, payable by all
applicants except nonprofit organizations filming exclusively for
educational purposes, which organizations shall be required to pay a
basic filming permit fee of $50; and
b. A daily filming permit of (i) $2,000 per day for applicants filming a
major motion picture having a budget of $5,000,000 or more, (ii) $1,000
per day for applicants filming a motion picture having a budget of more
than $1,000,000 but less than $5,000,000, or $150 per day for all other
applicants except nonprofit organizations filming exclusively for
educational purposes, which organizations shall not be required to pay
any daily filming permit fees.
In addition to the basic filming permit fee and the daily filming permit
fee, the permittee shall be required to pay a fee of $75 per day for each
commercial vehicle used by the permittee, but in no event more than
$750 for all commercial vehicles which are subject to this fee.
§ 5-71.5 KEARNY CODE § 5-72.1
AO:276
SIDEWALK — Shall mean the paved surface provided for the exclusive use
of pedestrians and situated between and extending from any building to the
curb of any street.
SIDEWALK CAFE — Shall mean a restaurant, fast food restaurant or retail
food establishment which is a permitted use under the Town's Zoning
Ordinances and which holds a valid license to serve food to be consumed
by the public at tables located within the restaurant's lot area or on the
sidewalk in front of the restaurant.
§ 5-72.2. License Required; Terms. [Ord. No. 2000-0-09 § 2]
§ 5-72.3. Application for License. [Ord. No. 2000-0-09 § 3]
Each applicant for a sidewalk cafe license shall submit an application to
the Town Clerk on forms established by the Mayor and Council at least one
month prior to the commencement of the license period together with the
license fee. The application shall set forth:
a. License Required. No person shall operate a sidewalk cafe within the
Town of Kearny without having first obtained a sidewalk cafe license in
accordance with the requirements of this section. The license shall be
issued by the Mayor and Council. Each license may contain specific
conditions related to the nature of the operation and characteristics of
the property and surrounding area. The license shall not be
transferable and shall continue for as long as the applicant operates the
restaurant business within the term of the license. The license shall be
subject to future amendments to this section or other applicable
regulations.
b. Terms. All sidewalk cafe licenses shall be issued for the six-month
period commencing May 1 and ending October 31 of the particular
year. Licenses may be renewed annually by the filing of an application
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
a. The name and address of the applicant, who shall be the owner or
operator of the restaurant of which the sidewalk cafe is to become a
part and extension. (There may not be a separate owner of the related
restaurant and the sidewalk cafe.)
b. A description of the dimensions of the area and all temporary
structures, equipment and apparatus to be used in connection with the
operation of the sidewalk cafe, including but not limited to tables,
temporary fences, barriers, planters, benches, chairs and umbrellas;
c. A statement of the seating capacity of the proposed sidewalk cafe and
of the existing restaurant;
d. A sketch to be drawn to scale of the proposed design and location of the
sidewalk cafe, including the location of all appurtenances,
demonstrating that pedestrian traffic will not be impeded and that the
provisions of subsection 5-72.5, Requirements and Specifications will
§ 5-72.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-72.3
AO:277
§ 5-72.4. License Fee. [Ord. No. 2000-O-09 § 4; Ord. No. 2012-22]
The fee for a sidewalk cafe license shall be $50 payable upon submission of
an application for a license.
§ 5-72.5. Requirements and Specifications. [Ord. No. 2000-0-09 § 5;
Ord. No. 2002-O-53A § 2-4]
A sidewalk cafe authorized and operating pursuant to this section shall
comply with all of the following rules and regulations and such others as
may be adopted from time to time by resolution of the Mayor and Council of
the Town of Kearny:
be satisfied. The Town Clerk shall refer the sketch to the Construction
Code Official/Zoning Officer, Chief of Police, Chief of Fire, Health
Officer and the Kearny Enterprise Zone Development Corporation for
his/her recommendation; and
e. A maintenance agreement pursuant to which the licensee shall agree,
at the option of the Town, to either repair at its sole cost and expense
any damage caused to the sidewalk by the operation of the sidewalk
cafe or to reimburse the Town in full for all costs and expenses incurred
by it in making any such repairs.
a. The sidewalk cafe shall be operated and maintained in accordance with
a layout plan approved by the officials referred to in subsection 5-72.3d.
If alcoholic beverages are to be served or consumed on the sidewalk
area, the layout plan shall provide for a removable barrier of not less
than three feet and not more than four feet in height circumscribing the
circumference of the sidewalk area.
b. All furniture, equipment or decoration used in connection with a
sidewalk cafe shall be located, in such a way that there shall be no less
than four feet of paved sidewalk for use by the public between the curb
and the operations of the sidewalk cafe. No furniture, equipment or
decoration used in connection with the operation of the sidewalk cafe
shall be located in such a way as to impede the safe and speedy ingress
and egress to or from any building or structure.
c. No sidewalk cafe license shall be issued unless the licensee shall have
first filed with the Town Clerk a copy of the insurance policy or
certificate of insurance, issued by a company duly authorized to
transact business under the laws of the State of New Jersey, providing
for the payment of not less than $1,000,000 to satisfy all claims for
damage by reason of bodily injuries to, or the death of, any person as a
direct or indirect result of the operation of the sidewalk cafe or for
injury to any person occurring on the premises occupied by such cafe,
and further providing for the payment of not less than $10,000 to satisfy
all claims for property damage occurring as a direct or indirect result of
the operation of such cafe. The policy and certificate shall name the
Town of Kearny as an additional insured and provide for 10 days'
§ 5-72.3 KEARNY CODE § 5-72.5
AO:278
written notice plus three days mail service of any proposed cancellation
of the policy to the Town Clerk.
d. No sidewalk cafe license shall be issued unless the licensee shall have
first executed and filed with the Town Clerk an indemnification
agreement on the form provided by the Town Clerk pursuant to which
the licensee shall agree to forever defend, protect and indemnify and
save harmless the Town of Kearny, its officers, agents and employees
from and against any and all claims, causes of action, injuries, losses,
damages, expenses, fees, and costs arising out of, or which arise out of
the licensee's operation of such sidewalk cafe. If the licensee is a
corporation or LLC, such indemnification and hold harmless agreement
shall be executed by a principal or by an adult officer of such
corporation or LLC in his or her personal capacity.
e. The property shall be maintained as required by Chapter 17, Property
Maintenance, of the Revised General Ordinances of the Town of Kearny
and the State Sanitary Code requirements (N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq. and
N.J.S.A. 24:15-1 et seq.).
f. Services in the sidewalk cafe shall be provided by persons engaged or
employed for that purpose and shall be furnished to seated patrons
only.
g. The sidewalk area utilized for the sidewalk cafe shall be kept clean and
free of litter. Trash receptacles shall be provided as required and
approved from time to time by the Town.
h. Noise shall be kept at such a level as to comply in all respects with the
provisions of the Code of the Town of Kearny.
i. Sidewalk cafes shall be authorized to operate from 7:00 a.m. until 10:30
p.m. during the months of May to October inclusive.
j. Within 30 minutes after the closing of the outdoor sidewalk cafe, the
operator shall have all furniture, equipment, decorations and umbrellas
and any other items used in connection with the operation of such
sidewalk cafe removed from the sidewalk. All such materials shall be
stored in a safe and secure interior location.
k. The operator shall comply with all other ordinances of the Town of
Kearny.
l. The sidewalk area upon which an outdoor sidewalk cafe has been
authorized to operate pursuant to this section shall constitute premises
duly licensed for the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages;
provided, however, that the related restaurant of which the sidewalk
cafe is a part and of which it is an extension is so licensed; and provided
further, however, that specific approval has been obtained from the
Town of Kearny for the extension of the alcoholic beverage license to
the sidewalk area. Such approval shall be separate from, and must be
§ 5-72.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-72.5
AO:279
§ 5-72.6. Revocation of License; Notice of Hearing; Penalty. [Ord.
No. 2000-0-09 § 6]
§ 5-73. PERSONS WHO ARE ISSUED A PERMIT TO USE PUBLIC
PROPERTY REQUIRED TO QUIT THE PREMISES AT THE END OF
EACH DAY'S ACTIVITY.
§ 5-73.1. Events Lasting More Than One Day. [Ord. No. 2009-13]
Whenever a permit or license is issued for the use of public property for
more than one-day for an event or activity to which the public is invited,
obtained in addition to, the license to operate an outdoor sidewalk cafe
pursuant to this section.
m. Patrons of an outdoor sidewalk cafe that does not have a liquor license
to sell alcoholic beverages on the sidewalk area upon which the outdoor
sidewalk cafe has been authorized to operate pursuant to this section
shall not be permitted to carry onto or consume any alcoholic beverages
on such sidewalk area.
n. If the premises licensed as a sidewalk cafe is also licensed for the
consumption of alcoholic beverages, no alcoholic beverage shall be
served, sold or consumed on the sidewalk area except with the
concurrent consumption of a meal by that patron or patrons. Once the
consumption of a meal has been completed the patron or patrons must
cease the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the sidewalk area.
o. The holder of the sidewalk cafe license shall have the primary
responsibility to supervise and police the conduct of the patrons on the
sidewalk area and that licensee shall be presumed to have known,
tolerated and allowed that conduct.
a. Revocation of License. Licenses issued under the provisions of this
section may be revoked by the Town Administrator after hearing on
notice for any of the following causes:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the
application for license;
2. Any violation of applicable law or Town ordinance.
b. Notice of Hearing. Notice of the hearing for revocation of license shall
be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint
and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed,
postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at least five
days prior to the date of the set hearing.
c. Penalty. The penalty upon an adverse finding for a first offense shall be
a thirty-day suspension of the sidewalk cafe license, for a second
offense 60 days and for a third offense revocation of the license for a
one year period.
§ 5-72.5 KEARNY CODE § 5-73.1
AO:280
the following conditions are hereby incorporated in and made a part of that
permit or license:
§ 5-73.2. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2009-13]
For violation of any provisions of this section, the sponsor of the event
and the permittee shall be jointly and severally liable under the penalty
provisions of Kearny Code subsections 1-5.1 and 1-5.4.
a. At the end of each day's event, presentation or activity for which the
premises are permitted or licensed, all persons associated with the
event, presentation or activity shall remove themselves from the
permitted or licensed premises within two hours of the end of the event,
presentation or activity and shall not return to the premises until one
hour before the event, presentation or activity is to begin on the
following day, except as provided in subparagraph (b).
b. If the Police Department determines in writing that for security
purposes there is a need to have a person on the premises overnight,
one person associated with the event or activity may remain on the
permitted or licensed premises overnight.
c. No person associated with the event shall remain overnight in a vehicle
on the streets or other public places of the Town.
§ 5-73.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-73.2
AO:281
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
§ 6-1. PURPOSE. [1973 Code § 49-1]
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Town of Kearny in accordance with the provisions of an
Act of Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled "An Act Concerning
Alcoholic Beverages" (Chapter 436 of the Laws of 1933), its supplements
and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Director of the Division of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS. [New]
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
§ 6-3.1. Laws Applicable. [1973 Code § 49-2]
All applications for licenses or special permits and all licenses issued and all
proceedings under this chapter shall be in accordance with the Act, rules
and regulations referred to in Section 6-1, and all other applicable laws of
the State of New Jersey or the United States.
§ 6-3.2. Application for License. [1973 Code § 49-9]
All applications for licenses shall be set forth, in full, answers to questions
prescribed by the aforesaid Act and by the rules and regulations of the State
Director, and shall include declarations called for by these provisions.
§ 6-3.3. Issuing Authority. [1973 Code § 49-3]
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the Mayor and
Town Council which shall also administer the provisions of this chapter. The
issuance of all licenses shall be reported to the Director of the Division of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3.4. Prerequisites to Issuance of Licenses. [1973 Code § 49-4]
No license shall be issued except after written application presented by
the proposed licensee, upon forms approved by the Governing Body and
inspection and investigation by the Alcoholic Beverage Control
§ 5-73.2 KEARNY CODE § 6-3.4
AO:282
Investigation and Enforcement Unit,25 and after conformity with publication
of notice and otherwise, as required by the Act and this chapter.
§ 6-3.5. License Required. [1973 Code § 49-5]
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Town
of Kearny without having obtained a license in accordance with the Act
referred to in section 6-1 and the provisions of this chapter, except in those
cases provided by law where the licenses in question are issued by the
Director of the State Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3.6. License Fees; Maximum Number. [1973 Code § 49-17; Ord.
No. 1999-O-1; Ord. No. 2002-O-83 § 6; Ord. No. 2007-(O)-43]
The annual license fees of licenses for the sale and distribution of alcoholic
beverages in the Town shall be as follows:
Class of License Annual License
Fees
Number of
Licenses
Plenary Retail Consumption
License
$930 33
Plenary Retail Distribution
License
$720 27
Club License $150 5
§ 6-3.7. Plenary Retail Consumption License. [1973 Code § 49-6;
Ord. No. 5-23-95]
The holder of a plenary retail consumption license shall be entitled, subject
to rules and regulations, to sell for consumption on the licensed premises
any alcoholic beverage by the glass or other open receptacle, and also
to sell all alcoholic beverages in original containers for consumption off
the licensed premises. Such license shall not permit the sale of alcoholic
beverages in or upon any premises in which a grocery, delicatessen,
drugstore or other mercantile business is carried on, except the keeping
of a hotel or restaurant or the sale of cigars and cigarettes at retail, as an
accommodation to patrons, or the retail sale of nonalcoholic beverages as
necessary beverages to alcoholic beverages.
a. The limitations imposed hereby shall be subject in all respects to the
laws of the State of New Jersey regarding the sale of alcoholic
beverages.
25.Editor's Note: For provisions establishing the Alcoholic Beverage Control Investigation
and Enforcement Unit, see subsection 6-4.11.
§ 6-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-3.8
AO:283
§ 6-3.8. Plenary Retail Distribution License. [1973 Code § 49-7; Ord.
No. 5-23-95]
The holder of a plenary retail distribution license shall be entitled, subject
to rules and regulations, to sell any alcoholic beverage for consumption off
the licensed premises, but only in original containers.
§ 6-3.9. Club License. [1973 Code § 49-8; Ord. No. 8-8-95]
§ 6-3.10. Issuance of Licenses to Only Qualified Applicants. [1973
Code § 49-10]
No license shall be issued to any person, firm, corporation, group or
partnership not fully qualified under the provisions of the Act and the rules
and regulations.26
a. The holder of a club license shall be entitled, subject to rules and
regulations, to sell, only to bona fide club members and their guests,
alcoholic beverages intended for immediate consumption on the
licensed premises.
b. Club licenses limited; hotels and motels excepted.
1. Club licenses shall be issued only to such corporations, associations
and organizations as are operated for benevolent, charitable,
fraternal, social, religious, recreational, athletic or similar
purposes and not for private gain, and such licenses shall be
subject to the qualifications, conditions and restrictions imposed by
the State Commissioner of Alcoholic Beverage Control; provided,
however, that no license shall be granted hereafter unless and until
the number of such licenses issued and outstanding shall be less
than 12, except as hereinafter set forth.
2. Nothing contained in paragraph b, 1 above shall prevent the
issuance in the Town of Kearny of a new license to a person who
operates a hotel or motel containing at least 100 sleeping rooms or
who may herinafter construct and establish a new hotel or motel
containing at least 100 sleeping rooms; provided, however, that the
renewal or transfer of such a license must be renewed for or
transferred to a hotel or motel containing at least 100 sleeping
rooms.
c. Each application for a club license shall set forth the names and
addresses of all officers, trustees, directors or other governing officials,
together with the names and addresses of all the members of the
applying club, corporation or association.
d. When the number of club licenses issued and outstanding shall be less
than 12, except as provided in paragraph b, 2 above, additional licenses
may be granted, but only such numbers that the number of club
licenses issued and outstanding shall not exceed 12.
§ 6-3.8 KEARNY CODE § 6-3.11
AO:284
§ 6-3.11. Duration of License; Prorated Fees. [1973 Code § 49-11]
All licenses shall be for a term of one year from the first day of July in
each year, and all fees shall be paid in advance, upon presentation of the
application; provided, however, that any licensee, except a seasonal retail
consumption licensee, who shall voluntarily surrender his license and who
shall not have committed any violation of this chapter or of any rule or
regulation, and who shall have paid all taxes, setoffs or counterclaims that
may have become due to the State of New Jersey or to the Town of Kearny,
shall be entitled, after deduction of 50% of the fee as a surrender fee, to the
prorated fee for the unexpired term.
§ 6-3.12. Transfer of License. [1973 Code § 49-12; Ord. No. 1997-17
§ 1]
§ 6-3.13. Number of Licenses Limited. [1973 Code § 49-13]
a. No plenary retail consumption license shall be transferred to another
premises or granted to a premises within a distance of 400 feet from an
existing licensed premises covered by a plenary retail consumption
license, unless (1) the owner(s) of the existing plenary retail
consumption license waives enforcement of this provision; (2) the
plenary retail consumption license will apply to premises used as a
restaurant serving alcoholic beverages as defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1t;
and (3) the Town Council waives the 400-foot distance provision after
providing interested parties with an opportunity to be heard.
b. No plenary retail distribution license shall be transferred to another
premises or granted to a premises within a distance of 400 feet from an
existing licensed premises covered by a plenary retail distribution
license.
c. The provisions of paragraph a and b of this subsection shall not apply to
the renewal of licenses which are issued and outstanding, nor to the
renewal of such licenses hereafter transferred to another person,
provided that the place of business or premises shall remain the same
as set forth in the license issued and outstanding.
d. The provisions of paragraph a and b of this subsection shall not apply to
the first transfer of any such license to another premises, provided that
the premises to which the business is transferred shall be within 600
feet to be measured in the normal way that a pedestrian would properly
walk from the nearest entrance of the premises to the nearest entrance
of the premises sought to be licensed.
a. No plenary retail consumption license shall be issued in the Town of
Kearny unless and until the combined total number of such licenses
existing in the Town is fewer than one for each 3,000 of its population as
shown by the last Federal census.
26.Editor's Note: Refer to Section 6-1, Purpose.
§ 6-3.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-3.13
AO:285
§ 6-4. REGULATION OF LICENSES.
§ 6-4.1. Hours of Sale; Weekdays. [1973 Code § 49-16]
No licensee shall sell, serve or deliver or allow, or permit the sale, service
or delivery of any alcoholic beverage or permit the consumption of any
alcoholic beverage on a licensed premises on weekdays between 2:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m. of the following weekday morning.
The above mentioned hours shall be construed to mean Eastern Standard
Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time, whichever time shall be in effect
within the Town of Kearny.
§ 6-4.2. Sundays. [1973 Code § 49-16]
No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, or permit the sale, service and
delivery or consumption of any alcoholic beverage on a Sunday between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
§ 6-4.3. New Year's Day. [1973 Code § 49-16]
No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, or permit the sale, service or
delivery of any alcoholic beverage or allow the consumption of any alcoholic
beverage upon the licensed premises between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. on New Year's Day when it falls on a weekday, or between the
hours of 4:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon when New Year's Day falls on a Sunday.
§ 6-4.4. Sales Prohibited Certain Hours on Day Following Election
Day. [1973 Code § 49-16]
No licensee shall sell, serve, deliver or allow, or permit the sale, service or
delivery of any alcoholic beverage or allow the consumption of any alcoholic
beverage upon the licensed premises on the day following Primary Election
Day or General Election Day, between the hours of 4:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
§ 6-4.5. Service in Back Rooms. [1973 Code § 49-19]
No person shall be served in any back room or side room which is not open
to the use of the public generally, except that in hotels guests may be served
in their rooms or in private or public dining rooms, and provided also that
this prohibition shall not apply to club licenses.
b. No new plenary retail distribution license shall be issued in the Town of
Kearny unless and until the number of such licenses existing in the
Town is fewer than one for each 7,500 of its population as shown by the
last Federal census.
c. Provisions of this section shall not apply to the renewal of licenses
which are issued and outstanding, nor shall the provisions apply to the
transfer of such licenses nor to the renewal of licenses so transferred.
§ 6-3.13 KEARNY CODE § 6-4.6
AO:286
§ 6-4.6. Location of Premises Restricted. [1973 Code § 49-20]
No license shall be issued for the sale of alcoholic beverages within 200
feet of any church or public school or private schoolhouse not conducted
for pecuniary profit, except to manufacturers, wholesalers, hotels, clubs
and fraternal organizations which own or are actually in possession of the
licensed premises at the time of the effectiveness of the aforesaid act, the
200 feet to be measured in the normal way that a pedestrian would properly
walk from the nearest entrance of the church or school to the nearest
entrance of the premises sought to be licensed; provided, however, that this
prohibition may be waived at the issuance or renewal of such license by
the duly authorized Governing Body or authority of such school or church,
and such waiver shall be effective until the date of the next renewal of
the license by the duly authorized Governing Body; and provided also that
this prohibition shall not apply to the renewal of the license where no such
school or church was located within the prohibited distance of the licensed
premises at the time of the issuance of the license, or as otherwise excepted
by the provisions of the Act.
§ 6-4.7. Procurement of Illicit Beverage. [1973 Code § 49-21]
Any person, except an officer or other person authorized by and acting
pursuant to instructions from such officer, so doing in the course of and for
the purpose of enforcing said act, who shall knowingly purchase, receive
or procure any illicit beverage, on conviction thereof shall be subject to a
fine of not less than $10 and not more than $100 or imprisonment for not
less than two days and not more than 10 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
§ 6-4.8. Access of Light and View from Exterior. [1973 Code § 49-15]
All premises in which alcoholic beverages shall be sold or otherwise
dispensed, excepting those which hold club licenses, shall have reasonable
access of light from the public street, and such premises shall be deemed
to have reasonable access of light when a normal-sized adult can, on
inspection from the exterior, view the interior of the licensed premises.
§ 6-4.9. Closing Provisions. [1973 Code § 49-16B,C]
a. During the hours sales of alcoholic beverages are prohibited, all
licensed premises except those for which plenary retail distribution
licenses are issued and on which other mercantile business is
conducted, and those for which plenary retail consumption licenses are
issued and on which a bona fide restaurant is conducted, shall be
closed.
b. The hours above referred to shall be the time officially in effect in the
Town of Kearny.
§ 6-4.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-4.10
AO:287
§ 6-4.10. Sales to Certain Persons. [1973 § 49-19]
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, directly
or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to any intoxicated person or person
under the legal age, or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on
any licensed premises by any of the above-named persons.
§ 6-4.11. Enforcement. [1973 Code § 49-3.1; Ord. No. 1996-0-17]
The Investigation Division of the Kearny Police Department is hereby
designated as the Alcoholic Beverage Control Investigation and
Enforcement Unit and is hereby authorized and empowered to investigate,
inspect, search or examine any licensed premises as may be necessary
for the Alcoholic Beverage Control Laws, and rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder.
§ 6-4.12. Identification Card Required for Licensee and Agents,
Bartenders, Waiters and Waitresses and Other Employees. [1973
Code § 49-13.1; Ord. No. 2002-O-54A §§ 1, 2]
§ 6-4.13. Fingerprinting and Photograph; Fees. [1973 Code
§ 49-13.2]
Upon notification by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Investigation and
Enforcement Unit to the licensee, agent, bartender, waiter, waitress,
barmaid and/or other employee that his application has been approved,
that individual shall report immediately to the Kearny Police Department
and permit the Police Department to take an impression of the thumb
and fingertips of both hands. At the time of taking of the fingerprints, the
individual shall also permit the Police Department to take a photograph of
the individual which photograph shall be attached to an identification card,
which shall be issued to the individual and shall be on file on the licensed
premises where he is employed so that it can be exhibited on demand at any
time. Such identification card shall expire one year from the date of issuing,
at which time new photographs shall be taken and an updated identification
a. Every licensee holding a plenary retail consumption license or a plenary
retail distribution license, and the agents, bartenders, waiters,
waitresses, barmaids, or other employees of the licensee, shall make
application to the Alcoholic Beverage Control Investigation and
Enforcement Unit for an identification card, which card shall be issued
only upon completion of the application form provided by the Alcoholic
Beverage Control Investigation and Enforcement Unit. The application
shall require complete answers in writing as to the identity, character,
general experience and other pertinent information with regard to the
licensee, his agent, bartender, waiter or other employees.
b. The provisions of paragraph a shall not apply to any person, whether
designated as an employee, independent contractor or otherwise,
whose sole function on the licensed premises is to provide
entertainment for the patrons.
§ 6-4.10 KEARNY CODE § 6-4.13
AO:288
card issued to the licensee, agent, bartender, waiter and/or other employee.
Each individual shall be required to pay a fee of $10 per year for each
identification card. In the event at the discretion of the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Investigation and Enforcement Unit the licensee, agent, bartender,
waiter, waitress, barmaid or other employee shall physically change in
appearance so that identification card photograph no longer depicts their
appearance, the licensee, agent, bartender, waiter, waitress, barmaid or
other employee shall be required to have a new photograph taken for which
the cardholder shall pay a fee of $5.
§ 6-4.14. Compliance by Licensee Holding a Club License. [1973
Code § 49-13.3]
Every licensee holding a club license shall be required to have its president
and bar manager comply with the provisions of subsections 6-4.12 and
6-4.13. Further, any club licensee shall notify the Alcoholic Beverage
Control Investigation and Enforcement Unit as to any change in the
individuals serving in the capacity as president and/or bar manager.
§ 6-4.15. Employee to Conform to Requirements. [1973 Code
§ 49-13.4]
No licensee shall engage or employ any agent, bartender, waiter or other
employee in connection with the business of the licensee until and unless
such person shall have conformed to the requirements of this chapter.
§ 6-5. REVOCATION OF LICENSE. [1973 Code § 49-14]
§ 6-6. PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL AGE.
§ 6-6.1. Restriction on Entering Room Containing a Bar. [1973 Code
§ 49-17]
Persons under the legal age shall not be allowed in any room in which any
bar is located, unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
a. Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable Statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State
Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
b. Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice of
charges preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable
opportunity for hearing and such suspension or revocation shall carry
the penalties and prohibitions provided for in said act.
c. Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
§ 6-4.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-6.2
AO:289
§ 6-6.2. Unlawful to Enter Premises to Purchase Alcoholic
Beverages. [1973 Code § 49-23; Ord. No. 12-22-82]
It shall be unlawful in the Town of Kearny for any person under the legal age
for purchasing alcoholic beverages to enter any premises licensed for the
sale of alcoholic beverages for the purpose of purchasing or having served
or delivered to him or her any alcoholic beverage.
§ 6-6.3. Unlawful to Have Others Purchase for Them. [1973 Code
§ 49-24; Ord. No. 12-22-82]
It shall be unlawful in the Town of Kearny for any person under the legal age
to purchase or attempt to purchase, or to have another person purchase for
him or her, any alcoholic beverage in the Town of Kearny.
§ 6-6.4. Proof of Age. [1973 Code § 49-25; Ord. No. 12-22-82]
It shall be the duty of any licensee or any of his employees, if in doubt
as to the age of any person desiring to purchase alcoholic beverages, to
ascertain, by reasonable means, the age of such person before selling,
serving or delivering alcoholic beverages to such person.
§ 6-6.5. Misrepresenting Age. [1973 Code § 49-26; Ord. No.
12-22-82]
It shall be unlawful in the Town of Kearny for any person under the legal
age to misrepresent or misstate his or her age for the purpose of inducing
a licensee or any of his employees to sell, serve or deliver any alcoholic
beverage to him or her.
§ 6-6.6. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 49-30]
It shall be unlawful for:
a. A person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages to
enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for
the purpose of purchasing, or having served or delivered to him or her,
any alcoholic beverage; or
b. A person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages to
consume any alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the retail sale
of alcoholic beverages, or to purchase, attempt to purchase or have
another purchase for him any alcoholic beverage; or
c. Any person to enter any premises licensed for retail sale of alcoholic
beverages for the purpose of purchasing, or to purchase alcoholic
beverages, for another person who does not because of his age have
right to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this subsection
shall be deemed and adjudged to be a disorderly person, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.
§ 6-6.2 KEARNY CODE § 6-6.6
AO:290
Chapter 7
TRAFFIC
§ 7-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 7-1.1. Words and Phrases. [1973 Code § 132-1]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 7-1.2. Official Time Standard. [New]
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time as may be in
current use.
§ 7-2. AUTHORIZATION FOR THE CLOSING OF ANY STREET. [New;
Ord. No. 1988-(O)-37 § I]
In addition, the Court shall suspend the person's license to operate a
motor vehicle for six months or prohibit the person from obtaining a
license to operate a motor vehicle in this State for six months beginning
on the date he becomes eligible to obtain a license or on the date
of conviction, whichever is later. In addition to the general penalty
prescribed for an offense, the Court may require any person under the
legal age who violates this Act to participate in an alcohol education or
treatment program authorized by the Department of Health for a period
not to exceed the maximum period of confinement prescribed by law
for the offense for which the individual has been convicted. (N.J.S.A.
33:1-81)
a. The Mayor or, in the event of his/her absence, disability or inability to
act, the Chief of the Police Department, or his designee, is hereby
authorized to provide by regulation for the closing of any street, or
portion thereof, to motor vehicle traffic and/or parking on any day or
days during specified hours whenever he/she finds that such closing is
necessary for the preservation of the public safety, health or welfare, or
for a special event authorized by the Mayor and Council of the Town.
For purposes of this subsection, a special event includes, but is not
limited to, parades, processions, street festivals, street carnivals, street
fairs, road races, neighborhood block parties, whether or not such
event occurs on the street or adjacent to the street.
b. Any regulations promulgated by the Mayor or the Chief of Police and in
accordance with paragraph a above, shall provide for the posting of
proper warning signs of such closing on any street or portion thereof
during the time the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
§ 6-6.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-2
AO:291
§ 7-2.1. Closing Streets in School Areas. [Ord. No. 2000-0-41; Ord.
No. 2009-26; Ord. No. 2014-4]
§ 7-3. TOW-AWAY. [New]
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any Police
Officer may provide for the removal of that vehicle. The owner shall bear
c. Any violation of this regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
d. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
a. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.9, the following portions of streets shall
be closed to the use of through vehicular traffic when the schools
adjoining such streets are in session and for two hours thereafter:
Name of Street Boundaries School
Beech Street From Oakwood Avenue to
Midland Avenue
Lincoln
Devon Street From King Street to Garfield
Avenue
Kearny High
Ivy Street [Ord.
No. 2014-4]
Ivy Street from Bergen Avenue
South to the dead end of Ivy
Street
Franklin
Rose Street From Belgrove Drive east to
Alexander Avenue
Washington
Stewart Avenue From Kearny Avenue west to
Grand Place
Roosevelt
Wilson Avenue From Davis Avenue east to
Schuyler Avenue
Franklin
b. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph a., the said streets may be
used during the said hours of ingress and egress to the adjacent schools
and by pupils of the adjacent schools for recreational purposes under
proper supervision.
c. The Police Department shall post proper warning signs in the said
streets indicating the street is closed and the purpose thereof. As to the
Ivy Street closure, pedestrian warning signs and school crossing signs
shall be placed on Bergen Avenue, both East and West between
Schuyler Avenue and Davis Avenue.
d. Violation of this subsection shall be punishable pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-215.
§ 7-2 KEARNY CODE § 7-3
AO:292
the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 7-4. PENALTIES. [1973 Code § 132-5]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 7-5. EFFECT OF CHAPTER. [1973 Code § 132-4]
If any part or parts of this chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 7-6. REPEAL. [1973 Code § 132-3]
All former traffic ordinances of the Town of Kearny are hereby repealed, and
all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, except that this repeal shall
not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any
act done or committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior
to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 7-7. PARKING.
§ 7-7.1. Regulations Not Exclusive. [1973 Code § 132-6]
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other, more restrictive, provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey Statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 7-7.2. Parking Prohibited During State of Emergency. [Ord. No.
1996-O-46; New]
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his/her absence,
the ranking Police Officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
conditions, accidents, road construction, fire or public celebrations
dictate or require avoidance of hazards or other conditions which
interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY
NO PARKING signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the
operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the
posting of the signs.
§ 7-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7.2
AO:293
§ 7-7.3. Temporary Parking Prohibition for Snow Plowing and
Removal. [1973 Code § 132-42; Ord. No. 1996-O-46; New; Ord. No.
1998-O-4 §§ I, II; Ord. No. 1999-O-29; Ord. No. 2000-O-05; Ord. No.
2010-21 § 1; Ord. No. 2013-40 § 1; Ord. No. 2013-43 § 1]
b. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
c. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this
subsection shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and
proper regulation of traffic and any Police Officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the
removal and storage which may result from such removal, before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
a. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the street or highway, an emergency shall exist and no vehicles shall be
parked on the following streets or highways or portions thereof listed
below.
The parking prohibitions listed below shall remain in effect after the
snow has ceased, until the streets have been plowed significantly, and
to the extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of
traffic.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this
ordinance shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and
proper regulation of traffic and any Police Officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the
removal and storage which may result from such removal before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
c. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon signs being
erected as required by law.
d. Unless other penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of this subsection or any supplement
thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
1. Primary Snow Emergency Streets. Whenever snow has fallen and
the accumulation is such that it covers the street or highway, no
vehicle shall be parked on the following main traveled or major
roadways or portions thereof which are hereby designated
"Primary Snow Emergency Streets:"
Name of Street Side Location
Belgrove Drive Both From Passaic Avenue to the dead
end north of Locust Avenue
Bergen Avenue Both From Passaic Avenue to the
Kearny Public Works Facility
§ 7-7.2 KEARNY CODE § 7-7.3
AO:294
Name of Street Side Location
Davis Avenue Both From Midland Avenue to Dukes
Street
Depot Square Both Includes Forest Street from
Midland Avenue to the railroad
tracks; Elm Street from Midland
Avenue to the railroad tracks
Garfield Place
Elm Street Both From Midland Avenue to Belleville
Turnpike
Fish House Road Both From Central Avenue to Route 7
Forest Street From Seeley Avenue to Stewart
Avenue
Johnston Avenue Both From Kearny Avenue to Passaic
Avenue
Kearny Avenue Both Entire length
Laurel Avenue Both From Schuyler Avenue to Passaic
Avenue
Midland Avenue Both From Belgrove Drive to Schuyler
Avenue
Newark/Jersey
City Turnpike
Both From Schuyler Avenue to Route 7
North Midland
Avenue
South From Midland Avenue to Passaic
Avenue
Passaic Avenue Both From the Kearny/East Newark
municipal line to Route 7
Quincy Avenue Both From Belgrove Drive to Schuyler
Avenue
Schuyler Avenue East From the Newark/Jersey City
Turnpike to Route 7
Schuyler Avenue West From Dukes Street to Route 7
Seeley Avenue Both From Kearny Avenue to Schuyler
Avenue
South Midland
Avenue
Both From Passaic Avenue to Belgrove
Drive
Stewart Avenue Both From Grand Place to Schuyler
Avenue
West Bennett
Avenue
From Kearny Avenue to Passaic
Avenue
Woodland Avenue Both From Kearny Avenue to Belgrove
Drive
§ 7-7.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-7.3
AO:295
2. Secondary Snow Emergency Streets. Whenever the accumulation
of fallen snow creates hazardous conditions which would endanger
the safety and welfare of the community, after the completion of the
clearing of the "Primary Snow Emergency Streets," the Chief of
Police or his designees shall determine whether to commence
clearing the accumulation of snow from those streets or portions
thereof that have been designated and posted as "Secondary Snow
Emergency Streets."
Whenever the decision is made to clear the "Secondary Snow
Emergency Streets," a minimum of four hours' prior notice will
be given that all parked vehicles must be removed from those
designated posted streets until these streets have been sufficiently
cleared to the extent that parking thereon will not interfere with
the normal flow of traffic.
Notification to the public regarding the removal of all parked
vehicles from the designated "Secondary Snow Emergency Streets"
may include but will not be limited to "public address system
announcements" and a published snow emergency "Hotline"
telephone number.
The following roadways or portions thereof shall be designated as
"Secondary Snow Emergency Streets:"
Name of Street Side Location
Afton Street [Ord.
No. 2013-40 § 1;
Ord. No. 2013-43
§ 1]
Both From Belgrove Drive to Passaic
Avenue
Beech Street Both From Oakwood Avenue to the
railroad cut
Chestnut Street Both From Hoyt Street to Dukes Street
Both From Midland Avenue to Columbia
Avenue
Devon Street Both The entire length, from Johnson
Avenue to the Bellevue Turnpike
Dukes Street Both From Kearny Avenue to Devon
Street
Elm Street Both From Garfield Avenue to Wilson
Avenue
Forest Street Both From Stewart Avenue to Midland
Avenue
Garfield Avenue Both From Kearny Avenue to Davis
Avenue
§ 7-7.3 KEARNY CODE § 7-7.3
AO:296
§ 7-7.4. No Parking on South Side of Afton Street When Adjacent
Field is Snow-Covered. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-75]
Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
War Memorial Park and the adjacent property and slope sufficiently to
permit sleigh riding thereon, thereby substantially increasing the number
of children in the area, the Chief of the Police Department, or his designee,
is hereby directed and authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the
posting of Emergency No Parking signs on the south side of Afton Street
between Belgrove Drive and Passaic Avenue to protect against the traffic
hazards that occur from the presence on Afton Street of the increased
pedestrian traffic. Notification that emergency No Parking signs are being
or will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle
which has been parked prior to the posting of the sign. That owner or
operator shall then have one hour after posting or one hour after daybreak if
posting occurs after 10:00 p.m. to remove his vehicle after which his vehicle
may be towed and shall be subject to the penalties provided for in these
ordinances.
§ 7-8. CONSTRUCTION ZONE: TRAFFIC CONTROLS FOR STREET
AND HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OPERATION
Name of Street Side Location
Halstead Street Both From Belgrove Drive to Kearny
Avenue
Highland Avenue Both From Johnson Avenue to Wilson
Avenue
Hoyt Street Both From Kearny Avenue to Devon
Street
King Street Both From Devon Street to Davis
Avenue
Liberty Street Both From Devon Street to Brighton
Avenue
Oakwood Avenue Both From Kearny Avenue to Beech
Street
Patterson Street Both From Belgrove Drive to Highland
Avenue
Spruce Street Northerly From Schuyler Avenue to the
existing restricted parking area in
front of the Spruce Terrace
Apartments at 21 Spruce Street
Wilson Avenue Both From Davis Avenue to Schuyler
Avenue
Both From Belgrove Drive to Kearny
Avenue
§ 7-7.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-8
AO:297
AND ADOPTION OF MANUAL ON UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL
DEVICES FOR STREETS AND HIGHWAYS. (Municipal Roads Only)
§ 7-8.1. Controls Established for Construction Zone. [New]
The Governing Body hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic
control occur and traffic must be moved through or around street
construction, maintenance operations, and utility work, above and below
ground which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the normal
flow of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can become dangerous
when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the public health,
safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and
regulations directed to the safety and expeditious movement of traffic
through construction and maintenance zones and to provide safety for the
work force performing these operations.
The Town of Kearny, in the County of Hudson, State of New Jersey, does
hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
hereafter known as M.U.T.C.D., except as hereby supplemented and
amended, as it controls and regulates whenever construction maintenance
operations or utility work obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Any person,
contractor, or utility, who fails to comply with the provisions of M.U.T.C.D.
while performing such work is in violation of this section.
§ 7-8.2. Pre-Construction Meeting. [New]
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of
a public utility agreement, wishing to conduct work on, under or above
the roadway to contact the Police Department in order to arrange a preconstruction
meeting in order to submit plans for the safe movement of
traffic during such period of construction work. Any person, contractor or
utility who fails to comply with this section prior to the start of such work
or whose plans are not approved by the Police Department is in violation of
this section.
§ 7-8.3. Hazardous Conditions. [New]
The person, contractor, or utility shall provide the Police Department with
at least two emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case of
emergency problems at the construction or maintenance site prior to the
start of any work. If for any reason emergency contact cannot be reached,
or if the emergency contact person does not respond to the call from
the Police Department to correct a hazardous condition, the Borough may
respond to correct such hazardous condition. The reasonable fees for such
emergency service by the Borough shall be charged to the person,
contractor, or utility for such condition.
§ 7-8.4. Hours. [New]
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations, or utility work on
any roadway in the Town before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. This
§ 7-8 KEARNY CODE § 7-8.4
AO:298
time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00
p.m. by the officer in charge of the Police Department. If it is determined by
the officer in charge that the construction or maintenance operations prior
to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay traffic or cause a
safety or health hazard, the work shall then be permitted only between 9:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
§ 7-8.5. Road Closing and Detours. [New]
Road closing and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Police Department.
§ 7-8.6. Traffic Directors. [New]
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Police Department that same is necessary to
provide for the safety and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 7-8.7. Stop Work. [New]
The Police Department shall have the authority to stop work, including
the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material within the street
right-of-way, back filling of open excavations and/or other related work, in
order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any violation of this
section.
§ 7-8.8. Site Preparation. [New]
It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicle or equipment
are to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk or until all construction, signs,
lights, devices and pavement markings are installed.
§ 7-8.9. Violations and Penalties. [New]
Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof for a first offense pay a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $500 and/or be imprisoned in the County jail for a term
not exceeding 90 days. For a second offense, upon conviction thereof, pay a
fine of not less than $250 and/or be imprisoned in the County jail for a term
not exceeding 90 days.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 7-8.10. Inconsistent Regulations. [New]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this section are hereby repealed to the extent of any such
inconsistency.
§ 7-8.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-8.11
AO:299
§ 7-8.11. Approval by the Commissioner of Transportation. [New]
This section shall take effect after approval by the Commissioner of
Transportation 20 days after passage and publication as prescribed by law.
§ 7-9. ANGLE PARKING. [Ord. No. 2000-O-29 § 6; Ord. No. 2014-48]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated for
Angle Parking at an angle so indicated.
Name of
Street
Side Angle Location
Cammann
Drive
North 30° 2,130 feet east of Schuyler Avenue
and extending 260 feet westerly
therefrom
Hoyt Street South 30° Between Devon Street and Kearny
Avenue [Ord. No. 2014-48]
Garafola Place South 30° Between Elm Street and Forest
Street [Ord. No. 2014-48]
§ 7-9A. HEAD ON PARKING. [Ord. No. 2017-26]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated for
head-on parking only:
Name of Street Location Number of head-on
Parking Spaces
William Street South of Wilkinson Street
at dead end.
3
These parking spaces shall be striped so as to avoid horizontal parking and
a sign shall be placed where this ordinance is effective.
These locations shall be subject to Town Code Section 7-12, Parking
Prohibited for Street Cleaning, and subsection 7-7.3, Temporary Parking
Prohibition for Snow Plowing and Removal.
§ 7-10. STOPPING OR STANDING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN
HOURS ON CERTAIN STREETS. [New; Ord. No. 1999-O-29]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified on any
day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts
of streets described, except where other parking regulations have been
provided for.
§ 7-8.11 KEARNY CODE § 7-10
AO:300
Name of
Street
Side Location
Central Avenue Both From U.S. Truck Route 1&9 to Fish House
Road except for a section along the east side
from a point 220 feet south of the curbline of
Pennsylvania Avenue to a point 280 feet
southerly therefrom.
§ 7-11. PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS. [1973
Code § 132-10; § 125-35; Ord. No. 9-26-95; Ord. No. 1999-O-29]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit between the
hours listed on any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any
of the streets or parts of streets described, except where other parking
regulations have been provided for.
Name of
Street Sides
Time Limit
(hours) Hours Location
Belgrove
Drive
East 3 8:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
Between Rose Street
and Paterson Street
Bergen
Avenue
South 2 All Between the west
curb of Forest Street
and the east curb of
Elm Street
Central
Avenue
Both 1/2 7:00 a.m. -
7:00 p.m.
Running southerly
from southerly line of
Lincoln Highway to
the line of the New
Jersey Central
Railroad Company
Central
Avenue
East 1/2 Daily From a point 220
feet south of the
southerly curbline of
Pennsylvania Avenue
and to a point 280
feet southerly
therefrom
Grant Avenue Both 3 All From the south
curbline of Johnston
Avenue in a southerly
direction to the north
line of lands of the
Newark branch of
the Erie Railroad Co.
§ 7-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-11
AO:301
Name of
Street Sides
Time Limit
(hours) Hours Location
Hackensack
Avenue
Both 1 All From the Lincoln
Highway north to
Third Street
Kearny
Avenue27
Both 1 8:00 a.m. -
10:00 p.m.
From the south curb
of the County
highway, commonly
known as Belleville
Turnpike, south to
the southerly line of
the Town of Kearny
at the bridge
crossing the Paterson
Branch of the Erie
Railroad
Laurel Avenue Both 3 All From the east
curbline of Elm
Street in an easterly
direction to the west
curbline of Schuyler
Avenue
Lincoln
Avenue
Both 3 All Between Belgrove
Drive and Johnston
Avenue
Marshall
Street
Both 2 8:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
Between Passaic
Avenue and Watt
Avenue
Midland
Avenue Post
Office
15 min. In front of the
Midland Avenue Post
Office
Sheridan
Avenue
Both 3 All Between Belgrove
Drive and Johnston
Avenue
§ 7-11A. PARKING RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN DRIVEWAY
EXTENSIONS. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-67 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2012-36]
a. Vehicles may be parked on the driveway extensions to 56 Madison
Avenue, 60 Madison Avenue, 6 Bayard Avenue and 38 Webster Avenue.
b. At no time shall a parked vehicle block the pedestrian sidewalk.
27.Editor's Note: See Section 7-38, Regulations for Use of Parking Meters.
§ 7-11 KEARNY CODE § 7-12
AO:302
§ 7-12. PARKING PROHIBITED FOR STREET CLEANING. [1973
Code § 132-11; Ord. No. 1996-(O)-31; Ord. No. 1998-(O)-9 § I; Ord.
No. 1999-(O)-29; Ord. No. 1999-(O)-31;Ord. No. 2002-(O)-16 § 1;
Ord. No. 2004-(O)-30; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-36; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-63;
Ord. No. 2007-(O)-11 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-56; Ord. No. 2014-21 § 1]
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor vehicle upon any
street between the specified hours and days described.
a. Mondays.
Street Sides Hours
Kearny Avenue West 7:00 a.m. — 8:00 a.m.
Kingsland Avenue East 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Ivy Street East 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Hickory Street East 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Davis Avenue East 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Elm Street East 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Devon Street East 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Chestnut Street East 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Beech Street East 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Argyle Place East 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Rutherford Place East 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Morgan Place East 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Clinton Avenue East 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Livingston Avenue East 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Hamilton Avenue East 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Jefferson Avenue East 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Madison Avenue East 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Webster Avenue East 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Ross Lane East 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Maple Street East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Windsor Street East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Highland Avenue East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Alexander Avenue East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Franklin Avenue East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Lafayette Place East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Brighton Avenue East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Trinity Place East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
§ 7-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-12
AO:303
Street Sides Hours
John Street East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Grant Avenue East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Sheridan Avenue East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Clark Avenue East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Lincoln Avenue East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Belgrove Drive East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Hillcrest Avenue East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Fairview Place East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Grand Place East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Pleasant Place East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Terrace Place East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Alpine Place East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
William Street East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Park Place East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Hillside Avenue East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Laurel Hill Terrace East 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Passaic Avenue Both 10:00 a.m. — 12:00 noon
Schuyler Avenue East 8:00 a.m. — 10:00 a.m.
Schuyler Avenue West 1:00 p.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Newark-Jersey City Turnpike North 8:00 a.m. — 9:00 a.m.
Newark-Jersey City Turnpike South 1:00 p.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Parking lot area adjacent to
Dowd Playground between
Devon Terrace and Hoyt
Street
Entire lot 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Parking lot area to the rear of
the Kearny Police facility at
the intersection of Grand
Avenue and Belgrove Drive
Entire lot 12:00 p.m. — 4:00 p.m.
b. Tuesdays.
Street Sides Hours
Kearny Avenue East 7:00 a.m. — 8:00 a.m.
Seeley Avenue North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Bennett Avenue North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
West Bennett Avenue North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
§ 7-12 KEARNY CODE § 7-12
AO:304
Street Sides Hours
Stuyvesant Avenue North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Bayard Avenue North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Schuyler Court North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Arlington Place North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Shepherd Place North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Prospect Place North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Stewart Avenue North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Howell Place North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Magnolia Avenue North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Linden Avenue North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Laurel Avenue North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Washington Avenue North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Columbia Avenue North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Pierce Place North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Midland Avenue except from
Kearny Avenue to Chestnut
Street
North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Midland Avenue from Kearny
Avenue to Chestnut Street
North 7:00 a.m. — 8:00 a.m.
Locust Avenue North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
North Midland Avenue North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
South Midland Avenue North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Stevenson Place North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
New Lawn Avenue North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Pavonia Avenue North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Fuller Place North 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Oakwood Avenue North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Quincy Avenue North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Grove Street North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Rutland Avenue North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Butler Place North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Harding Terrace North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Wilkinson Terrace North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
King Street North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Liberty Street North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
§ 7-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-12
AO:305
Street Sides Hours
Peden Terrace North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Halstead Street North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Garfield Avenue North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Afton Street North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Bergen Avenue North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Wilson Avenue North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Devon Terrace North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Hoyt Street North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Tappan Street North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Archibald Terrace North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Patterson Street North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Rose Street North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Dukes Street North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Woodland Avenue North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Johnston Avenue North 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Central Avenue Both 1:00 p.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Fish House Road Both 1:00 p.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Parking lot area adjacent to
Harvey Field off of First
Avenue
Entire lot 8:00 a.m. — 12:00 p.m.
Parking lot area adjacent to
Brighton Avenue playground
Bergen Avenue and Wilson
Avenue [Ord. No. 2012-56]
Entire lot 12:00 p.m. — 4:00 p.m.
c. Wednesdays.
Street Sides Hours
Kingsland Avenue West 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Ivy Street West 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Hickory Street West 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Davis Avenue except between
Garfield Avenue to King Street
West 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Elm Street West 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Devon Street West 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Chestnut Street West 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Beech Street West 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
§ 7-12 KEARNY CODE § 7-12
AO:306
Street Sides Hours
Argyle Place West 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Rutherford Place West 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Morgan Place West 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Clinton Avenue West 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Livingston Avenue West 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Hamilton Avenue West 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Jefferson Avenue West 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Madison Avenue West 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Webster Avenue West 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Ross Lane West 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Maple Street West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Windsor Street West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Highland Avenue West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Franklin Place West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Alexander Avenue West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Lafayette Place West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Brighton Place West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Trinity Place West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
John Street West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Grant Avenue West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Sheridan Avenue West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Clark Avenue West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Lincoln Avenue West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Belgrove Drive West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Hillcrest Road West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Laurel Hill Terrace West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Fairview Place West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Grand Place West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Pleasant Place West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Terrace Place West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Alpine Place West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
William Street West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Park Place West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Hillside Place West 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
§ 7-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-12
AO:307
Street Sides Hours
Forest Street [Ord. No.
2014-21 § 1]
East Noon to 4:00 p.m.
Beech Street between Laurel
Avenue and Columbia Avenue
[Ord. No. 2018-36]
East 4:00 p.m. — 5:00 p.m.
Chestnut Street between
Laurel Avenue and Columbia
Avenue [Ord. No. 2018-36]
West 4:00 p.m. — 5:00 p.m.
d. Thursdays.
Street Sides Hours
Kearny Avenue West 7:00 a.m. — 8:00 a.m.
Seeley Avenue South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Bennett Avenue South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
West Bennett Avenue South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Stuyvesant Avenue South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Bayard Avenue South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Schuyler Court South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Arlington Place South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Shepherd Place South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Prospect Place South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Stewart Avenue South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Howell Place South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Magnolia Avenue South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Linden Avenue South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Laurel Avenue South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Washington Avenue South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Columbia Avenue South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Pierce Place South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Midland Avenue except from
Chestnut Street to Belgrove
Drive
South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Midland Avenue from
Chestnut Street to Belgrove
Drive
South 7:00 a.m. — 8:00 a.m.
Locust Avenue South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
North Midland Avenue South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
§ 7-12 KEARNY CODE § 7-12
AO:308
Street Sides Hours
South Midland Avenue South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Stevenson Place South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
New Lawn Avenue South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Pavonia Avenue South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Fuller Place South 8:00 a.m. — 11:00 a.m.
Oakwood Avenue South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Quincy Avenue South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Grove Street South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Rutland Avenue South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Butler Place South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Harding Terrace South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Wilkinson Terrace South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
King Street South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Liberty Street South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Peden Terrace South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Halstead Street South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Garfield Avenue South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Afton Street South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Bergen Avenue South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Wilson Avenue South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Devon Terrace South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Hoyt Street South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Tappan Street South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Archibald Terrace South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Patterson Street South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Rose Street South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Dukes Street South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Woodland Avenue South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Johnston Avenue South 11:00 a.m. — 3:00 p.m.
Forest Street [Ord. No.
2014-21 § 1]
West Noon to 4:00 p.m.
Beech Street Between Laurel
Avenue and Columbia Avenue
[Ord. No. 2018-36]
West 4:00 p.m. — 5:00 p.m.
§ 7-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-12
AO:309
Street Sides Hours
Chestnut Street between
Laurel Avenue and Columbia
Avenue [Ord. No. 2018-36]
East 4:00 p.m. — 5:00 p.m.
e. Fridays.
Street Sides Hours
Kearny Avenue East 7:00 a.m. — 8:00 a.m.
f. Saturdays.
Street Sides Hours
Greenfield Avenue East 8:00 a.m. — 10:00 a.m.
Sanford Avenue East 8:00 a.m. — 10:00 a.m.
Ogden Avenue East 8:00 a.m. — 10:00 a.m.
Essex Place East 8:00 a.m. — 10:00 a.m.
Ann Street North 8:00 a.m. — 10:00 a.m.
Radley Street North 8:00 a.m. — 10:00 a.m.
Greenfield Avenue West 8:00 a.m. — 12:00 noon
Sanford Avenue West 10:00 a.m. — 12:00 noon
Ogden Avenue West 10:00 a.m. — 12:00 noon
Essex Place West 10:00 a.m. — 12:00 noon
Ann Street South 10:00 a.m. — 12:00 noon
Radley Street South 10:00 a.m. — 12:00 noon
g. Street Cleaning Near Schools and School Grounds:
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Rose Street North Monday Noon —
4:00
p.m.
Except from Highland
Avenue to Rose Street
South Tuesday Noon —
4:00
p.m.
Except from Highland
Avenue to Rose Street
North Monday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Highland Avenue
§ 7-12 KEARNY CODE § 7-12
AO:310
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
South Tuesday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
to Rose Street
Belgrove
Drive
East Tuesday Noon —
4:00
p.m.
Except from Rose Street
to Woodland Avenue, and
Halstead Street to
Wilkinson Terrace
West Monday Noon —
4:00
p.m.
Except from Rose Street
to Woodland Avenue, and
Halstead Street to
Wilkinson Terrace
East Tuesday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Rose Street to Woodland
Belgrove
Drive
West Monday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Avenue, and Halstead
Street to Wilkinson
Terrace
Woodland
Avenue
South Monday Noon —
4:00
p.m.
Except from Belgrove
Drive to Highland
Avenue
Woodland
Avenue
North Tuesday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Belgrove Drive to
Highland Avenue
South Monday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Wilson
Avenue
North Monday Noon —
4:00
p.m.
Except from Belgrove
Drive to Highland
Avenue
South Tuesday Noon —
4:00
p.m.
Except from Belgrove
Drive to Highland
Avenue
North Tuesday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Belgrove Drive to
Highland Avenue
§ 7-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-12
AO:311
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
South Monday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Halstead
Street
North Monday Noon —
4:00
p.m.
Except from Highland
Avenue to Belgrove
Drive
Halstead
Street
South Tuesday Noon —
4:00
p.m.
Except from Highland
Avenue to Belgrove
Drive
North Monday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Highland Avenue to
Belgrove Drive
South Tuesday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Beech
Street
East Wednesday Noon —
4:00
p.m.
Except from Oakwood
Avenue to Dead End off
Midland Avenue
West Thursday Noon —
4:00
p.m.
Except from Oakwood
Avenue to Dead End off
Midland Avenue
Beech
Street
East Wednesday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Oakwood Avenue to
Dead End off Midland
Avenue
West Thursday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Forest
Street
West Thursday Noon —
4:00
p.m.
Except from Stewart
Avenue to Seeley Avenue
East Wednesday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Prospect Avenue to
Sheperd Place
§ 7-12 KEARNY CODE § 7-12
AO:312
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
West Thursday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Sheperd
Place
North Thursday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Forest Street to Schuyler
Avenue
South Wednesday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Arlington
Avenue
North Thursday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Forest Street to Schuyler
Avenue
South Wednesday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Prospect
Place
North Wednesday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Forest Street to Schuyler
Avenue
South Thursday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Stuyvesant
Avenue
North Wednesday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Forest Street to Elm
Street
South Thursday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Wilson
Avenue
North Tuesday 8:00
a.m. —
Noon
Except from Davis
Avenue to Schuyler
Avenue
South Monday 8:00
a.m. —
Noon
Except from Davis
Avenue to Schuyler
Avenue
§ 7-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-12
AO:313
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Wilson
Avenue
North Tuesday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Davis Avenue to
Schuyler Avenue
South Monday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Devon
Street
East Monday 8:00
a.m. —
Noon
North of Duke Street,
except from Wilson
Avenue to Duke Street,
and Liberty Avenue to
Garfield Avenue
Devon
Street
West Tuesday 8:00
a.m. —
Noon
North of Duke Street,
except from Wilson
Avenue to Duke Street,
and Liberty Avenue
East Tuesday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Wilson Avenue to Duke
Street and Liberty
Avenue to Garfield
Avenue
West Monday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Hoyt Street South Monday 8:00
a.m. —
Noon
Except from Devon
Street to Kearny Avenue
South Monday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Devon Street to Kearny
Avenue
Chestnut
Street
East Monday 8:00
a.m. —
Noon
Except from Hoyt Street
to Dead End
West Tuesday 8:00
a.m. —
Noon
Except from Hoyt Street
to Dead End
East Monday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Hoyt Street to Dead End
§ 7-12 KEARNY CODE § 7-12
AO:314
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
West Tuesday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Duke
Street
North Tuesday 8:00
a.m. —
Noon
Except from Kearny
Avenue to Devon Street
Duke
Street
North Tuesday 8:00
a.m. —
Noon
Except from Kearny
Avenue to Devon Street
South Monday 8:00
a.m. —
Noon
Except from Kearny
Avenue to Devon Street
North Tuesday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Kearny Avenue to Devon
Street
South Monday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
King Street North Monday 8:00
a.m. —
Noon
Except from Devon
Street to Davis Avenue
South Tuesday 8:00
a.m. —
Noon
Except from Devon
Street to Davis Avenue
North Wednesday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Eevon Street to Davis
Avenue
South Thursday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Davis
Avenue
East Tuesday 8:00
a.m. —
Noon
Except from Bergen
Avenue to Wilson Avenue
West Monday 8:00
a.m. —
Noon
Except from Bergen
Avenue to Wilson Avenue
§ 7-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-12
AO:315
§ 7-13. PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN
STREETS. [1973 Code § 132-7; Ord. No. 1996-O-26; Ord. No.
1996-O-27; Ord. No. 1997-O-10; Ord. No. 1999-O-6; Ord. No.
1999-O-29; Ord. No. 2000-O-19; Ord. No. 2000-O-43; Ord. No.
2001-O-01; Ord. No. 2001-O-14; Ord. No. 2001-O-29 § 1; Ord. No.
2001-O-52; Ord. No. 2001-O-57 § 1; Ord. No. 2002-O-43 § 1; Ord.
No. 2004-(O)-22;Ord. No. 2007-(O)-58; Ord. No. 2008-(O)-05; Ord.
No. 2008-(O)-38§ 1; Ord. No. 2010-21 § 2; Ord. No. 2011-53; Ord.
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
East Tuesday
Monday
4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Bergen Avenue to Wilson
Avenue
West 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Garfield
Avenue
North Tuesday 8:00
a.m. —
Noon
Except from Davis
Avenue to Devon Street
Garfield
Avenue
South Monday 8:00
a.m. —
Noon
Except from Davis
Avenue to Devon Street
Garfield
Avenue
North Thursday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Davis Avenue to Devon
Street
South Wednesday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Stewart
Avenue
North Wednesday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
From Kearny Avenue to
Grand Place
South Thursday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
From Kearny Avenue to
and including 100
Stewart Avenue
Davis
Avenue
West Tuesday 4:00
p.m. —
5:00
p.m.
Between Garfield Avenue
and King Street only
§ 7-12 KEARNY CODE § 7-13
AO:316
No. 2012-53; Ord. No. 2013-29; Ord. No. 2013-40 § 2; Ord. No.
2013-43 § 2; Ord. No. 2017-52]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts thereof
described, except where other parking regulations have been provided for.
Name of Street Sides Location
Afton Street South Beginning at a point 60 feet west of the
southwest curbline of Afton Street and
Belgrove Drive, proceeding along the
south side of Afton Street, to a point 60
feet east thereof
Afton Street [Ord.
No. 2013-40 § 2;
Ord. No. 2013-43
§ 2]
South From the southwest corner of Afton
Street and Belgrove Drive westerly 185
feet
Ann Street North From the intersection of Sanford
Avenue and Ann Street, northwest
corner, 204 feet 8 inches west to a point
33 feet 7 inches west thereof
Belgrove Drive West Between the south curb of Woodland
Avenue and the east curb of Passaic
Avenue
East Between the north curb of Woodland
Avenue and the south curb of Rose
Street
West Between the south curb of Wilson
Avenue and a point 324 feet south
thereof
South 231 feet south of southeast Belgrove
Drive and Afton Street to a point 23 feet
south thereof
Belleville Turnpike South Between the east side of Kearny Avenue
and the west side of Morgan Place
Bergen Avenue North Between the west curb of Forest Street
and the east curb of Elm Street
North 410 feet 6 inches east of the southeast
corner of Bergen and Schuyler to a
point 119 feet 6 inches thereof
North From the northeasterly curbline of
Schuyler Avenue to a point 251 feet east
therefrom
South From the southeasterly curbline of
Schuyler Avenue to a point 240 feet east
therefrom
§ 7-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-13
AO:317
Name of Street Sides Location
Cammann Drive East West From Cammann Drive South to
Camman Drive North
Cammann Drive
South
North From Cammann Drive West to
Cammann Drive East
Cammann Drive
North
South From Cammann Drive East to Cammann
Drive West
North From the westernmost parking area of
Cammann Drive North west to the
Cammann Drive West parking area
Cammann Drive West East From Cammann Drive North to
Cammann Drive South
West From the end of Cammann Drive West
parking area to Schuyler Avenue
South From Schuyler Avenue to Cammann
Drive South
Southwest
and East
Of the grass median
Central Avenue West For 50 feet on either side of the existing
circular driveway in front of Western
Electric Corporation, it being the
intention of this subsection to prohibit
parking 50 feet north of the northern
entrance to 50 feet south of the
southern exit as existing on the date of
passage hereof
East Beginning at a point 0 feet of the
northeast curbline of the intersection of
Central Avenue and Hackensack Avenue
to a point 75 feet 7 inches north thereof
East Beginning at a point 0 feet southeast
curbline of the intersection of Central
Avenue and Hackensack Avenue to a
point 100 feet south thereof
West Beginning at a point 666 feet 9 inches
from the prolongation of the southeast
corner of the intersection of Central
Avenue and Hackensack Avenue to a
point 144 feet 5 inches south thereof
Devon Place, a/k/a
Lindsay Alley
East Between Boyd Street and Wilson
Avenue
§ 7-13 KEARNY CODE § 7-13
AO:318
Name of Street Sides Location
West From the southwest corner of Boyd
Street and Devon Place, also known as
Lindsay Alley to a point 148 feet 6
inches south thereof
Dukes Street [Ord.
No. 2015-16)
South Beginning at a point 271 feet east of the
curbline of the southeast corner of
Dukes Street and Devon Street to a
point 14 feet east thereof
Elm Street East From the intersection of Bergen Avenue
and Elm Street, southeast corner, to a
point 85 feet south thereof
West From the intersection of Bergen Avenue
and Elm Street, northeast corner, to a
point 165 feet south thereof
Fish House Road Both From the westerly curbline of Central
Avenue to the southerly curbline of
Newark/Jersey City Turnpike
Grant Avenue East Between the south curbline of Johnston
Avenue and the north line of the lands
of the Newark Branch of the Erie
Railroad Company
Grant Avenue West Rescinded by Ord. No. 2017-52
Hackensack Avenue West Between Third Street and Lincoln
Highway
Hoyt Street North Between Devon Street and Kearny
Avenue
Jacobus Avenue Both Between U.S. Route No. 1 and Route
No. 9 and a point 350 feet north of the
northerly curbline of the easterly
approach of Pennsylvania Avenue
John Street [Ord.
No. 2013-29]
East Beginning at a point 141 feet south of
the southwest curbline of John Street
and Woodland Avenue to a point 13 feet
east thereof
John Hay Avenue North From the intersection of John Hay
Avenue and Schuyler Avenue along the
northeast curbline of John Hay Avenue
to a point 67 feet east thereof [Ord.
No. 2012-53]
Liberty Street North From Devon Street to Kearny Avenue
only
§ 7-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-13
AO:319
Name of Street Sides Location
North Between Kearny Avenue and Maple
Street
Lincoln Parkway
(U.S. Route 1 and 9)
Southerly Side
Eastbound Hackensack Avenue - (Far Side).
Beginning at the easterly curbline of
Hackensack Avenue and extending 186
feet easterly therefrom
Westbound
on the
Northerly
Side
Hackensack Avenue - (Near Side).
Beginning at the easterly curbline of
Hackensack Avenue and extending 105
feet easterly therefrom
List Road (also
Dupont East)
Both Between the south line of Belleville
Turnpike and its junction with Dupont
Road South
McWhirter Road South Beginning at a point 112 feet 3 inches
of the southeast curbline of the
intersection of McWhirter Road and
Gross Place to a point 20 feet east
thereof
McWhirter Road South Beginning at a point 176 feet curbline
of the intersection of McWhirter Road
and Gross Place to a point 20 feet east
thereof
North Beginning at a point 121 feet 10 inches
of the northeast curbline of the
intersection of McWhirter Road and
Gross Place to a point 20 feet east
thereof
North Beginning at a point 173 feet 8 inches
of the northeast curbline of the
intersection of McWhirter Road and
Gross Place to a point 20 feet east
thereof
Newark/Jersey City
Turnpike
North Between Sanford Avenue and Ogden
Street
O'Brien Street South From the southwest corner of O'Brien
Street and Gross Street to a point 79
feet, 7 inches west thereof
Park Avenue South Between Belgrove Drive and Passaic
Avenue
Park Place West Between Park Avenue and South End
Passaic Avenue Both Between Johnston Avenue and Belleville
Turnpike
§ 7-13 KEARNY CODE § 7-13
AO:320
Name of Street Sides Location
Both From the East Newark/Kearny
municipal line to the southerly curbline
of Route 7
Pennsylvania Avenue Both Between North end and South end
Quincy Place South
(Mon.-
Fri.)
Between the easterly curbline of
Schuyler Avenue and a point 127 feet
east thereof
Ross Lane [Ord. No.
2016-23]
West Entire west side of Ross Lane
Scout Avenue Both Between Hackensack Avenue and the
Hackensack River
Schuyler Avenue East Between Midland Avenue and Harrison
Avenue
West Between Midland Avenue and Belleville
Turnpike
West From 68 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Dukes Street to 56 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Woodland Street
West From 40 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Tappan Street to 52 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Tappan Street
West From 47 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Hoyt Street to 29 feet south
of the southerly curbline of Hoyt Street
West From 58 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Devon Terrace to 27 feet
south of the southerly curbline of Devon
Terrace
West From 40 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Wilson Avenue to 41 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Wilson Avenue
West From 38 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Bergen Avenue to 34 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Bergen Avenue
West From 195 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Garfield Avenue 345 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Garfield Avenue
§ 7-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-13
AO:321
Name of Street Sides Location
West From 17 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Garfield Avenue to 43 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Garfield Avenue
West From 38 feet north of the northerly
curbline of King Street to 28 feet south
of the southerly curbline of King Street
Schuyler Avenue West From 40 feet north of the northerly
curbline of John Hay Avenue to 40 feet
south of the southerly curbline of John
Hay Avenue
West From 20 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Arlington Avenue to 70 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Arlington Avenue
West From 40 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Quincy Avenue to 28 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Quincy Avenue
West From 30 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Freeman Avenue to 60 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Freeman Avenue
West From 8 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Stover Avenue to 49 feet
south of the southerly curbline of Stover
Avenue
West From 140 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Oakwood Avenue to 40 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Oakwood Avenue
West From 48 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Spruce Street to 43 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
Spruce Street
West From 35 feet north of the northerly
curbline of Pine Street to 40 feet south
of the southerly curbline of Pine Street
West From southerly curbline of Route 7 to
36 feet south of the southerly curbline
of Midland Avenue
§ 7-13 KEARNY CODE § 7-13
AO:322
Name of Street Sides Location
East From 170 feet south of the southerly
curbline to Route 7 to the southerly
curbline of Route 7
East From 34 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Schuyler Court to 36 feet
north of northerly curbline of Schuyler
Court
Schuyler Avenue East From 42 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Seeley Avenue to 36 feet
north of the northerly curbline of Seeley
Avenue
East From 33 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Arlington Place to 42 feet
north of the northerly curbline of
Arlington Place
East From 44 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Shepard Place to 39 feet
north of the northerly curbline of
Shepard Place
East From 10 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Stewart Avenue to 48 feet
north of the northerly curbline of
Prospect Place
East From 24 feet south of the southerly
curbline of Laurel Avenue to 34 feet
north of the northerly curbline of Laurel
Avenue
East From the northerly curbline of Harrison
Avenue to 387 feet north of the
northerly curbline of East Midland
Avenue
West From a point 427 feet 6 inches north of
the northwest curbline at the
intersection of Bergen Avenue to a point
103 feet north thereof
West From a point 623 feet 2 inches north of
the northwest curbline at the
intersection of Bergen Avenue to a point
103 feet 3 inches north thereof
Second Street North Between the east curbline of Central
Avenue and a point 500 feet east
thereof
§ 7-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-13
AO:323
Name of Street Sides Location
South Between Central Avenue and
Hackensack Avenue
Third Avenue Both From a point 113 feet north of the
northeast curbline at the intersection of
Garfield Avenue to a point 61 feet north
thereof
Third Street Both Between Jacobus Avenue and Central
Avenue
Van Cortland Place South Between Morgan Place and Kearny
Avenue
§ 7-14. PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON
CERTAIN STREETS. [1973 Code § 132-8; Ord. No. 1997-O-10; Ord.
No. 2000-O-23 §§ 1 — 4; Ord. No. 2001-O-55; Ord. No. 2002-O-50;
Ord. No. 2014-21 § 2; Ord. No. 2014-25; Ord. No. 2015-29; Ord. No.
2016-22; Ord. No. 2017-31, Ord. No. 2017-52]
No person shall park or stand a vehicle between the hours specified any
day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets described,
except where other parking regulations have been provided for.
a. Section No. 1. Bounded on the North by Quincy Avenue, on the East by
Kearny Avenue, on the South by Johnston Avenue, and on the West by
Passaic Avenue.
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Alexander
Avenue
West Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
North side of West
Hudson Park area
Belgrove
Drive
West Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Brighton
Avenue
West Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Grant
Avenue
West Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Lincoln
Avenue
West Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Maple
Street
West Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Trinity
Street
West Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Watt Street West Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
§ 7-13 KEARNY CODE § 7-14
AO:324
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
William
Street
West Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Afton Street North Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Butler Place North Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Grove
Street
North Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Halstead
Street
North Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Johnston
Avenue
North Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Marshall
Street
North Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Rose Street North Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Rutland
Avenue
North Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Wilkinson
Terrace
North Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Wilson
Avenue
North Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Clark
Avenue
East Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Highland
Avenue
East Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Hillside
Avenue
East Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
John Street East Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Park Place East Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Sheridan
Place
East Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Windsor
Street
East Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
William
Street
East Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
§ 7-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-14
AO:325
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Archibald
Terrace
South Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Bergen
Avenue
South Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Harding
Terrace
South Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Liberty
Street
South Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Park Avenue South Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Patterson
Street
South Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Pedan
Terrace
South Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Quincy
Avenue
South Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Woodland
Avenue
South Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Riverview
Court
All Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Entire area
Alexander
Avenue
East Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Belgrove
Drive
East Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Brighton
Avenue
East Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Grant
Avenue
East Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Lincoln
Avenue
East Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Maple
Street
East Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Trinity
Place
East Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Watt Street East Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
William
Street
East Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
§ 7-14 KEARNY CODE § 7-14
AO:326
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Afton Street South Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Butler Place South Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Grove
Street
South Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Halstead
Street
South Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Johnston
Avenue
South Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Marshall
Street
South Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Rose Street South Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Rutland
Avenue
South Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Wilkinson
Terrace
South Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Wilson
Avenue
South Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Clark
Avenue
West Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Highland
Avenue
West Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Hillside
Avenue
West Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
John Street West Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Park Place West Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Sheridan
Avenue
West Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Windsor
Street
West Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
William
Street
West Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Archibald
Terrace
West Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
§ 7-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-14
AO:327
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Bergen
Avenue
West Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Harding
Terrace
West Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Liberty
Street
West Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Park Avenue West Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Patterson
Street
West Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Lindsay
Lane
East Monday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Lindsay
Lane
West Tuesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
b. Section No. 2. Bounded on the North by Belleville Turnpike, on the East
by Kearny Avenue, on the South by Quincy Avenue, and on the West by
Passaic Avenue.
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Alpine Place West Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
North of Railroad cut
Belgrove
Drive
West Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Clinton
Avenue
West Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Fairview
Place
West Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Fuller Place West Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Grand Place West Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Except from the
southerly curbline of
Belleville Turnpike to
northerly curbline of
Elizabeth Avenue
Hamilton
Avenue
West Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Hillcrest
Road
West Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
§ 7-14 KEARNY CODE § 7-14
AO:328
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Lafayette
Place
West Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Laurel Hill
Terrace
West Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Madison
Avenue
West Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Passaic
Avenue
West Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Old section of
Railroad cut
Stevenson
Place
West Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Washington
Court
West Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Bennett
Avenue
North Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Elizabeth
Avenue
North Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Fuller Place North Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Linden
Avenue
North Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Locust
Avenue
North Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Midland
Avenue
North Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
North
Midland
Avenue
North Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Oakwood
Avenue
North Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Stewart
Avenue
North Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Washington
Avenue
South Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
West
Bennett
Avenue
South Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Alpine Place West Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
South of railroad cut
§ 7-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-14
AO:329
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Franklin
Place
West Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Highland
Avenue
West Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Jefferson
Avenue
West Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Livingston
Avenue
West Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Passaic
Avenue
West Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Old section north of
railroad cut
Pleasant
Place
West Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Terrace
Place
West Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Washington
Court
West Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Webster
Avenue
West Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Bayard
Avenue
North Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Laurel
Avenue
North Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Magnolia
Avenue
North Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Newlawn
Avenue
North Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Pavonia
Avenue
North Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Seeley
Avenue
North Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
South
Midland
Avenue
North Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Stevenson
Place
North Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Stuyvesant
Avenue
North Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Washington
Court
North Thursday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
§ 7-14 KEARNY CODE § 7-14
AO:330
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Grand Place Both
sides
Wed. and
Thurs.
8:00 a.m.
— Noon
From the southerly
curbline of Belleville
Turnpike to northerly
curbline of Elizabeth
Avenue
c. Section No. 3. Bounded on the North by Belleville Turnpike, on the East
by Schuyler Avenue, on the South by Quincy Avenue, and on the West by
Kearny Avenue
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Argyle Place West Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
North of railroad cut
Chestnut
Street
West Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Davis
Avenue
West Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
South of railroad cut
Elm Street West Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Hickory
Street
West Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
North of railroad cut
Ivy Street West Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Morgan
Place
West Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Columbia
Avenue
North Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Magnolia
Avenue
North Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Midland
Avenue
North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Except for such part
of Midland Avenue
extending from the
easterly curbline of
Franklin Place to the
westerly curbline of
Forest Street, as to
which parking is
prohibited on both
sides of the street on
Wednesday from 6:00
a.m. to 8:00 a.m.
§ 7-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-14
AO:331
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Pierce Place North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Prospect
Place
North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Seeley
Avenue
North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Stuyvesant
Avenue
North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Van
Cortland
Place
North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Argyle Place East Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
South of railroad cut
Beech
Street
East Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Beech
Street
East Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Davis
Avenue
East Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
North of railroad cut
Devon
Street
East Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Hickory
Street
East Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
South of railroad cut
Rutherford
Place
East Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Arlington
Place
South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Bennett
Avenue
South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
E. Midland
Avenue
South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Elizabeth
Avenue
South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Howell
Place
South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Laurel
Avenue
South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Linden
Avenue
South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
§ 7-14 KEARNY CODE § 7-14
AO:332
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Oakwood
Avenue
South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Pine Street South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Schuyler
Avenue
South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Shepherd
Place
South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Spruce
Street
South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Stewart
Avenue
South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Washington
Avenue
South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Argyle Place East Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
North of railroad cut
Chestnut
Street
East Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Davis
Avenue
East Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
South of railroad cut
Elm Street East Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Hickory
Street
East Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
North of railroad cut
Ivy Street East Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Morgan
Place
East Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Columbia
Avenue
South Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Magnolia
Avenue
South Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Midland
Avenue
South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Pierce Place South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Prospect
Place
South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
§ 7-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-14
AO:333
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Seeley
Avenue
South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Stuyvesant
Avenue
South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Van
Cortland
Avenue
South Wednesday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Argyle Place West Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
South of railroad cut
Beech
Street
West Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Beech
Street
West Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Davis
Avenue
West Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
North of railroad cut
Devon
Street
West Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Hickory
Street
West Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
South of railroad cut
Rutherford
Place
West Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Arlington
Place
North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Bennett
Avenue
North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
East
Midland
Avenue
North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Elizabeth
Avenue
North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Howell
Place
North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Laurel
Avenue
North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Linden
Avenue
North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Oakwood
Avenue
North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
§ 7-14 KEARNY CODE § 7-14
AO:334
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Pine Street North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Schuyler
Court
North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Shepherd
Place
North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Spruce
Street
North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Stewart
Avenue
North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
Washington
Avenue
North Thursday Noon —
4:00 p.m.
d. Section No. 4. Bounded on the North by Quincy Avenue, on the East by
Schuyler Avenue, on the South by the Sanford Avenue area; and on the
West by Kearny Avenue
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Chestnut
Street
West Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Except between
northerly curbline of
Bergen Avenue, and
southerly curbline of
Garfield Avenue and
Devon Circle
Davis
Avenue
West Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Devon
Street
West Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Elm Street West Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Greenfield
Avenue
West Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Ivy Street West Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Lindseys
Alley
West Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Ann Street North Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Bergen
Avenue
North Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
§ 7-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-14
AO:335
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Devon
Terrace
North Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Halstead
Street
North Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Johnston
Avenue
North Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
King Street North Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Liberty
Street
North Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
South of West Hudson
Park except between
northerly curbline of
Bergen Avenue and
southerly curbline of
Garfield Avenue
Radley
Street
North Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Tappan
Street
North Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Chestnut
Street
East Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Devon
Street
East Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
North of Dukes Street
Essex Place East Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
First
Avenue
East Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Forest
Street
East Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Hickory
Street
East Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Kingsland
Avenue
East Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Ogden
Avenue
East Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Sanford
Avenue
East Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Second
Avenue
East Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Third
Avenue
East Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
§ 7-14 KEARNY CODE § 7-14
AO:336
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Arlington
Avenue
South Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Boyd Street South Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Dukes
Street
South Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Garfield
Avenue
South Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Hoyt Street South Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
John Jay
Avenue
South Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Quincy
Avenue
South Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Quincy
Place
South Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Wilson
Avenue
South Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Chestnut
Street
East Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Except between the
northerly curbline of
Bergen Avenue and
the southerly curbline
of Garfield Avenue
Davis
Avenue
East Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Devon
Street
East Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Elm Street East Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Greenfield
Avenue
East Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Ivy Street East Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Lindsley
Place
East Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Ann Street South Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Bergen
Avenue
South Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
§ 7-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-14
AO:337
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Devon
Terrace
South Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Halstead
Street
South Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Johnston
Avenue
South Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
King Street South Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Liberty
Street
South Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
South of West Hudson
Park except between
northerly curbline of
Bergen Avenue and
southerly curbline of
Garfield Avenue
Radley
Street
South Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Tappan
Street
South Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Chestnut
Street
West Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Devon
Street
West Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
North of Dukes Street
Essex Place West Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
First Street West Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Forest
Street
West Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Hickory
Street
West Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Kingsland
Avenue
West Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Ogden
Avenue
West Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Sanford
Avenue
West Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Second
Avenue
West Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Third
Avenue
West Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
§ 7-14 KEARNY CODE § 7-14
AO:338
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Arlington
Avenue
North Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Boyd Street North Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Dukes
Street
North Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Garfield
Avenue
North Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Hoyt Street North Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
John Jay
Avenue
North Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Quincy
Avenue
North Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Quincy
Place
North Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Wilson
Avenue
North Tuesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Chestnut
Street
Both
sides
Mon. and
Tues.
8:00
a.m.-10:00
a.m.
Between northerly
curbline of Bergen
Avenue and southerly
curbline of Garfield
Avenue
East Monday 8:00
a.m.-10:00
a.m.
Between Quincy
Avenue and Garfield
Avenue
West Tuesday 8:00
a.m.-10:00
a.m.
Between Quincy
Avenue and Garfield
Avenue
e. Section No. 5. Parking shall be prohibited on both sides of Kearny
Avenue the entire length thereof in the Town of Kearny on Wednesdays
between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m.
f. Section No. 6.
§ 7-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-14
AO:339
§ 7-14.1. School Bus Zones. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-54]
§ 7-14.2. Parking along the Westerly Side of a Portion of Beech
Street When Lincoln School is in Session. [Ord. No. 2009-29 §§ 1 —
3]
Name of
Street
Side Day Hours Remarks
Schuyler
Avenue
West Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Between Midland
Avenue and Harrison
Avenue
East Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Between Midland
Avenue and Belleville
Turnpike
Newark
Jersey City
Turnpike
South Monday 8:00 a.m.
— Noon
Between Sanford
Avenue and Ogden
Street
g. Section No. 7.
Name of Street Side Day Hours Remarks
Garfield Avenue
between Kearny
Avenue and
Chestnut Street28
[Ord. No.
2015-29; Ord.
No. 2016-22;
Ord. No.
2017-31]
Both Thursday 8:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Farmers
Market
a. Roosevelt School.
1. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, a school bus zone be and hereby is
established on the Kearny Avenue side of the Roosevelt School,
beginning at the southwest curbline of Kearny Avenue and Stewart
Avenue, to a point measuring 105 feet south thereof.
2. A sign, as prescribed by N.J.S.A. 39:4-198, stating "No Parking Here
to Corner 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. School Days" shall be placed at
this location.
3. No vehicle shall be permitted to park in the designated space
during these hours.
28.Note: Effective only on dates to be designated each year by Resolution of the Mayor and
Council
§ 7-14 KEARNY CODE § 7-14.2
AO:340
§ 7-14.3. School Hour No Parking Zone on the Westerly Side of
Chestnut Street. [Ord. No. 2009-46]
§ 7-14.4. School Hour No Parking Zone on the Easterly Side of Ivy
Street. [Ord. No. 2015-52]
§ 7-15. PARKING OF CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
§ 7-15.1. Parking Prohibited for Commercial Vehicles. [1973 Code
§ 132-13; Ord. No. 1999-O-3; Ord. No. 2002-O-70]
a. Prohibited Parking. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-139, parking of vehicles
on the westerly side of Beech Street along the curb in front of Lincoln
Street beginning at a point 195 feet south of the intersection of Midland
Avenue and Beech Street and extending along Beech Street 201 feet
south thereon, is and shall be prohibited from 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
when school is in session.
b. Fire Hydrants. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-138i, pertaining to fire
hydrants, parking of vehicles on the westerly side of Beech Street along
the curb in front of Lincoln School within 10 feet of the fire hydrant
shall be prohibited at all times, the provisions of paragraph a of this
subsection notwithstanding.
c. Signage. Official signs as provided for in N.J.S.A. 39:4-139 designating
the hours and days when parking is prohibited pursuant to paragraphs
a and b of this subsection shall be placed by the Police Department.
a. Between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., on days when school is in
session at Mater Dei Academy, no person shall park or stand a vehicle
on the westerly side of Chestnut Street from a point 108 feet north of
the northwest corner of Chestnut Street and Midland Avenue to a point
60 feet north therefrom.
b. The Police Department shall place a sign at the location where this
Ordinance is effective stating: "No Parking 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., on
School Days.
a. Between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., on days when Franklin
School is in session at Ivy Street, no person shall park or stand a vehicle
on the easterly side of Ivy Street from a point on the east curb of Ivy
Street, 383 feet south of the south east curbline of Ivy Street and
Bergen Avenue, 22 feet therefrom.
b. The Police Department shall place a sign at the location where this
Ordinance is effective stating "No Parking, 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., on
School Days."
a. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a truck (including
without limitation vans and pick up trucks), truck tractor, trailer, semitrailer,
commuter van, school buses including Type I and Type II buses,
§ 7-14.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-15.1
AO:341
§ 7-15.2. Omnibus Parking and Standing Prohibited. [Ord. No.
1996-O-52]
It shall be unlawful for any omnibus to park, stand or remain idling on the
streets or parts of streets described below.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Madison Avenue Both All From north of West Bennett
Avenue to the Belleville
Turnpike
Ross Lane Both All Between Passaic Avenue and
Belleville Turnpike
Webster Avenue Both All From north of West Bennett
Avenue to the Belleville
Turnpike
§ 7-15.3. Emergency Vehicles Only. [Ord. 2001-O-43 § 1]
It shall be unlawful at all times for any vehicles other than emergency
vehicles to park, stand or remain idling on the part of the street described
below.
omnibus vehicles (including taxis), motorized mobile homes (a vehicle
equipped with sleeping, kitchen, or bathroom facilities), used for
commercial purposes, as defined by N.J. Motor Vehicle and Traffic
Regulations 39:1-1, to park such vehicles on any street in the Town of
Kearny between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. prevailing time.
b. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a truck tractor, trailer
or semi-trailer to park such vehicle on any residential street at any time
except for purposes of pick-up and delivery.
c. It shall be unlawful for anyone to park any trailer or semi-trailer on any
street in the Town of Kearny at any time unless it is connected to a
power unit. [This provision shall not apply to dumpsters which are
governed by Section 20-3 of the Revised General Ordinances.]
d. Any unoccupied vehicle or any trailer or semi-trailer named in
subsection 7-15.1, parked or standing in violation of this subsection
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic; and any Kearny Police Officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer. The owner shall pay the
reasonable costs of the removal and storage which may result from
such removal before regaining possession of the vehicle, trailer or semitrailer.
§ 7-15.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-15.3
AO:342
Street Side Location
Elm Street West Beginning at a point along the west curb
line of Elm Street 25 feet 9 inches south of
the southwest curb of Bergen Avenue, south
a distance of 78 feet along the west curb
line of Elm Street
§ 7-16. ROUTES FOR TRUCKS OVER FOUR TONS. [New]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described
are hereby designated as routes for vehicles OVER four tons. All trucks
having a total combined registered gross weight of vehicle plus load in
excess of four tons shall be excluded from all streets, except for those
streets listed which form a part of the system of truck routes. Vehicles will
be permitted on all streets for the purpose of the pick up and delivery of
materials.
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-17. VEHICLE EXCLUSIONS FROM CERTAIN STREETS.
§ 7-17.1. Vehicles Over Designated Registered Gross Weight
Excluded from Certain Streets. [1973 Code § 132-14; Ord. No.
4-25-80; Ord. No. 1997-18 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-11 § 1; Ord. No.
2009-34]
Vehicles over the registered gross weight are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described except for the pick up and delivery of
materials on such street, or the use of emergency vehicles on such street.
Name of Street Weight Location
Arlington Place 4 tons Entire length
Belgrove Drive 4 tons Entire length
Bergen Avenue 4 tons From Kearny Avenue to Schuyler
Avenue
20,000 lbs. Westerly from Schuyler Avenue to
Belgrove Drive
Clinton Avenue 4 tons From the north of West Bennett
Avenue to the Belleville Turnpike
Columbia Avenue 4 tons From Kearny Avenue to Elm Street
Devon Street 4 tons From Wilson Avenue to Bergen
Avenue
Duke Street 4 tons From Devon Street to Schuyler
Avenue
§ 7-15.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-17.1
AO:343
Name of Street Weight Location
Essex Place 4 tons Between Tappan Street and Dukes
Street
Forest Street 4 tons From Laurel Avenue to Belleville
Turnpike
Hamilton Avenue 4 tons From the north of West Bennett
Avenue to the Belleville Turnpike
Howell Place 4 tons Entire length
Jefferson Avenue 4 tons From the north of West Bennett
Avenue to the Belleville Turnpike
King Street 4 tons Between Devon Street and Schuyler
Avenue
Laurel Avenue 4 tons Between Kearny Avenue and Passaic
Avenue
Livingston Avenue 4 tons From the north of West Bennett
Avenue to the Belleville Turnpike
Madison Avenue 4 tons From north of West Bennett Avenue
to the Belleville Turnpike
North Midland
Avenue
4 tons Entire length
Peden Terrace 4 tons Entire length
Pleasant Place 4 tons From the north of West Bennett
Avenue to the Belleville Turnpike
Prospect Place 4 tons Entire length
Radley Street 4 tons Between Schuyler Avenue and
Sanford Avenue
Ross Lane 4 tons Between Passaic Avenue and the
Belleville Turnpike
Schuyler Court 4 tons Entire length
Shepard Place 4 tons Entire length
South Midland
Avenue
4 tons Entire length
Webster Avenue 4 tons From north of West Bennett Avenue
to the Belleville Turnpike
§ 7-17.2. Omnibus Excluded from Certain Streets. [Ord. No.
1996-O-52]
Omnibus are hereby excluded from the streets or parts of streets described
below. It shall be unlawful for any omnibus to park, stand or remain idling
on the streets or parts of streets described below.
§ 7-17.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-17.2
AO:344
Name of Street Location
Madison Avenue From north of West Bennett Avenue to the
Belleville Turnpike
Ross Lane Between Passaic Avenue and Belleville
Turnpike
Webster Avenue From north of West Bennett Avenue to the
Belleville Turnpike
§ 7-18. ONE-WAY STREETS.
§ 7-18.1. One-Way Streets Designated. [1973 Code § 132-15; Ord.
No. 1996-O-10; Ord. No. 1996-O-39; Ord. No. 1997-O-12; New; Ord.
No. 2001-O-29 § 2]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
One-Way Streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be
permitted on the sides indicated below.
Name of Street Direction Location
Afton Street West From Kearny Avenue to Belgrove Drive
Ann Street West From Sanford Avenue to Ogden Avenue
Beech Street North From Quincy Avenue to Midland
Avenue
Boyd Street West From Devon Street to Kearny Avenue
Cammann Drive East 278 feet east of Schuyler Avenue to a
point 33,352 feet easterly therefrom
Chestnut Street South From Quincy Avenue to Johnston
Avenue
Clark Avenue North From Belgrove Drive to Marshall Street
Depot Plaza West From the west curb of Forest Street to
the east curb of Elm Street
Devon Terrace West From Devon Street to Schuyler Avenue
Dukes Street East From Devon Street to Schuyler Avenue
Elizabeth Avenue East From Kearny Avenue to Morgan Place
Elm Street South From the north curb of Midland Avenue
to the south curb of Depot Plaza
Grove Street West From Kearny Avenue to Brighton
Avenue
Highland Avenue South From Woodland Avenue to Johnston
Avenue
Hoyt Street West From the west curb of Devon Street
east curb of Kearny Avenue
§ 7-17.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-18.1
AO:345
Name of Street Direction Location
East From Devon Street to Schuyler Avenue
King Street East From Devon Street to Davis Avenue
John Street North From Woodland Avenue to Johnston
Avenue
Lindsay Lane North From Wilson Avenue to Bergen Avenue
Maple Street North From Johnston Avenue to Quincy
Avenue
Marshall Street West From Clerk Avenue to Waat Street
Ogden Avenue North From Ann Street to Harrison Avenue
Patterson Street West From Kearny Avenue to Maple Street
Radley Street East Entire length
Ross Lane South Lying between Belleville Turnpike and
Passaic Avenue
Rutland Avenue West From Highland Avenue to Belgrove
Drive
Schuyler Court East Entire length
Sheridan Avenue South From Belgrove Drive to Johnston
Avenue
Tappan Street West From Devon Street to Schuyler Avenue
Van Cordlandt Place West From Kearny Avenue to Morgan Place
Washington Place East Entire length
Wilson Avenue East From Kearny Avenue to Devon Street
East From Devon Street to Schuyler Avenue
Windsor Street South From Quincy Avenue to Wilson Avenue
§ 7-19. THROUGH STREETS. [1973 Code § 132-16; Ord. No.
1999-O-29]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described are hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs
shall be installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the
Through Street except where Yield signs are provided for in the
designation.
Name of Street Limits
Afton Street Between Passaic Avenue and Belgrove
Drive
Bayard Avenue Between Passaic Avenue and East of
Clinton Avenue
§ 7-18.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-19
AO:346
Name of Street Limits
Bennett Avenue-West Bennett
Avenue
Between Argyle Places and Kearny
Avenue
Between Kearny Avenue and Passaic
Avenue
Bergen Avenue Between Schuyler Avenue and Kearny
Avenue
Between Kearny Avenue and Belgrove
Drive
Central Avenue (Route 659) U.S. Truck Route 1&9 to Fish House
Road
Columbia Avenue Between Elm Street and Kearny Avenue
Davis Avenue Between the Town of Harrison-Town of
Kearny Corporate Line and Bergen
Avenue
Between Bergen Avenue and Midland
Avenue
Devon Street Between southern end and Wilson
Avenue
Elm Street Between Midland Avenue and Belleville
Turnpike
Fish House Road (Route 659) To Route 7
Frank E. Rodgers Boulevard
(Route 697)
To Johnston Avenue
Garfield Avenue Between Schuyler Avenue and Third
Avenue
Grant Avenue-Belgrove Drive Between Johnson Street and Midland
Avenue
Hackensack Avenue Between U.S. Routes 1 and 9 and Stern
Avenue
Halstead Street Between Kearny Avenue and Belgrove
Drive
Jacobus Avenue Between the westerly intersection of
Pennsylvania Avenue and U.S. Routes 1
and 9
Johnson Avenue Between Kearny Avenue and Passaic
Avenue
Kearny Avenue Between the Town of Harrison-Town of
Kearny Corporate Line and the Belleville
Turnpike
§ 7-19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-19
AO:347
Name of Street Limits
King Street Between Schuyler Avenue and Davis
Avenue
Between Davis Avenue and Devon Street
Laurel Avenue Between Schuyler Avenue and Elm
Street
Between Elm Street and Kearny Avenue
Between Kearny Avenue and Passaic
Avenue
Liberty Street Between Devon Street and Kearny
Avenue
Between Kearny Avenue and Brighton
Avenue
Locust Street Between Kearny Avenue and Belgrove
Drive
Midland Avenue Between Schuyler Avenue and Kearny
Avenue
Between Kearny Avenue and Passaic
Avenue
Newark/Jersey City Turnpike
(Route 508)
To Route 7, Kearny
Oakwood Avenue Between Schuyler and Davis Avenue
Between Davis and Kearny Avenue
Passaic Avenue (Route 699) Between the Kearny border south and
the Belleville Turnpike
To Route 7
Quincy Avenue Between Schuyler Avenue and Davis
Avenue
Between Davis Avenue and Kearny
Avenue
Between Kearny Avenue and Belgrove
Drive
Rose Street Between Kearny Avenue and Belgrove
Drive
Schuyler Avenue (Route 507) Between Harrison Avenue and Belleville
Turnpike
To Route 7
Seeley Avenue Between Schuyler and Elm Street
Between Elm Street and Kearny Avenue
§ 7-19 KEARNY CODE § 7-19
AO:348
Name of Street Limits
Stewart Avenue Between Schuyler Avenue and Elm
Street
Between Elm Street and Argyle Place
Between Argyle Place and Kearny
Avenue
Between Kearny Avenue and Passaic
Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue Between Elm Street and Kearny Avenue
Washington Avenue Between Kearny Avenue and Passaic
Avenue
William Street Entire length
Wilson Avenue Between Davis Avenue and Kearny
Avenue
Between Kearny Avenue and Belgrove
Drive
Woodland Avenue Between Kearny Avenue and Devon
Street
§ 7-20. STOP INTERSECTIONS. [1973 Code § 132-17; Ord. No.
1996-O-40; Ord. No. 1999-O-29; Ord. No. 2002-O-37; Ord. No.
2002-O-44; Ord. No. 2015-53]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Argyle Place and Bennett Avenue Bennett Avenue
Argyle Place and Stewart Avenue Stewart Avenue
Argyle Place and Magnolia Avenue Magnolia Avenue
Argyle Place and Washington
Avenue
Washington Avenue
Beech Street and Magnolia Avenue Magnolia Avenue
Belleville Turnpike and Chestnut
Street
Chestnut Street
Belleville Turnpike and Devon
Street
Devon Street
Belleville Turnpike and Forest
Street
Forest Street
§ 7-19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-20
AO:349
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Camman Drive North and Camman
Drive West
Camman Drive North, 2,775 feet
east of Schuyler Avenue
Central Avenue and Third Street Third Street
Chestnut Street and Boyd Street Boyd Street
Chestnut Street and Halstead Street Halstead Street
Chestnut Street and Hoyt Street Hoyt Street
Davis Avenue (northbound) and
Devon Terrace
Devon Terrace
Davis Avenue and Pierce Place Pierce Place
Devon Street and Liberty Street Liberty Street
Devon Street and Woodland Avenue
[Ord. No. 2015-53]
Devon Street
Dukes Street and Chestnut Street Chestnut Street
Dukes Street and Essex Place Essex Place
Fish House Road and Belleza
Construction
Belleza Construction
Forest Street and Arlington Place Arlington Place
Forest Street and Howell Place Howell Place
Forest Street and Prospect Place Prospect Place
Forest Street and Schuyler Court Schuyler Court
Forest Street and Shepperd Place Shepperd Place
Forest Street and Stuyvesant
Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue
Garfield Avenue and Chestnut
Street
Chestnut Street
Garfield Avenue and Elm Street Elm Street
Garfield Avenue and Forest Street Forest Street
Grove Street and Maple Street Maple Street for northbound traffic
Grove Street and Windsor Street Windsor Street for southbound
traffic
Hickory Street and Pierce Place Pierce Place
Hickory Street and Pine Street Pine Street
Hickory Street and Spruce Street Spruce Street
Highland Avenue and Archibald
Terrace
Archibald Terrace
Highland Avenue and Grove Street Grove Street
§ 7-20 KEARNY CODE § 7-20
AO:350
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Johnston Avenue and Chestnut
Street
Chestnut Street
Maple Street and Afton Street Afton Street
Oakwood Avenue and Highland
Avenue
Highland Avenue
Passaic Avenue and Bayard Avenue Bayard Avenue
Passaic Avenue and Jefferson
Avenue
Jefferson Avenue
Passaic Avenue and Laurel Avenue Laurel Avenue
Passaic Avenue and Linden Avenue Linden Avenue
Passaic Avenue and North Midland
Avenue
North Midland Avenue
Passaic Avenue and Park Place Park Place
Passaic Avenue and Peden Terrace Peden Terrace
Passaic Avenue and West Bennett
Avenue
West Bennett Avenue
Patterson Street and Highland
Avenue
Highland Avenue
Pavonia Avenue and Highland
Avenue
Highland Avenue
Pleasant Avenue and Seeley Avenue Seeley Avenue
Pleasant Place and Elizabeth
Avenue
Elizabeth Avenue
Pleasant Place and Stuyvesant
Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue
Rutland Avenue and Brighton
Avenue
Brighton Avenue
Schuyler Avenue and Devon Street Devon Terrace
Schuyler Avenue and Devon Terrace Devon Terrace
Schuyler Avenue and King Street King Street
Schuyler Avenue and Laurel Avenue Laurel Avenue
Schuyler Avenue and Quincy Place Quincy Place
Schuyler Avenue and Seeley Avenue Seeley Avenue
Schuyler Avenue and Steward
Avenue
Steward Avenue
Schuyler Avenue and Tappan Street Tappan Street
Seeley Avenue and Grand Place Grand Place
§ 7-20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-20
AO:351
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Stewart Avenue and Grand Place Grand Place
Stewart Avenue and Pleasant Place Pleasant Place
Tappan Street and Essex Place Essex Place
West Hudson Park and Devon
Terrace
West Hudson Park, Franklyn
§ 7-20A. STOP LOCATIONS (NOT AT INTERSECTIONS). [Ord. No.
2011-37 § 2]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197e, the stop locations hereinafter set forth are
hereby designated as stop locations and stop signs shall be installed at
those locations.
Street Stop Sign and Location
Cammann Drive (Eastbound) 440 feet east of Schuyler Avenue
Cammann Drive (Eastbound) 568 feet east of Schuyler Avenue
§ 7-21. ALL-WAY STOPS. [New; Ord. No. 2008-(O)-11; Ord. No.
2012-7; Ord. No. 2013-34; Ord. No. 2018-31; amended 10-8-2019 by
Ord. No. 2019-32]
The following intersections are hereby designated as All-Way Stops.
7-21 ALL-WAY STOPS
Intersection Stop Sign On
Devon Street and Devon Terrace Northwest corner, Sign facing north
Southeast corner, Sign facing south
Northeast corner, Sign facing east
Devon Street and Tappan Street Northwest corner, Sign facing north
Southeast corner, Sign facing south
Northeast corner, Sign facing east
Elm Street and Stuyvesant Avenue Northwest corner, Sign facing north
Southwest corner, Sign facing west
Southeast corner, Sign facing south
Northeast corner, Sign facing east
Hamilton Avenue and West Bennett
Avenue
Northwest corner, Sign facing north
Southwest corner, Sign facing west
Southeast corner, Sign facing south
Northeast corner, Sign facing east
§ 7-20 KEARNY CODE § 7-21
AO:352
7-21 ALL-WAY STOPS
Intersection Stop Sign On
Highland Avenue and Afton Street Northwest corner, Sign facing north
Southeast corner, Sign facing south
Southeast corner, Sign facing east
Northeast corner, Sign facing east
Highland Avenue and Wilson Avenue Northwest corner, Sign facing north
Southwest corner, Sign facing west
Southeast corner, Sign facing south
Northeast corner, Sign facing east
Ivy Street and King Street Northwest corner, Sign facing north
Southwest corner, Sign facing west
Southeast corner, Sign facing south
Northeast corner, Sign facing east
Jefferson Avenue and West Bennett
Avenue
Northwest corner, Sign facing north
Southwest corner, Sign facing west
Southeast corner, Sign facing south
Northeast corner, Sign facing east
Laurel Avenue and Hillcrest Road
[Added 8-4-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-27]
Washington Avenue and Hillcrest
Road [Added 8-4-2020 by Ord.
No. 2020-27]
§ 7-22. YIELD INTERSECTIONS. [1973 Code § 132-18; Ord. No.
1996-O-18; Ord. No. 1999-O-29; Ord. No. 2001-O-29 § 3; Ord. No.
2011-37 § 1; Ord. No. 2016-17]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Yield Intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
Intersection Yield Sign On
Devon Street and Devon Place Devon Place
Elm Street and Garafolo Place Garafolo Place
Franklyn Avenue, West Hudson Park
and Schuyler Avenue (Deleted by
Ord. No. 2016-17]
§ 7-21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-22
AO:353
Intersection Yield Sign On
Hillcrest Avenue and Linden Avenue
[Ord. No. 2016-17]
Hillcrest Avenue, north and south
Hillcrest Avenue and Magnolia
Avenue [Ord. No. 2016-17]
Hillcrest Avenue, north
§ 7-23. TURN PROHIBITIONS.
§ 7-23.1. Turn Prohibitions Designated. [1973 Code § 132-23; Ord.
No. 1999-O-29; Ord. No. 2002-O-62 § 1; Ord. No. 2005-(O)-31; Ord.
No. 2010-36]
No person shall make a turn at any location listed and only in the manner
described.
Intersection Turn
Prohibited
Movement Prohibited
Belgrove Drive Left Turn From the exit (southernmost
driveway) of Clara Maas
Building, 195 Belgrove Drive
Bergen Avenue at NJMC
Keegan Landfill exit/
entrance driveway
Left Turn Eastbound truck traffic
entering into landfill
Bergen Avenue at NJMC
Keegan Landfill exit/
entrance driveway
Right Turn Southbound truck traffic
exiting from landfill
Fish House Road and
Belleza Construction
Company Driveway
U-Turn Northbound on Fish House
Road to southbound on Fish
House Road at Belleza
Construction Company
Driveway
Kearny Avenue U-Turn Between Belleville Turnpike
and Newark Branch of Erie
Railroad
Newark/Jersey City
Turnpike and Greenfield
Avenue
U-Turn Northbound on Greenfield
Avenue to southbound on
Greenfield Avenue
Newark/Jersey City
Turnpike and Route 7 Exit
Ramp
Turns Eastbound or westbound on
Newark/Jersey City Turnpike
to Route 7 Exit Ramp
Newark/Jersey City
Turnpike and Route 280
Turns Eastbound Newark/Jersey City
Turnpike to Route 280 Exit
Ramp and westbound
Newark/Jersey City Turnpike
to Route 280 Exit Ramp
§ 7-22 KEARNY CODE § 7-23.1
AO:354
Intersection Turn
Prohibited
Movement Prohibited
Passaic Avenue and Laurel
Avenue
Left Turn Southbound on Passaic
Avenue to eastbound on
Laurel Avenue
Passaic Avenue and North
Midland Avenue
Left Turn Southbound on Passaic
Avenue to eastbound on North
Midland Avenue
Schuyler Avenue and
Howell Place
Left Turn Northbound on Schuyler
Avenue to westbound on
Howell Place
Schuyler Avenue and Pine
Street
Left Turn Northbound on Schuyler
Avenue to westbound on Pine
Street
§ 7-24. NO TURN ON RED. [New; Ord. No. 1999-O-29; Ord. No.
2002-O-38; Ord. No. 2011-18; Ord. No. 2013-40 § 3; Ord. No.
2013-43 § 3; Ord. No. 2015-50]
No person shall make a right turn on the red signal at any location listed:
Intersection Hours and
Days
Right Turn Prohibited
Afton Street and
Belgrove Drive [Ord.
No. 2013-40 § 3; Ord.
No. 2013-43 § 3]
All From eastbound on Afton
Street to southbound on
Belgrove Drive
Belgrove Drive and
Quincy Avenue [Ord.
No. 2015-50]
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Mon. to Fri.
From northbound on Belgrove
Drive to eastbound on Quincy
Avenue
From westbound on Quincy
Avenue to northbound on
Belgrove Drive
Bergen Avenue and
Belgrove Drive
All From southbound on Belgrove
Drive to westbound on Bergen
Avenue
From northbound on Belgrove
Drive to eastbound on Bergen
Avenue
From westbound on Bergen
Avenue to northbound on
Belgrove Drive
From eastbound on Bergen
Avenue to Southbound on
Belgrove Drive
§ 7-23.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-24
AO:355
Intersection Hours and
Days
Right Turn Prohibited
Bergen and Davis
Avenues
All From southbound on Davis
Avenue to westbound Bergen
Avenue
From northbound on Davis
Avenue to eastbound on
Bergen Avenue
From westbound on Bergen
Avenue to northbound on
Davis Avenue
From eastbound on Bergen
Avenue to southbound on
Davis Avenue
Bergen and Kearny
Avenues
All From southbound on Kearny
Avenue to westbound on
Bergen Avenue
From northbound on Kearny
Avenue to eastbound on
Bergen Avenue
From westbound on Bergen
Avenue to northbound on
Kearny Avenue
From eastbound on Bergen
Avenue to southbound on
Kearny Avenue
Devon Street and
Garfield Avenue
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Mon. to Fri.
From southbound on Devon
Street to westbound on
Garfield Avenue
From northbound on Devon
Street to eastbound on
Garfield Avenue
From westbound on Garfield
Avenue to Northbound on
Devon Street
From eastbound on Garfield
Avenue to southbound on
Devon Street
Halstead Street and
Belgrove Drive
All From northbound on Belgrove
Drive to eastbound on
Halstead Street
§ 7-24 KEARNY CODE § 7-24
AO:356
Intersection Hours and
Days
Right Turn Prohibited
From westbound on Halstead
Street to northbound on
Belgrove Drive
Halstead Street and
Kearny Avenue
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Mon. to Fri.
From southbound on Kearny
Avenue to westbound on
Halstead Street
From northbound on Kearny
Avenue to eastbound on
Halstead Street
From westbound on Halstead
Street to northbound on
Kearny Avenue
From eastbound on Halstead
Street to southbound on
Kearny Avenue
Hoyt Street and Davis
Avenue
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Mon. to Fri.
From northbound on Davis
Avenue to eastbound on Hoyt
Street
From eastbound on Hoyt
Street to southbound on Davis
Avenue
Hoyt Street and Kearny
Avenue
Mon. to Fri From southbound on Kearny
Avenue to westbound on
Paterson Street
From westbound on Hoyt
Street to northbound on
Kearny Avenue
Kearny and Bennett
Avenues [Ord. No.
2015-50]
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Mon. to Fri.
From southbound on Kearny
Avenues to westbound on
Bennett Avenue
From northbound on Kearny
Avenue to eastbound on
Bennett Avenue
From westbound on Bennett
Avenue to northbound on
Kearny Avenue
From eastbound on Bennett
Avenue to southbound on
Kearny Avenue
§ 7-24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-24
AO:357
Intersection Hours and
Days
Right Turn Prohibited
Kearny and Stewart
Avenues [Ord. No.
2015-50]
All From southbound on Kearny
Avenue to westbound on
Bennett Avenue
From northbound on Kearny
Avenue to eastbound on
Bennett Avenue
From westbound on Stewart
Avenue to northbound on
Kearny Avenue
From eastbound on Stewart
Avenue to southbound on
Kearny Avenue
King Street and Davis
Avenue
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Mon. to Fri.
From northbound on Davis
Avenue to eastbound on King
Street
From westbound on King
Street to northbound on Davis
Avenue
From eastbound on King
Street to southbound on Davis
Avenue
Laurel and Kearny
Avenues
When children
are present
From southbound on Kearny
Avenue to westbound on
Laurel Avenue
From northbound on Kearny
Avenue to eastbound on
Laurel Avenue
From westbound on Laurel
Avenue to northbound on
Kearny Avenue
From eastbound on Laurel
Avenue to southbound on
Kearny Avenue
Midland Avenue and
Belgrove Drive
When children
are present
From southbound on Belgrove
Drive to westbound on
Midland Avenue
From northbound on Belgrove
Drive to eastbound on
Midland Avenue
§ 7-24 KEARNY CODE § 7-24
AO:358
Intersection Hours and
Days
Right Turn Prohibited
From westbound on Midland
Avenue to northbound on
Belgrove Drive
From eastbound on Midland
Avenue to southbound on
Belgrove Drive
Midland Avenue and
Elm Street
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Mon. to Fri.
From southbound on Elm
Street to westbound on
Midland Avenue
From northbound on Elm
Street eastbound on Midland
Avenue
From eastbound on Midland
Avenue to southbound on Elm
Street
Midland and Kearny
Avenues
All From southbound on Kearny
Avenue to westbound on
Midland Avenue
From northbound on Kearny
Avenue to eastbound on
Midland Avenue
From westbound on Midland
Avenue to northbound on
Kearny Avenue
From eastbound on Midland
Avenue to southbound on
Kearny Avenue
Newark/Jersey City
Turnpike and U.S. Route
1&9 Ramp
All From eastbound on Newark/
Jersey City Turnpike to
southbound on U.S. Route 1 &
9 Ramp
Oakwood and Davis
Avenues
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Mon. to Fri.
From southbound on Davis
Avenue to westbound on
Oakwood Avenue
From northbound on Davis
Avenue to eastbound on
Oakwood Avenue
From westbound on Oakwood
Avenue to northbound on
Davis Avenue
§ 7-24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-24
AO:359
Intersection Hours and
Days
Right Turn Prohibited
From eastbound on Oakwood
Avenue to southbound on
Davis Avenue
Oakwood and Kearny
Avenues
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Mon. to Fri.
From southbound on Kearny
Avenue to westbound on
Oakwood Avenue
From northbound on Kearny
Avenue to eastbound on
Oakwood Avenue
From westbound on Oakwood
Avenue to northbound on
Kearny Avenue
From eastbound on Oakwood
Avenue to southbound on
Kearny Avenue
Quincy Avenue and
Beech Street
All From westbound on Quincy
Avenue to northbound on
Beech Street
Quincy Avenue and
Belgrove Drive
All From northbound on Belgrove
Drive to eastbound on Quincy
Avenue
From westbound on Quincy
Avenue to northbound on
Belgrove Drive
Quincy and Kearny
Avenues
All From southbound on Kearny
Avenue to westbound on
Quincy Avenue
From northbound on Kearny
Avenue to eastbound on
Quincy Avenue
From eastbound on Quincy
Avenue to southbound on
Kearny Avenue
Schuyler Avenue and
Bergen Avenue
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Mon. to Fri.
From northbound on Schuyler
Avenue to eastbound on
Bergen Avenue
From southbound on Schuyler
Avenue to westbound on
Bergen Avenue
§ 7-24 KEARNY CODE § 7-24
AO:360
Intersection Hours and
Days
Right Turn Prohibited
Schuyler Avenue and
Dukes Street
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Mon. to Fri.
From southbound on Schuyler
Avenue to westbound on
Dukes Street
From northbound on Schuyler
Avenue to eastbound on
Dukes Street
Schuyler Avenue and
Hoyt Street
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Mon. to Fri.
From northbound on Schuyler
Avenue to eastbound on Hoyt
Street
Schuyler Avenue and
Newark/Jersey City
Turnpike
All From southbound on Schuyler
Avenue to westbound on
Newark/Jersey City Turnpike
Schuyler Avenue and
Route 7
All From northbound on Schuyler
Avenue to eastbound on Route
7
Seeley Avenue and Elm
Street
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Mon. to Fri.
From southbound on Elm
Street to westbound on Seeley
Avenue
From northbound on Elm
Street to eastbound on Seeley
Avenue
From westbound on Seeley
Avenue to northbound on Elm
Street
From eastbound on Seeley
Avenue to southbound on Elm
Street
Stewart and Kearny
Avenues
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. Mon. to Fri.
From southbound on Kearny
Avenue to westbound on
Stewart Avenue
From northbound on Kearny
Avenue to eastbound on
Stewart Avenue
From westbound on Stewart
Avenue to northbound on
Kearny Avenue
Woodland Avenue and
Belgrove Drive
All From northbound Belgrove
Drive to eastbound on
Woodland Avenue
§ 7-24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-24
AO:361
Intersection Hours and
Days
Right Turn Prohibited
From westbound on Woodland
Avenue to northbound on
Belgrove Drive
Woodland and Kearny
Avenues
All From southbound on Kearny
Avenue to westbound on
Woodland Avenue
From northbound on Kearny
Avenue to eastbound on
Woodland Avenue
From westbound on Woodland
Avenue to northbound on
Kearny Avenue
From eastbound on Woodland
Avenue to southbound on
Kearny Avenue
§ 7-25. LOADING ZONES.29 [1973 Code § 132-19; Ord. No.
2001-O-48 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-Ch. 7-49 § 1; Ord. No. 2014-26; Ord.
No. 2015-51; Ord. No. 2015-58]
The locations described are hereby designated as Loading Zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in these locations during the times indicated other than
for the loading or unloading of goods and materials.
Name of Street Time Side Location
Beech Street 8:00
a.m.-6:00
p.m.
West Beginning at a point on the
west curb of Beech Street 57
feet 9 inches south of the south
curbline of Midland Avenue and
from that point running
northerly a distance of 43 feet 9
inches along the west curb of
Beech Street.
Elm Street 7:00
a.m.-5:00
p.m.
East Beginning at a point on the east
curb of Elm Street distant 267
feet south of the curb of Laurel
Avenue and from that point
running southerly the distance
of 83 feet along the east curb of
Elm Street.
29.Editor's Note: Minimum length for all Loading Zones is 50 feet. No Loading Zone may be
established in any area where it is prohibited to stand or park by statute N.J.S.A. 39:4-136.
§ 7-24 KEARNY CODE § 7-25
AO:362
Name of Street Time Side Location
Elm Street 7:00
a.m.-5:00
p.m.
East Beginning at a point on the east
curb of Elm Street distant
southerly 141 feet from the
north curb of Laurel Avenue
and from that point running
northerly the distance of 89
feet along the east curb of Elm
Street.
Elm Street
[Ord. No.
2001-0-48]
All times East Beginning at a point along the
east curbline of Elm Street 271
feet 9 inches south of the
southeast curb of Bergen
Avenue and from that point a
distance of 30 feet 6 inches
along the east curbline of Elm
Street
Elm Street
[Ord. No.
2015-58]
7:00 a.m.
to 5:00
p.m.,
Monday-
Friday
East Beginning at a point 191 feet
north of the northeast curbline
of Elm Street and Laurel
Avenue to a point 128 feet
north thereof
Hoyt Street
[Ord. No.
2014-26]
8:00 a.m.
4:00 p.m.
South Beginning at a point on the
south curb of Hoyt Street, 120
feet west of the west curb of
Schuyler Avenue and from that
point running easterly distance
of 87 feet along the said south
curb of Hoyt Street
Johnston Avenue 7:00
a.m.-5:00
p.m.
South Beginning at a point on the
south curb of Johnston Avenue
distant westerly 24 feet from
where the west curbline of
Sheridan Avenue, if extended,
would intersect the south curb
of Johnston Avenue and from
that point running westerly the
distance of 75 feet along the
south curb of Johnston Avenue.
§ 7-25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-25
AO:363
Name of Street Time Side Location
Kearny Avenue 7:00
a.m.-5:00
p.m.
East Beginning at a point on the east
curb of Kearny Avenue distant
25 feet northerly from the north
curb of Van Cortland Place and
from that point running
northerly the distance of 50
feet along the east curb of
Kearny Avenue
7:00
a.m.-5:00
p.m.
East Beginning at a point on the east
curb of Kearny Avenue distant
northerly 178 feet from where
the north curbline of Grove
Street, if extended, would
intersect the east curb of
Kearny Avenue and from that
point running northerly the
distance of 50 feet along the
east curb of Kearny Avenue.
8:00
a.m.-6:00
p.m.
West Beginning at a point on the
west curb of Kearny Avenue 64
feet south of the south curbline
of Grove Street and from that
point running northerly a
distance of 56 feet along the
west curb of Kearny Avenue.
7:00
a.m.-1:00
p.m.
East Beginning at a point on the east
curb of Kearny Avenue 109 feet
7 inches north of the north curb
of Bergen Avenue and from that
point running north for a
distance of 44 feet two inches.
8:00
a.m.-1:00
p.m.
West Beginning at a point along the
west curbline of Kearny Avenue
178 feet north of the north-west
curb of Wood-land Avenue,
south 38 feet to the edge of the
drive-way to the adjacent
property.
§ 7-25 KEARNY CODE § 7-25
AO:364
Name of Street Time Side Location
Midland Avenue 8:00
a.m.-6:00
p.m.
South Beginning at a point on the
south curb of Midland Avenue
70 feet 4 inches east of the east
curbline of Kearny Avenue and
from that point running
westerly a distance of 50 feet
along the south curb of Midland
Avenue.
Sanford Avenue
[Ord. No.
2015-51]
6:00
a.m.-6:00
p.m.
East Beginning at a point 155 feet
north of the northeast curbline
of Harrison Avenue and Sanford
Avenue to a point 58 feet south
thereof
Woodland
Avenue
8:00
a.m.-6:00
p.m.
South Beginning at a point on the
south curb of Woodland Avenue
45 feet two inches east of the
east curb of Belgrove Drive and
from that point running
westerly a distance of 33 feet
along the south curb of
Woodland Avenue.
§ 7-26. BUS STOPS. [1973 Code § 132-21; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-28;
Ord. No. 2004-(O)-39; Ord. No. 2005-(O)-16; Ord. No. 2012-15]
The locations described are hereby designated as Bus Stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers, shall be
permitted to occupy the location between the hours indicated.
a. Belgrove Drive, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at:
1. Woodland Avenue — Far side.
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Woodland Avenue and
extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
2. Bergen Avenue — Near side.
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Bergen Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
b. Belgrove Drive, southbound, on the westerly side thereof at:
1. Woodland Avenue — Near side (prolongation).
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of
Woodland Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
2. Bergen Avenue — Near side.
§ 7-25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-26
AO:365
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Bergen Avenue and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom (at concrete, municipal
shelter).
c. Central Avenue, southbound, on the westerly side thereof at:
1. Between Hackensack Avenue and Lincoln Highway — (Mid-block)
Beginning 598 feet north of the prolongation of the northerly
curbline of Hackensack Avenue and extending 135 feet southerly
therefrom. (at Gate #7)
2. South Hackensack Avenue — Far side Beginning at the
prolongation of the southerly curbline of South Hackensack Avenue
and extending 100 feet southerly therefrom.
d. Along Central Avenue, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
1. South Hackensack Avenue — Near side.
Beginning at the southerly curbline of South Hackensack Avenue
and extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
e. Along Central Avenue, northbound, on the easterly side thereof:
1. Between Ford Lane, Block 288, Lot 10.02 and Hackensack Avenue
— (Mid-block). Beginning 175 feet south of the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Ford Lane and extending 135 feet southerly
therefrom. (Opposite the River Terminal Development Corporation
near utility pole E-63914 KY.)
2. The bus stop will be installed by N.J. Transit and will be served by
the No. 1 (Newark/Jersey City) bus route.
3. The Police Department shall enforce the needed traffic regulations
governing the said bus stop and provide the necessary police
security to ensure the safety of the traveling public.
(Note: Below are minimum standards for bus stop length which
are based on recommendations of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers and Studies conducted by the Bureau of Traffic
Engineering and Safety programs. These standards include
minimum lengths required for Bus Stops in order that buses may
leave moving traffic lanes safely. Keeping in mind that buses
alongside the curb within six inches thereof as provided by State
law pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-135. These minimums are as follows:
NEAR SIDE — 90 feet plus the distance from the curbline to the
end of the curb return, property line or crosswalk approximately
105 feet to 120 feet. Minimum acceptable length is 105 feet.
FAR SIDE — 85 feet plus the distance from the curbline to the end
of the curb return, property line or crosswalk approximately 105
feet to 120 feet. Minimum acceptable length is 105 feet.
§ 7-26 KEARNY CODE § 7-26
AO:366
§ 7-27. TAXI STANDS. [1973 Code § 132-20]
The locations described are hereby designated as Taxi Stands. No vehicle
other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy these locations during the
times indicated.
Name of Street Location Hours
(Reserved)
Note: Minimum length of taxi stand near intersection is 25 feet. Adding the
sidewalk area of about 10 feet to the area where parking is prohibited by
State Law would make the starting point approximately 35 feet from the
curbline. Other locations should be at least 30 feet for one taxi and 25 feet
for each additional taxi.
No taxi stand may be established in any area where it is prohibited to stand
or park by Statute pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-136.
§ 7-28. LANE USE RESERVATIONS. [New; Ord. No. 1999-O-29]
The lane locations described are designated as Lane Use Reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection Movement
Newark/Jersey City Turnpike,
and U.S. Post Office Driveway
Westbound left lane of Newark/Jersey
City Turnpike reserved for left turn only
Eastbound right lane of Newark/Jersey
City Turnpike reserved for right turn
only
Passaic Avenue and Bergen
Avenue
Westbound left lane of Bergen Avenue
reserved for left turn only
Westbound right lane of Bergen Avenue
reserved for right turn only
Passaic Avenue between Bergen
Avenue and Riverside Ford
Dealer
Southbound right lane of Passaic
Avenue reserved for right turn only into
various shopping malls and centers
along west side of Passaic Avenue
Passaic Avenue and driveways of
Foodtown, Burger King and
Channel Lumber
Southbound center lane of Passaic
Avenue reserved for through traffic
MID-BLOCK — No intersection on either side of roadside
minimum acceptable length is 135 feet.
FAR-SIDE — (AFTER BUS MAKES RIGHT TURN) — Minimum
acceptable length is 150 feet. An additional 45 feet of length
should be provided for each additional bus expected to stop
simultaneously.
§ 7-26 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-28
AO:367
Intersection Movement
Southbound right lane of Passaic
Avenue reserved for right turn only
Northbound left lane of Passaic Avenue,
reserved for left turn only
Passaic Avenue and south
driveway at K-Mart
Westbound left lane of south driveway
reserved for left turn only
Westbound right lane of south driveway
reserved for right turn only
Passaic Avenue between south
drive-way at K-Mart and Bergen
Avenue
Northbound right lane of Passaic
Avenue reserved for right turn only
Passaic Avenue and Route 7 Northbound left lane of Passaic Avenue
reserved for left turn only
Passaic Avenue and north
driveway of Shop Rite
Westbound left lane of driveway at Shop
Rite reserved for left turn only
Westbound right lane of driveway at
Shop Rite reserved for right turn only
Passaic Avenue and South
Midland Avenue
Southbound left lane of Passaic Avenue
reserved for left turn only
Schuyler Avenue and Route 7 Northbound left lane of Schuyler
Avenue reserved for left turn only
§ 7-29. SPEED LIMITS. [1973 Code § 132-46; Ord. No. 1996-O-49;
New; Ord. No. 1999-O-29; Ord. No. 2001-O-29 § 4; Ord. No.
2006-(O)-60 § 19]
Speed limits shall be established as follows: Regulatory and warning signs,
conforming to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways, shall be erected and maintained to effect the
designated speed limit(s), as required by the Commissioner of
Transportation of the State of New Jersey and as specified and authorized
in writing from the Bureau of Traffic Engineering of the Department of
Transportation.
Name of Street Speed Limit Location
Cammann Drive 15 MPH Entire length
Gunnel Oval 15 MPH Entire length
Newark/Jersey City
Turnpike
35 MPH From Schuyler Avenue to the
Conrail/Erie-Lackawanna
Overpass
§ 7-28 KEARNY CODE § 7-29
AO:368
Name of Street Speed Limit Location
Newark/Jersey City
Turnpike
40 MPH From the Conrail/Erie-
Lackawanna Overpass to
Route 7
§ 7-30. MID-BLOCK CROSSWALKS. [New; Ord. No. 2001-O-29 § 5;
Ord. No. 2002-O-20; Ord. No. 2013-46]
A Mid-Block Crosswalk shall be established and maintained at the following
locations.
Name of Street Location
Belgrove Drive [Ord.
No. 2013-46]
440 feet north of the northern curbline of Bergen
Avenue
Cammann Drive 440 feet east of Schuyler Avenue
Cammann Drive 740 feet east of Schuyler Avenue
Cammann Drive 880 feet east of Schuyler Avenue
Cammann Drive 1,220 feet east of Schuyler Avenue
Cammann Drive 1,500 feet east of Schuyler Avenue
Cammann Drive 1,900 feet east of Schuyler Avenue
Cammann Drive 2,210 feet east of Schuyler Avenue
Cammann Drive 2,390 feet east of Schuyler Avenue
Cammann Drive 2,790 feet east of Schuyler Avenue
Cammann Drive 3,010 feet east of Schuyler Avenue
Kearny Avenue From the east curbline to the west curbline of
Kearny Avenue 400 feet north of the northeast
curbline of Kearny Avenue and Bergen Avenue to
a point 10 feet 6 inches north
§ 7-31. NO PASSING ZONES. [New]
No Passing Zones are hereby established and shall be maintained upon the
following described streets or parts thereof.
Name of Street Sketch Dated Sketch No.
(Reserved)
§ 7-32. PERMIT PARKING.
§ 7-32.1. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 2000-O-2 § 1; Ord. No.
2000-O-14; Ord. No. 2001-O-§§ 1 — 5; Ord. No. 2012-46]
No vehicle shall park for more than two hours in one location on the streets
designated in Schedule A attached hereto or for more than three hours in
§ 7-29 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-32.1
AO:369
one location on the streets designated in Schedule B attached hereto during
the days and hours designated in the schedules unless:30
§ 7-32.2. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2000-O-2 § 2]
The following shall be exempt from this section:
§ 7-32.3. Addition of Streets to Schedule. [Ord. No. 2000-O-2 § 3]
Whenever the Chief of Police, or his designee, shall determine that certain
streets are being used for parking by the operators of vehicles who do not
reside on said streets, and that the average number of such vehicles is in
excess of 20% of the number of parking spaces on such streets and that the
total number of parking spaces actually occupied exceeds 75% of the total
number of parking spaces on such streets on the weekdays of any month,
then the Chief of Police, or his designee shall recommend to the Mayor and
Council that such streets be included within this section.
a. The vehicle is owned or operated on a regular basis by a resident and
the vehicle has displayed on the rear driver's side window or, if there is
no such window, on the driver's side window, in such a manner as to be
closely examined by an officer, a current residential parking permit; or
b. The vehicle is owned or operated by the owner or operator of a
commercial or professional business located in the area delineated in
Schedule A, or an employee of that business, and the vehicle has
displayed on the rear driver's side window or, if there is no such
window, on the driver's side window, in such a manner as to be closely
examined by an officer, a current parking permit; or
c. The vehicle falls under one of the exceptions to the parking ban under
subsection 7-32.2 hereof.
a. Visitors. Provided that the operator of the vehicle is a bona fide guest of
a residence within the permit parking area, a vehicle displaying a
current visitor's permit parking placard may park within the permit
parking area without the restrictions imposed under subsection 7-32.1.
The visitor's permit placard shall be displayed on the rear view mirror
of the vehicle in such a manner as to be clearly visible by an officer
enforcing parking regulations.
b. Contractors, Service and Delivery Vehicles. Contractors, service and
delivery vehicles bearing the name and address of a commercial
business may park without a permit during the time they are rendering
service to a residence within the permit parking area.
c. Emergency Vehicles. Emergency vehicles, telephone and other public
utility vehicles may park within the permit parking area during the time
they are rendering service or repairs within the area.
30.Editor's Note: The schedules referred to herein may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 7-32.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-32.4
AO:370
§ 7-32.4. Application for Permits. [Ord. No. 2000-O-2 § 4]
Application for parking permits under this section shall be made in writing
on forms provided to the Chief of Police or his designee. Applicants must
present proof satisfactory to the Chief of Police or his designee that the
terms and conditions of this section have been satisfied. Permits shall be
granted only under the following terms and conditions:
§ 7-32.5. Applicability of Other Ordinances. [Ord. No. 2000-O-2 § 5]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed provided that no parking may be established by this section in
any area where it is prohibited. The provisions of ordinances prohibiting
parking during street cleaning shall remain in effect and the possession of
a parking permit shall not be a defense to a violation of those ordinances.
§ 7-32.6. Violation and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2000-O-2 § 6]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a penalty not less than $20 and not exceeding $30.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a new violation occurs or continues.
§ 7-33. OFF-STREET OVERNIGHT RESIDENTIAL PARKING
FACILITIES.
§ 7-33.1. Creation of Off-Street Overnight Residential Parking
Facilities Program. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-51]
The Mayor and Council, by resolution, may designate for the development
and use of off-street parking facilities for overnight use by residents in
such areas within the Town as may be necessary to promote the intended
purposes of relieving traffic congestion and making provisions for
convenient off-street parking area for overnight residential use in order to
facilitate the free flow of traffic.
a. To persons who are residents on said street(s) or portion thereof set
forth in Schedule A of this section, a permit valid for six months shall be
issued for every vehicle owned or principally operated by such person.
b. Visitor permits shall be issued to each residential unit on any street or
portion thereof upon which parking is limited by this section for use by
visitors to that residential unit in accordance with the requirements of
subsection 7-32.2a of this section.
c. To such other persons or businesses, who in the judgment of the Chief
of Police are deemed to be suffering an undue hardship after
consideration of the purpose of this section.
§ 7-32.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-33.2
AO:371
§ 7-33.2. Designation, Location and Operation of Off-Street Parking
Facilities. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-51]
The Business Administrator from time to time shall make recommendations
as to potential locations, or portions thereof, to be designated for parking
facilities, which locations shall be considered for use as such facilities and
shall cause to have located and installed at such designated facilities all
necessary equipment and take all steps necessary for the effective operation
of such facilities upon approval by the Mayor and Council.
§ 7-33.3. Parking Permits Required. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-51]
Overnight parking between the limited hours specified by resolution for any
off-street overnight residential parking facility shall be permitted only to
persons who have obtained a proper permit as provided herein from the
Town.
§ 7-33.3A. Overnight Off-Street Parking With a Permit. [Ord. No.
2010-45; Ord. No. 2011-8; Ord. No. 2012-16; Ord. No. 2012-30;
amended 11-12-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-35]
The following are (i) areas designated as off-street parking locations for
overnight use only by residents who have been issued a parking permit as
provided for in Section 7-33 and (ii) the hours during which a permit shall
be required at each location:
Location Hours
Block 38, Lots 24, 25, 26 and 27 Mandee Parking
Lot 285 Kearny Avenue (across from Mandee's
store)
11:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Block 234, Lot 9 Chestnut Street (behind Mandee's
store)
10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Block 24, Lot 29 Sopranos Lot 101 Kearny Avenue 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Block 38, Lot 1 Provident Bank Maple Street
(behind Provident Bank)
10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Block 34 Lots 7 and 8 American Legion Post 99/
VFW Post #1302 Brighton Avenue Parking lot
9:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Block 260, Lot 7 Dowd Playground 61 Hoyt Street 9:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Block 28, Lot 30 Brighton Avenue Playground
23-41 Brighton Avenue
9:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Block 7, Lot 6 Police Substation Lot 50 Belgrove
Drive
9:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
§ 7-33.2 KEARNY CODE § 7-33.3A
AO:372
During the hours set forth above, any vehicle parked at any of the locations
aforesaid which does not display the permit provided for in Subsection
7-33.4d shall be deemed in violation of this section and shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15
days for each violation.
§ 7-33.4. Permit Applications and Authority to Issue. [Ord. No.
2004-(O)-51; Ord. No. 2013-32 § 1; Ord. No. 2016-31]
§ 7-33.5. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-51; Ord. No.
2013-32 §§ 2 — 6]
The following rules and regulations shall apply to the Town of Kearny Off-
Street Overnight Residential Off-Street Parking by Permit Program:
a. Applications for permits shall be available at the office of the Town
Clerk. An applicant shall file a completed application with the Clerk
who shall issue permits on a first-come, first-serve basis for each of the
available spaces in each of the off-street overnight residential parking
facilities. Applications will not be placed in the queue if they are not
complete, not verified or do not include a signed Hold Harmless
Agreement until such time as they are completed, verified and include
the Hold Harmless Agreement.
b. Applications for parking permits pursuant to this section shall be
provided only to eligible applicant who are residents or occupants of a
dwelling within the area designated for each specific off-street
overnight residential parking facility as more particularly described by
boundaries indicated on the map depicting eligible residences to be
determined for each facility.
c. There shall be an administrative fee of $125 for the issuance of a
parking permit to any resident under this subsection 7-33.4.
d. The permit shall be of a design and manufacture that will enable said
permit to be affixed to the rear window and readily visible to the
Parking Enforcement Officer through the rear window of the vehicle.
Placement of the permit contrary to the aforesaid will cause the permit
to be invalid and may result in the issuance of a parking and towing
ticket at the owner's expense.
a. A parking permit for overnight resident parking in a designated offstreet
parking facility of a design and manufacturer specified by the
Town will be issued to residents of the Town of Kearny for the
authorized vehicle.
b. Proof of residency of the owner of a vehicle must be presented when
applying for a permit in order to be included in the process. The
following are acceptable and required to be submitted as proof of
residency:
§ 7-33.3A ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-33.5
AO:373
§ 7-33.6. Term of Permits. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-51; Ord. No. 2013-32
§§ 7, 8]
1. A copy of a valid New Jersey driver's license reflecting an address
of a dwelling within the boundaries specifically designated for each
off-street parking facility; and
2. A copy of a valid New Jersey motor vehicle registration for which
the permit is sought showing an address of a dwelling within the
boundaries specifically designated for each off-street parking
facility; or
3. In the case of a vehicle claimed to be leased and used by an
otherwise qualified resident, a copy of a valid motor vehicle
registration and copy of the automobile lease shall be presented to
the Town Clerk in lieu of the New Jersey motor vehicle registration
shall be attached to the application for permit; and
4. A copy of a valid insurance card for the vehicle.
Residents who do not possess a valid New Jersey driver's license or
valid New Jersey vehicle registration or a valid insurance card shall
not be qualified make application for a permit.
c. Any resident to whom a permit shall be issued must display the permit
in accordance with subsection 7-33.4d above only in the vehicle
described and identified in the application. Parking permits are
restricted to the designated lot and cannot be utilized in any other
location.
d. In the event a resident permit holder should no longer possess the
vehicle for which the application was made, the permit issued shall be
returned to the Clerk's office. Upon delivery of the permit and
submission of the documents required above related to a newly
acquired vehicle, the permit will be transferred to the newly acquired
vehicle for the remainder of the term. Failure to return the originally
issued permit will forfeit the right to have a new permit issued for the
duration of the term. Permits are not transferable from vehicle to
vehicle. Failure to return the originally issued permit will also subject
the resident to any summons issued by the Police Department for a new
vehicle not displaying a sticker. All summonses are the responsibility of
the resident who failed to notify the Town Clerk in writing of any
changes to vehicles, licenses or registrations.
e. All vehicles must be properly maintained. Any vehicle creating a
hazardous condition (leaking fluid, etc.) will be towed at the owner's
expense.
f. Vehicle repairs are prohibited. Any permit holder repairing or having
repairs done on any vehicle in a parking lot shall have their permit
revoked and their vehicle will be subject to a parking ticket and towing
at the owner's expense.
§ 7-33.5 KEARNY CODE § 7-33.6
AO:374
§ 7-33.7. Violations. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-51]
The following violations shall result in automatic revocation of any off-street
overnight residential parking facility permit:
§ 7-33.8. Responsibility for Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2003-(O)-12 § 1;
Ord. No. 2004-(O)-51]
Enforcement of this section shall be the responsibility of the Police
Department.
§ 7-33.9. Penalty. [Ord. No. 2003-(O)-12 § 3; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-51]
The penalty for violation of this section shall be not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both and may result in
revocation of the permit issued hereunder.
§ 7-34. OFF-STREET BUSINESS PARKING FACILITIES.
a. Newly Designated Facilities. The Town Clerk shall accept applications
for permits for each newly designated off-street overnight residential
parking facility during the month of September. The permits issued
shall be effective retroactively from the first day of January and shall
remain effective until December 31 of the year they are issued.
b. Subsequent Permits. The Town Clerk shall accept applications for
permits after the initial issuance for each off-street overnight
residential parking facility between September 1 and September 30
each year. Upon selection in subsequent years following the initial
issuance, the permits to be issued shall be effective for a period of one
year commencing on the next January 1 and shall remain effective until
December 31 of the same year.
a. Willfully providing any false or inaccurate information for the purpose
of obtaining a permit hereunder.
b. Transferring a permit obtained hereunder to another person or vehicle.
c. Utilizing a permit obtained hereunder in a vehicle other than the
vehicle appearing on the application even though owned or operated by
the resident to whom a permit was issued.
d. Permitting a vehicle to remain in an off-street overnight residential
parking facility for any length of time beyond which is permitted for the
particular facility on more than two occasions.
e. Making repairs of any kind in an off-street overnight residential parking
facility.
§ 7-33.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-34.1
AO:375
§ 7-34.1. Creation of Off-street Business Parking Facilities
Program. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-15 § 7.34-1]
The Mayor and Council, by resolution, may designate for the development
and use of off-street parking, facilities for use by employees and business
owners in such areas within the Town as may be necessary to promote
the intended purposes of relieving traffic congestion and making provisions
for convenient off-street parking area for owners and employees of local
business establishments and in order to facilitate the free flow of traffic.
§ 7-34.2. Designation, Location and Operation of Off-street Parking
Facilities. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-15 § 7.34-2]
The Business Administrator from time to time shall make recommendations
as to potential locations, or portions thereof, to be designated for parking
facilities, which locations shall be considered for use as such facilities and
shall cause to have located and installed at such designated facilities all
necessary equipment and take all steps necessary for the effective operation
of such facilities upon approval by the Mayor and Council.
§ 7-34.3. Parking Permits Required. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-15 § 7.34-3]
Off-street business parking between the limited hours specified by
resolution for any off-street parking facility shall be permitted only to
persons who have obtained a proper permit as provided herein from the
Town. Permits shall be issued on an annual basis to eligible business owners
for their own use and for the use of their employees.
§ 7-34.4. Permit Applications and Authority to Issue; Fees. [Ord. No.
2005-(O)-15 § 7.34-4; Ord. No. 2015-24; Ord. No. 2015-46]
a. Business establishments located in the Town of Kearny may obtain an
off-street business parking permit for any employee or business owner
of such business establishment. The permit for off-street business
parking shall be limited to establishments adjacent to the designated
parking area as established by the Mayor and Council by resolution and
spaces reserved for off-street business parking permits shall be further
limited to not more than 20 spaces in any designated lot and to the
hours during which the employee or business owner is present at his or
her place of employment, but in no event prior to 8:00 a.m. or after 6:00
p.m. Monday through Saturday. Off-street business parking permits
shall not be valid on Sundays.
b. Applications for permits shall be available at the office of the Town
Clerk. All applications for off-street business parking permits shall be in
writing and executed by the owner or responsible officer of the
employer. Employees may not make application directly to the Town for
a permit. Upon completion of said application, it shall be delivered to
the Town Clerk who shall determine the issuance of permits for each of
the available spaces in each of the off-street parking facilities that are
designated for off-street business parking. The business applicant is
§ 7-34.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-34.4
AO:376
§ 7-34.5. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-15 § 7.34-5;
Ord. No. 2013-32 §§ 9, 10]
required to submit a signed Hold Harmless Agreement to the benefit of
the Town of Kearny as part of the application.
c. Applications for off-street business parking permits pursuant to this
section shall be provided only to eligible applicants who are business
owners of an establishment within the area designated for each specific
off-street parking facility as more particularly described by boundaries
indicated on the map depicting eligible business to be determined for
each facility.
d. There shall be an annual fee of $525 per parking permit issued.
e. (Reserved)
f. The permit shall be of a design and manufacture that will enable said
permit to be affixed to the rear window and readily visible to the
Parking Enforcement Officer through the rear window of the vehicle.
Placement of the permit contrary to the aforesaid will cause the permit
to be invalid and may result in the issuance of a parking ticket and/or
subject the vehicle to towing at the owner's expense.
g. Overnight Commercial Off-Street Parking Permit. The annual fee for an
Overnight Commercial Off-Street Parking Permit shall be $250 and
shall be limited to the Mandee lot, the Police substation lot and the 101
Kearny Avenue Lot.31
h. Front-end (Head on) Parking.
1. At all times all vehicles at the Town owned parking facility at 101
Kearny Avenue shall be parked within marked parking spaces
front-end in first.
2. The Police Department shall install and maintain appropriate
signage notifying users of the requirement.
3. Violators may be towed.
4. The penalty for each violation of paragraph 7-34.4h shall be no
more than $50.32
a. The following rules and regulations shall apply to the Town of Kearny
Off-Street Business Parking by Permit Program:
1. Parking permits for off-street business parking in a designated offstreet
parking facility of a design and manufacturer specified by
the Town will be issued to the business applicants only.
31.Editor's Note: See also Section 7-37.
32.Editor's Note: See also Section 7-37
§ 7-34.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-34.5
AO:377
2. Proof of business ownership is required on the application and the
Kearny Police Department shall be entitled to obtain periodic
verification of all relevant information and shall have the authority
to recommend the invalidation or non-renewal of any off-street
business parking permit issued pursuant to this section if the
information indicates nonentitlement to the business permit.
Business applicants shall be responsible for any vehicle to which
a business parking permit may be affixed and required for each to
provide:
(a) Proof of ownership or responsible officer of an eligible
business;
(b) A copy of a valid driver's license for the driver each vehicle the
permit will be affixed to; and
(c) A copy of a valid motor vehicle registration for each vehicle
which the permit is sought; or
(d) In the case of a vehicle claimed to be leased and used by an
otherwise qualified applicant, a copy of a valid motor vehicle
registration and copy of the automobile lease shall be
presented to the Town Clerk in lieu of the motor vehicle
registration shall be attached to the application for permit; and
(e) A copy of a valid insurance card for each vehicle.
3. Any business applicant to whom a permit shall be issued must
insure that the permit is displayed accordance with subsection
7-34.4f above only on the vehicle described and identified in the
business's application. Parking permits are restricted to the
designated lot and cannot be utilized in any other location.
4. In the event an off-street business parking permit should no longer
be needed for display on the vehicle for which the application was
made, the permit issued shall be returned to the Clerk's Office.
Upon delivery of the business parking permit and submission of the
documents required above related to a new vehicle, the permit will
be transferred to the new vehicle for the remainder of the term.
Failure to return the originally issued permit will forfeit the right to
have a new permit issued for the duration of the term. Permits are
otherwise not transferable from vehicle to vehicle. Failure to return
the originally issued permit will also subject the resident to any
summons issued by the Police Department for a new vehicle not
displaying a sticker. All summonses are the responsibility of the
resident who failed to notify the Town Clerk in writing of any
changes to vehicles, licenses or registration.
5. All vehicles must be properly maintained. Any vehicle creating a
hazardous condition (leaking fluid, etc.) will be towed at the
owner's expense.
§ 7-34.5 KEARNY CODE § 7-34.5
AO:378
§ 7-34.6. Term of Permits. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-15 § 7.34-6; Ord. No.
2013-32 § 11]
The Town Clerk shall accept applications for permits after the initial
issuance for each off-street business parking permits as necessary during
the year. Any permit issued shall be effective until December 31. Thereafter,
applications for permit renewals shall be accepted between November 1
and November 30 each year. Subsequent renewals following the initial
issuance of a permit, shall be effective for a period of one year commencing
on the next January 1 and shall remain effective until December 31 of the
same year.
§ 7-34.7. Violations. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-15 § 7.34-7]
§ 7-34.8. Responsibility for Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-15
§ 7.34-8]
Enforcement of this section shall be the responsibility of the Police
Department.
§ 7-34.9. Penalty. [34-9]
The penalty for violation of this section shall be not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both and may result in
revocation of the permit issued hereunder.
6. Vehicle Repairs are Prohibited. Any permit holder repairing or
having repairs done on any vehicle in a parking lot shall have their
permit revoked and their vehicle will be subject to a parking ticket
and towing at the owner's expense.
a. The following violations shall result in automatic revocation of any offstreet
business parking permit:
1. Willfully providing any false or inaccurate information for the
purpose of obtaining a permit hereunder.
2. Transferring a permit obtained hereunder to another person or
vehicle.
3. Utilizing a permit obtained hereunder in a vehicle other than the
vehicle appearing on the application even though owned or
operated by the individual to whom a permit was issued.
4. Permitting a vehicle to remain in an off-street parking facility for
any length of time beyond which is permitted for the particular
facility on more than two occasions.
5. Making repairs of any kind in an off-street parking facility.
§ 7-34.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-34.10
AO:379
§ 7-34.10. Repealer. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-15 § 7.34-10]
All ordinances and parts thereof conflicting herewith be, and the same
hereby are, repealed.
§ 7-34.11. Severability. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-15§ 7.34-11]
If any subsection, paragraph subdivision, clause or provision of this section
shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to that
subsection, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision so adjudged, and the
remainder of this section shall be deemed to be valid and effective.
§ 7-34.12. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-15 § 7.34-12]
This section shall be effective upon passage and publication as required by
law.
§ 7-35. HANDICAPPED PARKING.
§ 7-35.1. Handicapped Parking on Streets.33 [Ordinance History:
Ord. Nos. 1996-37; 1996-48; 1996-54; 1997-4; 1997-6; 1997-22;
1997-37; 1998-O-3; 1998-O-10; 1998-O-27; 1998-O-32; 1998-O-44;
1998-O-52; 1999-O-14 §§ 1, 2; 1999-O-21 § 1; 1999-O-22 § 1;
1999-O-24 § 1; 1999-O-28 § 1; 1999-O-29; 2000-O-03 § 1; 2000-O-07
§ 1; 2000-O-11 § 1; 2000-O-12 § 1; 2000-O-20 § 1; 2000-O-24 § 1;
2000-O-25; 2000-O-30 § 1; 2000-O-31 § 1; 2000-O-38 § 1; 2000-O-44
§ 1; 2000-O-47 § 1; 2000-O-49 § 1; 2001-O-11 § 1; 2001-O-02 § 1;
2001-O-15 § 1; 2001- O-16 § 1; 2001-O-19 § 1; 2001-O-20 § 1;
2001-O-21 § 1; 2001-O-27 § 1; 2001-O-33 § 1; 2001-O-42 § 1;
2001-O-50 § 1; 2001-O-59 § 1; 2002-O-1 § 1; 2002-O-5 § 1;
2002-O-13 § 1; 2002-O-14 § 1; 2002-O-15 § 1; 2002-O-19 § 1;
2002-O-21 § 1; 2002-O-22 § 1; 2002-O-23 § 1; 2002-O-24 § 1;
2002-O-30 § 1; 2002-O-33 § 1; 2002-O-34 § 1; 2002-O-36 § 1;
2002-O-41 § 1; 2002-O-55 § 1; 2002-O-56 § 1; 2002-O-57 § 1;
2002-O-58 § 1; 2002-O-68 § 1; 2002-O-75 § 1; 2002-O-76 § 1;
2002-O-79 § 1; 2002-O-80 § 1; 2002-O-81 § 1; 2003-(O)-01;
2003-(O)-08; 2003-(O)-17; 2003-O-19; 2003-O-27; 2003-O-28;
2003-O-29; 2003-O-35; 2003-O-36; 2003-O-37; 2003-O-39;
2003-O-41; 2003-O-42; 2003-O-44; 2003-O-45; 2003-O-48;
2003-O-53; 2003-O-54; 2003-O-56; 2003-O-58; 2003-O-60;
2004-O-01; 2004-O-02; 2004- O-13; 2004-O-19; 2004-O-20;
2004-O-21; 2004-O-29; 2004-O-31; 2004-O-32; 2004-O-35;
2004-O-38; 2004-O-39; 2004-O-40; 2004-O-42; 2004-O-44;
2004-O-45; 2004-O-54; 2004-O-55; 2004-O-61; 2004- O-62;
2004-O-66; 2004-O-67; 2005-(O)-01 § 1; 2005-(O)-02 § 1;
2005-(O)-05 § 1; 2005-(O)-08 § 1; 2005-(O)-24 § 1; 2005-(O)-26 § 1;
2005-(O)-28 § 1; 2005-(O)-29 § 1; 2005-(O)-39 § 1; 2005-(O)-40 § 1;
33.Editor's Note: See subsection 7-35.2 for the establishment of a Restricted Parking Zone in
front of a residence and the permit fee required.
§ 7-34.10 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:380
2005-(O)-41 § 1; 2005-(O)-45 § 1; 2005-(O)-46 § 1; 2005-(O)-51 § 1;
2005-(O)-55 § 1; 2006-(O)-01 § 1; 2006-(O)-02 § 1; 2006-(O)-03 § 1;
2006-(O)-07 § 1; 2006-(O)-10 § 1; 2006-(O)-14 § 1; 2006-(O)-17 § 1;
2006-(O)-18 § 1; 2006-(O)-23 § 1; 2006-(O)-24 § 1; 2006-(O)-28 § 1;
2006-(O)-33 § 1; 2006-(O)-38 § 1; 2006-(O)-40 § 1; 2006-(O)-41 § 1;
2006-(O)-45 § 1; 2006-(O)-48 § 1; 2006-(O)-51 § 1; 2006-(O)-52 § 1;
2006-(O)-53 § 1; 2006-(O)-59 § 1; 2006-(O)-61 § 1; 2006-(O)-62 § 1;
2006-(O)-65 § 1; 2007-(O)-01 § 1; 2007-(O)-02 § 1; 2007-(O)-08 § 1;
2007-(O)-13 § 1; 2007-(O)-18 § 1; 2007-(O)-24 § 1; 2007-(O)-36 § 1;
2007-(O)-37 § 1; 2007-(O)-44 § 1; 2007-(O)-46 § 1; 2007-(O)-47 § 1;
2007-(O)-48 § 1; 2007-(O)-51 § 1; 2007-(O)-56 § 1; 2007-(O)-57 § 1;
2007-(O)-63 § 1; 2007-(O)-69 § 1; 2008-(O)-1 § 1; 2008-(O)-02 § 1;
2008-(O)-06 § 1; 2008-(O)-09 § 1; 2008-(O)-10 § 1; 2008-(O)-13 § 1;
2008-(O)-18 § 1; 2008-(O)-19 § 1; 2008-(O)-22 § 1; 2008-(O)-23 § 1;
2008-(O)-30 § 1; 2008-(O)-31 § 1; 2008-(O)-37 § 1; 2008-(O)-39 § 1;
2008-(O)-40 § 1; 2008-(O)-41; 2009-1 § 1; 2009-2 § 1; 2009-4 § 1;
2009-8 § 1; 2009-10 § 1; 2009-11 § 1; 2009-14 § 1; 2009-15 § 1;
2009-16 § 1; 2009-22 § 1; 2009-23 § 1; 2009-24 § 1; 2009-27 § 1;
2009-28 § 1; 2009-32 § 1; 2009-35 § 1; 2009-36 § 1; 2009-41 § 1;
2009-43 § 1; 2009-44 § 1; 2009-49 § 1; 2009- 50 § 1; 2010-3 § 1;
2010-4 § 1; 2010-8 § 1; 2010-15 § 1; 2010-16 § 1; 2010-17 § 1;
2010-28 § 1; 2010-29 § 1; 2010-30 § 1; 2010-31 § 1; 2010-35 § 1;
2010-37; 2010-42; 2010-43; 2010-46; 2101-47; 2010-50; 2010-51;
2010-53; 2011-1; 2011-7; 2011-9; 2011-10; 2011-15; 2011-16;
2011-19; 2011-23; 2011-24; 2011-25; 2011-28; 2011-30; 2011-31;
2011-32; 2011-34; 2011-35; 2011-38; 2011-39; 2011-40; 2011-41;
2011-42; 2011-46; 2011-47; 2011-48; 2011-50; 2012-1; 2012-4;
2012-8; 2012-9; 2012-13; 2012-14; 2012-17; 2012-21; 2012-24;
2012-25; 2012-28; 2012-29; 2012-33; 2012-42; 2012-43; 2012-50;
2012-51; 2012-54; 2012-55; 2012-60; 2012-64; 2012-65; 2012-66;
2013-1; 2013-3; 2013-4; 2013-9; 2013-10; 2013-14; 2013-15;
2013-16; 2013-23; 2013-25; 2013-26; 2013-31; 2013-36; 2013-37;
2013-41; 2013-42; 2014-1; 2014-2; 2014-3; 2014-6; 2014-7;
2014-14; 2014-15; 2014-16; 2014-18; 2014-23; 2014-24; 2014- 27;
2014-28; 2014-31; 2014-32; 2014-34; 2014-35; 2014-36; 2014-37;
2014-38; 2014-39; 2014-45; 2014- 48; 2014-49; 2014-50; 2014-53;
2015-1; 2015-4; 2015-10; 2015-11; 2015-14; 2015-15; 2015-18;
2015- 22; 2015-23; 2015-26; 2015-27; 2015-34; 2015-36; 2015-37;
2015-38; 2015-39; 2015-41; 2015-43; 2015- 44; 2015-48; 2015-49;
2015-55; 2015-56; 2016-3; 2016-6; 2016-8; 2016-9; 2016-10;
2016-13; 2016-14; 2016-24; 2016-25; 2016-29; 2016-30; 2016-36;
2016-37; 2016-38; 2016-39; 2016-43; 2016-49; 2016-50; 2016-51;
2016-52; 2016-56; 2016-57; 2017-01; 2017-07; 2017-08; 2017-11;
2017-12; 2017-13; 2017-14; 2017-18; 2017-19; 2017-24; 2017-25;
2017-27; 2017-28; 2017-30; 2017-32; 2017-33; 2017-35; 2017-36;
2017-37; 2017-39; 2017-43; 2017-47; 2017-48; 2017-51; 2017-56;
2017-58; 2018-01; 2018-04; 2018-05; 2018-06; 2018-14; 2018-15;
2018-16; 2018-18; 2018-26; 2018-27; 2018-32; 2018-34; 2018-35;
2018-39; 2018-40; 2018-42; 2018-43; 2018-45; 2018-47; 2018-50;
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:381
2018-51; 2019-03; 2019-04; 2019-06; 2019-07; 2019-08; 2019-09;
2019-10; 2019-11; 2019-16]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following on
street locations are designated as handicapped parking places. Such spaces
are for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or
plates or placards by the Division of Motor Vehicles, or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in
these places.
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
132 Afton Street 1 Beginning at a point 25
feet west of the
southwest curbline of
Afton Street and Maple
Street to a point 22 feet
west thereof
2014-3,
2018-32,
2018-35
45 Alpine Place Rescinded by
2016-6
301 Argyle Place 1 Beginning at a point 111
feet south of the
southwest curb line of
Belleville Turnpike and
Argyle Place to a point
22 feet north thereof
2016-50
6 Beech Street 1 Beginning at a point 57
feet north of the
northeast curbline of
Beech Street and Quincy
Avenue to a point 22 feet
north thereof
2019-34
51 Beech Street 1 Beginning at a point 191
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Beech Street and
Oakwood Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
2019-21
58 Beech Street Rescinded by
2016-51
91 Beech Street,
Apt. 29
2014-18,
rescinded by
2016-36
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:382
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
149 Beech Street 1 Beginning at a point 225
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Beech Street and
Midland Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
169 Beech Street 1 Beginning at a point 458
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Beech Street and
Midland Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
2015-39
217 Beech Street 1 Beginning at a point 168
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Beech Street and Laurel
Avenue to a point 22 feet
north thereof
245 Beech Street 2015-11,
rescinded by
2015-55
425 Beech Street 1 Beginning at a point 154
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Belleville Turnpike and
Beech Street to a point
22 feet south thereof
2020-05
248 Belgrove
Drive
1 Beginning at a point 236
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Belgrove Drive and
Bergen Avenue to a point
22 feet south thereof
2016-3
250 Belgrove
Drive
1 Beginning at a point 213
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Bergen Avenue and
Belgrove Drive to a point
22 feet south thereof
2020-05
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:383
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
253 Belgrove
Drive
1 Beginning at a point 187
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Belgrove Drive and
Bergen Avenue to a point
22 feet south thereof
2015-49
410 Belgrove
Drive
1 Beginning at a point 611
feet north of the
northeast curb line of
Halstead Street and
Belgrove Drive to a point
22 feet south thereof
2016-57
95 Bergen
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 162
feet west of the
northwest curbline of
Bergen Avenue and
Highland Avenue to a
point 22 feet east thereof
100 Bergen
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 134
feet east of the southeast
curbline of Bergen
Avenue and Brighton
Avenue to a point 22 feet
west thereof
166 Bergen
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 67
feet west of the
southwest curbline of
Bergen Avenue and
Chestnut Street to a
point 17 feet west
thereof
2019-31
258 Bergen
Avenue
Rescinded by
2019-3
276 Bergen
Avenue
2012-51,
rescinded by
2017-47
9 Boyd Street 1 Beginning at a point 108
feet west of the
northwest curbline of
Boyd Street and
Chestnut Street to a
point 22 feet east thereof
2013-42
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:384
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
36 Brighton
Avenue
Rescinded by
2016-8
75 Brighton
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 123
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Brighton and Bergen to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
79 Brighton
Avenue
2009-49,
rescinded by
2014-34
163 Brighton
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 123
feet north of the
northwest curb line of
Brighton Avenue and
Halstead Street to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
2017-37
166 Brighton
Avenue
2013-37,
rescinded by
2017-11
169 Brighton
Avenue
2014-15,
rescinded by
2014-34
173 Brighton
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 236
feet north of the
northeast curb line of
Brighton Avenue and
Halstead Street to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
2018-27
180 Brighton
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 135
feet of the southeast
curbline of Brighton
Avenue and Liberty
Street to a point 22 feet
south thereof
185 Brighton
Avenue
2012-55,
rescinded by
2017-39
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:385
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
197 Brighton
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 535
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Brighton and Halstead to
a point 22 feet north
thereof
226 Brighton
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 157
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Brighton Avenue and
Rutland Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
Calvary
Chapel
1 Beginning at a point 98
feet west of the
southwest curbline of
Oakwood Avenue and
Forest Street to a point
22 feet west thereof
Chestnut
Street
2 37 feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Garfield Avenue and
Chestnut Street to a
point 44 feet south
thereof; adjacent to the
rear entry of the Kearny
Public Library
19 Chestnut
Street
1 Beginning at a point 231
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Chestnut Street and
Johnston Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
24 Chestnut
Street
1 271 feet north of the
northeast curbline of
Johnston Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
28 Chestnut
Street
2017-37,
rescinded by
2018-39
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:386
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
86 Chestnut
Street
2013-1,
rescinded by
2018-6
96 Chestnut
Street
1 Beginning at a point 148
feet north of the
northeast curbline of
Chestnut Street and
Dukes Street to a point
22 feet south thereof
2017-48
140 Chestnut
Street
Rescinded by
2018-42
149 Chestnut
Street
Rescinded by
2015-48
151 Chestnut
Street
2013-37,
rescinded by
2015-14
153 Chestnut
Street
2014-37,
rescinded by
2016-10
154 Chestnut
Street
1 Beginning at a point 80
feet north of the
northeast curb line of
Chestnut Street and
Wilson Avenue to a point
22 feet north thereof
2015-39,
rescinded by
2018-4,
added by
2019-11
160 Chestnut
Street
1 Beginning at a point 185
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Chestnut Street and
Boyd Street to a point 22
feet north thereof
2014-32
166 Chestnut
Street
2010-42,
rescinded by
2014-31
175 Chestnut
Street
1 Beginning at a point 26
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Boyd Street to a point 22
feet north thereof
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:387
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
188 Chestnut
Street
1 Beginning at a point 160
feet north of the
northeast curbline of
Boyd Street to a point 22
feet north thereof
202 Chestnut
Street
1 Beginning at a point 130
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Chestnut Street and
Bergen Avenue to a point
22 feet south thereof
2020-17
232 Chestnut
Street
2011-46,
rescinded by
2014-38
294 Chestnut
Street
1 Beginning at a point 116
feet north of the
northeast curb line of
Chestnut Street and
Garfield Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
2018-40
332 Chestnut
Street
2013-16,
rescinded by
2017-24
348 Chestnut
Street
1 Beginning at a point 20
feet south of the
southeast curb line of
Chestnut Street and
Liberty Street to a point
22 feet south thereof
2017-28
366 Chestnut
Street
2015-1,
rescinded by
2019-3
403 Chestnut
Street
1 Beginning at a point 212
feet south of the
southwest curb line of
Chestnut Street and
Quincy Avenue to a point
22 feet south thereof
2017-12
458 Chestnut
Street
Rescinded by
2016-49
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:388
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
678 Chestnut
Street
1 308 feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Stewart Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
683 Chestnut
Street
1 Beginning at a point 293
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Chestnut Street and
Stewart Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
683-1/
2
Chestnut
Street
1 Beginning at a point 488
feet north of the
northwest curb line of
Chestnut Street and
Laurel Avenue to a point
22 feet north thereof
2018-15
686 Chestnut
Street
2016-57,
rescinded by
2017-30
690 Chestnut
Street
1 Beginning at a point 166
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Chestnut Street and
Stewart Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
691 Chestnut
Street
1 Beginning at a point 195
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Chestnut Street and
Stewart Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
695-1/
2
Chestnut
Street
1 Beginning at a point 137
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Chestnut Street and
Stewart Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:389
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
826 Chestnut
Street
1 Beginning at a point 411
feet south of southeast
curbline of Chestnut
Street and Belleville
Turnpike to a point 22
feet north thereof
2014-32
46-48Columbia
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 275
feet west of the
southwest curbline of
Columbia Avenue and
Chestnut Street to a
point 22 feet west
thereof
2013-10
37 Davis Avenue 2015-34,
rescinded by
2017-43
56 Davis Avenue
(on the Devon
Terrace side)
Rescinded by
2019-38
61 Davis Avenue 1 Beginning at a point
107.1 feet south of the
curbline of the southwest
corner of Davis Avenue
and Wilson Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
2015-18
105 Davis Avenue Rescinded by
2018-45
149 Davis Avenue 1 Beginning at a point 129
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Davis Avenue and Bergen
Avenue to a point 22 feet
north thereof
2019-39
194 Davis Avenue
#24
1 Beginning at a point
804.1 feet north of the
curbline of the northeast
corner of Davis Avenue
and Bergen Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
2015-27
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:390
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
194 Davis Avenue
#30
2014-50,
rescinded by
2016-6
263 Davis Avenue 1 Beginning at a point 119
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Davis Avenue and King
Street to a point 22 feet
south thereof
2020-13,
2020-18
307 Davis Avenue 1 Beginning at a point
338.6 feet south of the
curbline of the southwest
corner of Davis Avenue
and Quincy Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
2015-18
323 Davis Avenue 1 Beginning at a point 129
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Davis Avenue and Quincy
Avenue to a point 22 feet
north thereof
325 Davis Avenue 1 Beginning at a point 111
feet south of the curbline
of the northwest corner
of Davis Avenue and
Quincy Avenue to a point
22 feet north thereof
2014-45
343 Davis Avenue 2015-1,
rescinded by
2017-30
344 Davis Avenue 1 Beginning at a point 196
feet north of the
northeast curb line of
Davis Avenue and Quincy
Avenue to a point 22 feet
south thereof
2018-27
404 Davis Avenue 1 Beginning at a point 103
feet north of the
northeast curbline of
Davis Avenue and
Oakwood Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
2014-24
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:391
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
413 Davis Avenue 1 Beginning at a point 180
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Davis Avenue and
Oakwood Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
2014-16
415 Davis Avenue 1 Beginning at a point 216
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Davis Avenue and
Oakwood Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
2014-7
425 Davis Avenue 1 Beginning at a point 335
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
David Avenue and
Oakwood Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
2012-55
426 Davis Avenue 1 Beginning at a point 326
feet north of the
northeast curbline of
Davis Avenue and
Oakwood Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
2020-26
429 Davis Avenue 1 Beginning at a point 400
feet north of the
Oakwood Avenue
curbline of Davis Avenue
to a point 22 feet north
thereof
433 Davis Avenue Rescinded by
2017-47
435 Davis Avenue 2012-43,
rescinded by
2018-14
451 Davis Avenue 2019-17,
rescinded by
2019-29
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:392
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
545 Davis Avenue 1 Beginning at a point 222
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Davis Avenue and Pierce
Place to a point 22 feet
north thereof
2017-28
683 Davis Avenue 2011-41,
rescinded by
2014-49
81 Devon Street 2013-27,
rescinded by
2015-38
103 Devon Street 2015-11,
rescinded by
2018-1
106 Devon Street 2015-44,
rescinded by
2017-32
125 Devon Street 1 Beginning at a point 93
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Devon Street and Hoyt
Street to a point 22 feet
south thereof
127 Devon Street 1 Beginning at a point 92
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Devon Street and Hoyt
Street to a point 22 feet
north thereof
129 Devon Street 1 Beginning at a point 114
feet from the northwest
curbline of Devon Street
and Hoyt Street and
extending to a point 22
feet north thereof
153 Devon Street 1 Beginning at a point 25
feet west of the
northwest curbline of
Devon Street and Wilson
Avenue to a point 22 feet
west thereof
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:393
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
178 Devon Street 1 Beginning at a point 94
feet north of the
northeast curbline of
Wilson Avenue and
Devon Street to a point
22 feet south thereof
184 Devon Street,
Apt. 2
1 Beginning at a point 171
feet north of the
northeast curb line of
Devon Street and Wilson
Avenue to a point 22 feet
south thereof
2016-52
204 Devon Street 1 Beginning at a point 52
feet north of the
prolongation of the
northwest curbline of
Devon Street and Boyd
Street to a point 22 feet
south thereof
207 Devon Street 2013-14,
rescinded by
2018-4
209 Devon Street Rescinded by
2018-14 and
2019-3
225 Devon Street 1 Beginning at a point 170
feet south of the
southwest curb line of
Bergen Avenue and
Devon Street to a point
22 feet south thereof
2019-8
279 Devon Street 1 Beginning at a point 448
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Devon Street and
Garfield Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
464 Devon Street 1 Beginning at a point 206
feet north of the
northeast curbline of
Devon Street and Quincy
Avenue to a point 22 feet
south thereof
2013-37
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:394
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
516 Devon Street 1 Beginning at a point 28
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Devon Street and
Oakwood Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
562 Devon Street Rescinded by
2017-18
564 Devon Street 1 Beginning at a point 223
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Devon Street and
Midland Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
588 Devon Street 2014-18,
rescinded by
2019-6
597 Devon Street 2019-21,
rescinded by
2020-14
599 Devon Street Rescinded by
2018-1
650 Devon Street 2015-1,
2015-28,
rescinded by
2017-47
690 Devon Street 1 Beginning at a point 156
feet north of the
northeast curb line of
Devon Street and Laurel
Avenue to a point 22 feet
south thereof
2019-4
717-1/
2
Devon Street Rescinded by
2017-13
721 Devon Street 2014-53,
rescinded by
2020-11
725 Devon Street Rescinded by
2019-33
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:395
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
731 Devon Street 1 Beginning at a point 135
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Stewart Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
811 Devon Street Rescinded by
2020-14
21 Devon
Terrace
1 Beginning at a point 254
feet east of the northeast
curbline of Devon
Terrace and Devon
Street to a point 22 feet
east thereof
2020-17
94 Devon
Terrace
1 Beginning at a point 322
feet east of the southeast
curb line of Devon
Terrace and Davis
Avenue to a point 22 feet
west thereof
2016-57
128 Devon
Terrace
Rescinded by
2016-29
146 Devon
Terrace
1 Beginning at a point 162
feet west of the
southwest curbline of
Devon Terrace and
Schuyler Avenue to a
point 22 feet west
thereof
Rescinded by
2020-21,
added by
2020-22
152 Devon
Terrace
2013-37,
rescinded by
2019-3
14 Dukes Street 2006-7,
rescinded by
2013-31
18 Dukes Street 1 Beginning at a point 25
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Chestnut Street and
Dukes Street to a point
22 feet south thereof
24 Dukes Street Rescinded by
2018-6
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:396
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
35 Dukes Street 2014-32,
rescinded by
2014-49
40 Dukes Street Rescinded by
2017-7
43 Dukes Street 1 Beginning at a point 120
feet east of the northeast
curb line of Dukes Street
and Devon Street to a
point 22 feet east thereof
Rescinded by
2017-13,
added by
2018-18
58 Dukes Street 2015-18,
rescinded by
2018-1
137 Elm Street 1 Beginning at a point 216
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Elm Street and Bergen
Avenue to a point 22 feet
north thereof
139 Elm Street 1 Beginning at a point 240
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Elm Street and Bergen
Avenue to a point 22 feet
north thereof
143 Elm Street 1 Beginning at a point 291
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Bergen Avenue and Ivy
Street to a point 22 feet
north thereof
262 Elm Street 1 Beginning at a point 152
feet north of the King
Street curbline of Elm
Street to a point 22 feet
north thereof
295 Elm Street Rescinded by
2016-49
345 Elm Street 2010-53,
rescinded by
2017-47
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:397
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
348 Elm Street Rescinded by
2015-48
354 Elm Street 1 Beginning at a point 404
feet north of the
northeast curbline of
Elm Street and Quincy
Avenue to a point 22 feet
south thereof
2013-16
442 Elm Street 2013-37,
rescinded by
2014-34
496 Elm Street 1 Beginning at a point 175
feet north of the
northeast curb line of
Elm Street and Garafola
Place to a point 22 feet
south thereof
2017-48
616 Elm Street 2014-27,
rescinded by
2014-36
625 Elm Street 1 Beginning at a point 210
feet north of the
northwest curb line of
Elm Street and Stewart
Avenue to a point 22 feet
south thereof
2017-37
635 Elm Street 1 Beginning at a point 112
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Elm Street and
Stuyvesant Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
654 Elm Street 2006-33,
rescinded by
2014-2
659 Elm Street 2002-79,
rescinded by
2017-35
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:398
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
667 Elm Street 1 Beginning at a point 292
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Elm Street and
Stuyvesant Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
2018-27
676 Elm Street 1 Beginning at a point 396
feet north of the
northeast curbline of
Stuyvesant Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
692 Elm Street 1 Beginning at a point 220
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Elm Street and Seeley
Avenue to a point 22 feet
south thereof
714 Elm Street 1 Beginning at a point 74
feet north of the
northeast curbline of
Seeley Avenue and Elm
Street to a point 22 feet
north thereof
2019-17
732 Elm Street 1 Beginning at a point 405
feet north of the
northeast curbline of
Elm Street and Seeley
Avenue to a point 22 feet
south thereof
First
Presbyterian
Church of
Arlington
1 Beginning at a point 45
feet west of the
southwest curbline of
Laurel Avenue and
Kearny Avenue to a point
22 feet west thereof
140 Forest Street 2010-28,
rescinded by
2016-56
169 Forest Street Rescinded by
2019-3
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:399
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
251 Forest Street 1 Beginning at a point 98
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Forest Street and King
Street to a point 22 feet
north thereof
2015-44
328 Forest Street 1 Beginning at a point
133.7 feet north of the
curbline of the northeast
corner of Forest Street
and Quincy Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
2015-23
333-1/
2
Forest Street 1 Beginning at a point 200
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Forest Street and Quincy
Avenue to a point 22 feet
south thereof
2014-32
338 Forest Street Rescinded by
2016-43
345 Forest Street 1 Beginning at a point 312
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Forest Street and
Oakwood Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
2020-02
371 Forest Street 2009-32,
rescinded by
2019-16
378 Forest Street Rescinded by
2017-13
504 Forest Street 1 Beginning at a point 38.8
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Forest Street and Pierce
Place to a point 22 feet
south thereof
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:400
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
593 Forest Street 1 Beginning at a point 163
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Forest Street and
Stewart Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
2015-49
694 Forest Street 1 Beginning at a point 134
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Seeley Avenue and
Forest Street to a point
22 feet north thereof
2019-39
713 Forest Street 2016-3,
rescinded by
2016-25
21 Fuller Place 2014-35,
rescinded by
2017-35
3 Grove Street 1 Beginning at a point 58
feet east of the northeast
curb line of Grove Street
and Highland Avenue to
a point 22 feet east
thereof
2018-43
4 Grove Street 1 Beginning at a point 141
feet west of the
southwest curbline of
Windsor Street and
Grove Street to a point
22 feet west thereof
2014-7
36 Halstead
Street
2009-22,
rescinded by
2014-49
60 Halstead
Street
1 Beginning at a point 105
feet east of the southeast
curbline of Windsor
Street and Halstead
Street to a point 22 feet
east thereof
2019-28
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:401
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
81 Halstead
Street
1 Beginning at a point 139
feet west of the
northwest curbline of
Halstead Street and
Kearny Avenue to a point
22 feet east thereof
4 Harding
Terrace
2014-24,
rescinded by
2016-24
23 Harding
Terrace
1 Beginning at a point 35
feet west of the
northwest curb line of
Harding Terrace and
Belgrove Drive to a point
22 feet west thereof
2018-50
271 Hickory
Street
2006-65,
rescinded by
2017-47
274 Hickory
Street
1 Beginning at a point 311
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Hickory Street and
Quincy Avenue to a point
22 feet south thereof
2019-28
294 Hickory
Street
1 Beginning at a point 80
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Hickory Street and
Quincy Avenue to a point
22 feet south thereof
315 Hickory
Street
2019-4,
rescinded by
2019-38
319 Hickory
Street
2014-37,
rescinded by
2020-14
337 Hickory
Street
1 Beginning at a point 349
feet from the southwest
curbline of Hickory
Street and Oakwood
Avenue and extending to
a point 22 feet north
thereof
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:402
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
342 Hickory
Street
2012-64,
rescinded by
2017-43
381 Hickory
Street
2014-3,
rescinded by
2016-43
385 Hickory
Street
1 Beginning at a point 275
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Hickory Street and
Oakwood Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
2019-21
439 Hickory
Street
2013-4,
rescinded by
2017-43
510 Hickory
Street
2006-01,
rescinded by
2014-34
512 Hickory
Street
1 Beginning at a point 191
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Hickory Street and
Laurel Avenue to a point
22 feet south thereof
513 Hickory
Street
2015-44,
rescinded by
2019-3
9 Highland
Avenue
2015-44,
rescinded by
2016-24
10 Highland
Avenue
2015-41,
rescinded by
2019-9
13 Highland
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 165
feet of the northwest
curbline of Highland
Avenue and Johnston
Avenue to a point 22 feet
west thereof
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:403
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
14 Highland
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 185
feet north of the curbline
of the northeast corner
of Highland Avenue and
Johnston Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof from the south
portion of yellow painted
curbline
2015-4
26 Highland
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 320
feet north of the
northeast curbline of
Johnston Avenue and
Highland Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
36 Highland
Avenue
Rescinded by
2015-22
36 Highland
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 434
feet north of the
northeast curbline of
Highland Avenue and
Johnston Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
2015-41
37 Highland
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 113
feet south of the curbline
of the southwest corner
of Highland Avenue and
Woodland Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof from the south
portion of yellow painted
curbline
2016-9
41 Highland
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 87
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Highland Avenue and
Woodland Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:404
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
43 Highland
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 57
feet south of the
southwest curb line of
Highland Avenue and
Woodland Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
2017-12
178 Highland
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 315
feet north of the
northeast curbline of
Highland Avenue and
Wilson Avenue to a point
22 feet north thereof
189 Highland
Avenue
2015-18,
rescinded by
2017-51
195 Highland
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 283
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Highland Avenue and
Bergen Avenue to a point
22 feet north thereof
238 Highland
Avenue
2015-15,
rescinded by
2020-14
261 Highland
Avenue
2013-10,
rescinded by
2017-47
271 Highland
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 20
feet south of the
southwest curb line of
Highland Avenue and
Afton Street to a point 22
feet south thereof
2019-7
290 Highland
Avenue
2015-49,
rescinded by
2016-24
296 Highland
Avenue
2014-32,
rescinded by
2017-7
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:405
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
329 Highland
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 263
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Highland Avenue and
Halstead Street to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
330 Highland
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 211
feet south of the curbline
of the southeast corner
of Highland Avenue and
Liberty Avenue to a point
22 feet north thereof
2015-18
339 Highland
Avenue
2015-44,
rescinded by
2019-3
360 Highland
Avenue
Rescinded by
2017-1
371 Highland
Avenue
2015-1,
rescinded by
2019-20
373 Highland
Avenue
2009-16,
rescinded by
2014-23
428 Highland
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 106
feet north of the
northeast curbline of
Highland Avenue and
Quincy Avenue to a point
22 feet south thereof
7 Hillside
Avenue
2015-56,
rescinded by
2020-04
11 Hillside
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 140
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Hillside Avenue and
Afton Street to a point 22
feet north thereof
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:406
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
19 Hillside
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 249
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Hillside Avenue and
Afton Street to a point 22
feet north thereof
19 Howell Place Rescinded by
2018-1
28 Howell Place 1 Beginning at a point 300
feet east of the southeast
curbline of Howell Place
and Forest Street to a
point 22 feet west
thereof
30 Howell Place 1 Beginning at a point 298
feet east of the southeast
curbline of Howell Place
and Forest Street to a
point 22 feet east thereof
2015-18,
rescinded by
2017-47,
added by
2020-15
33 Howell Place 1 Beginning at a point 291
feet west of the
southwest curbline of
Schuyler Avenue and
Howell Place to a point
22 feet east thereof
2014-24
Hoyt Street
(St. Cecilia
Church)
1 Beginning at a point 85
feet east of the southeast
curbline of Kearny
Avenue and Hoyt Street
to a point 12 feet (angle
spot) east thereof
56 Hoyt Street Rescinded by
2019-24
72 Hoyt Street 2013-26,
2015-36
111 Hoyt Street 1 Beginning at a point 122
feet west of the
northwest curbline of
Davis Avenue and Hoyt
Street to a point 22 feet
west thereof
2019-39
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:407
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
130 Hoyt Street 2017-14,
rescinded by
2018-14
136 Hoyt Street 1 Beginning at a point 198
feet east of the southeast
curb line of Hoyt Street
and Devon Street to a
point 22 feet east thereof
2019-10
151 Hoyt Street 1 Beginning at a point 390
feet east of the northeast
curb line of Davis Avenue
and Hoyt Street to a
point 22 feet east thereof
2016-39
177 Hoyt Street 1 Beginning at a point 426
feet west of the
northwest curbline of
Hoyt Street and Schuyler
Avenue to a point 22 feet
west thereof
179 Hoyt Street 1 Beginning at a point 400
feet west of the
northwest curbline of
Hoyt Street and Schuyler
Avenue to a point 22 feet
west thereof
184 Hoyt Street 2014-24,
rescinded by
2016-56
42 Ivy Street 2015-44,
rescinded by
2019-29
86 Ivy Street 2009-10,
rescinded by
2014-6
177 Ivy Street 1 Beginning at a point 177
feet north of the
northwest curbline of Ivy
Street and Bergen
Avenue to a point 22 feet
north thereof
217 Ivy Street 2003-19,
rescinded by
2017-47
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:408
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
277 Ivy Street 2010-37,
rescinded by
2016-56
292 Ivy Street 1 Beginning at a point 341
feet south of the
southeast curb line of Ivy
Street and Oakwood
Avenue to a point 22 feet
south thereof
2017-8
298 Ivy Street 1 Beginning at a point 248
feet south of the
southeast curbline of Ivy
Street and Oakwood
Avenue to a point 22 feet
south thereof
2019-21
306 Ivy Street 1 Beginning at a point 164
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Oakwood Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
310 Ivy Street 1 Beginning at a point 100
feet south of the
southeast curbline of Ivy
Street and Oakwood
Avenue to a point 22 feet
south thereof
14 John Hay
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 180
feet east of the southeast
curb line of John Hay
Avenue and Schuyler
Avenue to a point 22 feet
east thereof
2017-25
19 John Street 2013-16,
2014-39,
rescinded by
2017-39
20 John Street 2014-32,
rescinded by
2016-56
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:409
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
21
1/2
John Street 1 Beginning at a point 147
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
John Street and Johnston
Avenue to a point 22 feet
north thereof
2020-02
23 John Street 2013-01,
rescinded by
2019-16
29 John Street Rescinded by
2018-39
33 John Street 1 Beginning at a point 290
feet south of the
northwest curb line of
John Street and Johnston
Avenue to a point 22 feet
south thereof
2018-40
43 John Street 1 Beginning at a point 193
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
John Street and
Woodland Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
2018-40
44 John Street 1 Beginning at a point 152
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
John Street and
Woodland Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
46 John Street Rescinded by
2018-34
44 Johnston
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 115
feet west of the
southwest curbline of
Johnston Avenue and
Grant Avenue to a point
22 feet west thereof
Rescinded by
2019-38,
added by
2019-39
61 Johnston
Avenue
2011-01,
rescinded by
2017-39
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:410
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
98 Johnston
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 254
feet west of the
southwest curbline of
Kearny Avenue and
Johnston Avenue to a
point 22 feet east thereof
2016-30
103 Johnston
Avenue
#7 2010-50,
rescinded by
2013-41
140 Johnston
Avenue
1999-22, rescinded by
2014-14
140 Johnston
Avenue
2016-37,
rescinded by
2018-1
140 Johnston
Avenue
2015-18,
rescinded by
2016-36
Kearny
Avenue
1 On the east side of
Kearny Avenue
beginning at a point 66
feet north of the north
prolongation curbline of
Kearny Avenue and
Grove Street to a point
22 feet south thereof
Kearny
Avenue
1 On the west side of
Kearny Avenue
beginning at a point 143
feet 6 inches south of the
southwest curbline of
Kearny Avenue and
Washington Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
Kearny High
School
2000-34, rescinded by
2017-33
Kearny
Library
1 Beginning at a point 48
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Kearny Avenue and
Stuyvesant Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:411
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
20 Kearny
Avenue
2010-28,
rescinded by
2014-1
50 Kearny
Avenue
2013-37,
rescinded by
2014-23
125 Kearny
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 91
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Kearny Avenue and Hoyt
Street to a point 22 feet
south thereof
2019-36
196 Kearny
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 84
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Kearny Avenue and Boyd
Street to a point 22 feet
south thereof
2019-39,
2020-06
247 Kearny
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 85
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Kearny Avenue and
Bergen Avenue to a point
22 feet north thereof
2016-3
325 Kearny
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 245
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Kearny Avenue and
Halstead Street to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
Rescinded by
2017-56,
added by
2018-5
351 Kearny
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 67
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Kearny Avenue and
Halstead Street to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
355 Kearny
Avenue
2016-14,
rescinded by
2016-56
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:412
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
799 Kearny
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 141
feet north of the
northwest curb line of
Kearny Avenue and
Bennett Avenue to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
839 Kearny
Avenue
2014-24,
rescinded by
2016-36
94 King Street Rescinded by 2018-34
and 2019-3
257 Laurel
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 62
feet east of the northeast
curbline of Laurel
Avenue and Forest Street
to a point 22 feet east
thereof
19 Liberty Street 2013-4,
rescinded by
2016-25
74 Liberty Street 1 Beginning at a point 71
feet west of the
southwest curbline of
Liberty Street and
Chestnut Street to a
point 22 feet west
thereof
2020-02
17 Lindsay Lane 2014-15, rescinded by
2016-56
9 Magnolia
Avenue
Rescinded by 2013-36
194 Magnolia
Avenue 1st
Floor
1 Beginning at a point 162
feet east of the southeast
curbline of Argyle Place
and Magnolia Avenue to
a point 22 feet west
thereof
2014-35
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:413
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
13 Maple Street 1 Beginning at a point 194
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Johnston Avenue and
Maple Street to a point
22 feet south thereof
15 Maple Street 2016-3,
rescinded by
2018-26
16 Maple Street 2014-37,
rescinded by
2019-29
19 Maple Street 2006-1,
rescinded by
2014-14
19 Maple Street 1 Beginning at a point 270
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Maple Street and
Johnston Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
2014-3
21 Maple Street 1 Beginning at a point 292
feet north of the curbline
of the southwest corner
of Maple Street and
Johnston Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
2015-18
35 Maple Street 2014-24,
rescinded by
2016-3
38 Maple Street 1 Beginning at a point 100
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Maple Street and
Woodland Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
2014-28,
rescinded by
2017-24,
added by
2017-48
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:414
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
98 Maple Street 1 Beginning at a point 256
feet north of the
northeast curb line of
Maple Street and Rose
Street to a point 22 feet
south thereof
2018-50
124 Maple Street Rescinded by
2019-29
143 Maple Street 1 Beginning at a point 178
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Maple Street and Wilson
Avenue to a point 22 feet
south thereof
2017-24,
2017-25
212 Maple Street 1 Beginning at a point 94
feet south of the
southeast curbline of the
intersection of Maple
Street and Bergen
Avenue to a point 22 feet
south thereof
214 Maple Street 1 Beginning at a point 72
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Maple Street and Bergen
Avenue to a point 22 feet
south thereof
2013-10
238 Maple Street 2015-44,
rescinded by
2016-56
240 Maple Street 2012-4,
rescinded by
2013-36
240 Maple Street 1 Beginning at a point 246
feet north of the
northeast curbline of
Maple Street and Bergen
Avenue to a point 22 feet
south thereof
266 Maple Street Rescinded by
2016-36
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:415
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
274 Maple Street 2019-36,
rescinded by
2020-14
283 Maple Street 1 Beginning at a point 70
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Maple Street and Afton
Street to a point 22 feet
north thereof
301 Maple Street 1 Beginning at a point 165
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Maple Street and
Halstead Street to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
355 Maple Street Rescinded by 2018-51
136 Midland
Avenue
2013-10,
rescinded by
2014-14
224 Midland
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 88
feet east of the
southwest curbline of
Midland Avenue and
Hickory Street to a point
22 feet west thereof
Rescinded by
2018-6,
added by
2018-47
74 Oakwood
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 151
feet west of the
southwest curbline of
Oakwood Avenue and
Kearny Avenue to a point
22 feet west thereof
2012-51
192 Oakwood
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 64
feet west of the
southwest curbline of
Oakwood Avenue and
Hickory Street to a point
22 feet west thereof
2013-37
226 Oakwood
Avenue
2018-50,
rescinded by
2020-21
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:416
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
30 Park Place 1 Beginning at a point 358
feet north of the
northeast curbline of
Park Place and Afton
Street to a point 22 feet
north thereof
2019-25
42 Park Place 1 Beginning at a point 500
feet north of the
northeast curbline of
Park Avenue and Afton
Street to a point 22 feet
north thereof
105 Park Place 2019-4,
rescinded by
2019-29
51 Patterson
Street
2017-48,
rescinded by
2018-34
64 Patterson
Street
2014-50,
rescinded by
2017-32
34 Pavonia
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 250
feet west of the
southwest curbline of
Pavonia Avenue and
Highland Avenue to a
point 22 feet west
thereof
2020-26
36 Pavonia
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 240
feet west of the curbline
of the southwest corner
of Highland Avenue and
Pavonia Avenue to a
point 22 feet east thereof
from the south portion of
yellow painted curbline
2015-1
56 Pavonia
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 50
feet east of the southeast
curbline of Pavonia
Avenue and Highland
Avenue to a point 22 feet
east thereof
2019-28
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:417
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
Police
Headquarters
1 Beginning at a point 44
feet and 10 inches west
of the northwest curbline
of Laurel Avenue and
Forest Street to a point
22 feet east thereof
54 Quincy
Avenue
Rescinded by
2019-24
199 Quincy
Avenue
2006-7,
rescinded by
2013-36
213 Quincy
Avenue
2012-55,
rescinded by
2016-56
32 Rose Street 1 Beginning at a point 53
feet west of the
northwest curbline of
Rose Street and
Highland Avenue to a
point 22 feet west
thereof
2019-17
50 Rose Street 1 Beginning at a point 105
feet east of the southeast
curbline of Rose Street
and Highland Avenue to
a point 22 feet north
thereof
2014-18
50 Rose Street 1 Beginning at a point 72
feet east of the northeast
curbline of Rose Street
and Highland Avenue to
a point 22 feet east
thereof
2019-17
41 Rutherford
Place
Rescinded by
2017-58
210 Sanford
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 597
feet north of the curbline
of the southeast corner
of Sanford Avenue and
Harrison Avenue to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
2014-39
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:418
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
126 Schuyler
Avenue
2010-16,
rescinded by
2014-14
131 Schuyler
Avenue
2004-67,
rescinded by
2014-14
663 Schuyler
Avenue
1 From a point 88 feet
south of the southerly
curbline of Laurel
Avenue to a point 22 feet
southerly therefrom
217 Seeley
Avenue
Rescinded by
2018-16 and
2019-3
32 Spruce Street 2008-30,
rescinded by
2014-35
St. Stephen's
Church
1 Beginning at a point 60
feet east of the southeast
curbline of Laurel
Avenue and Kearny
Avenue to a point 22 feet
west thereof
78 Stewart
Avenue
Rescinded by
2015-26
268 Stewart
Avenue 1st
Floor
2014-50,
rescinded by
2015-43
274 Stewart
Avenue
2014-35,
rescinded by
2016-24
289 Stewart
Avenue
2014-35,
rescinded by
2016-56
31 Tappan Street 1 Beginning at a point 404
feet west of the
northeast curb line of
Tappan Street and Devon
Street to a point 22 feet
east thereof
2018-18
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:419
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
42 Tappan Street 1 Beginning at a point 486
feet east of the southeast
curbline of Tappan Street
and Devon Street to a
point 22 feet east thereof
44 Tappan Street 1 Beginning at a point 569
feet east of the southeast
curbline of Tappan Street
and Devon Street to a
point 22 feet east thereof
2019-30
50 Tappan Street 2002-5,
rescinded by
2014-14
53 Tappan Street 1 Beginning at a point 260
feet west of the
northwest curbline of
Tappan Street and Davis
Avenue to a point 22 feet
south thereof
2018-40
131 Tappan Street 2016-37,
rescinded by
2017-35
136 Tappan Street 2016-3,
rescinded by
2019-24
153 Tappan Street 1 Beginning at a point 248
feet west of the
northwest curbline of
Tappan Street and
Schuyler Avenue to a
point 22 feet west
thereof
2014-35,
rescinded by
2017-7,
added by
2019-21
170 Tappan Street 2011-38,
rescinded by
2016-56
87 Washington
Avenue
Rescinded by
2018-45
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:420
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
7 Webster
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 190
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Webster Avenue and
Belleville Turnpike to a
point 22 feet north
thereof
2017-48
1 William
Street
Rescinded by
2020-01
34 William
Street
2014-53,
rescinded by
2016-56
42 William
Street
2012-33,
rescinded by
2016-36
15 Wilson
Avenue
2005-29,
rescinded by
2016-56
29 Wilson
Avenue
2011-46,
rescinded by
2017-47
85 Wilson
Avenue
Rescinded by
2016-25
132 Wilson
Avenue Apt. 1
1 On Devon Street,
beginning at a point 56
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Devon Street and Wilson
Avenue to a point 22 feet
south thereof
2015-37
215 Wilson
Avenue
2015-1,
rescinded by
2017-27
233 Wilson
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 605
feet west of the
northwest curbline of
Wilson Avenue and
Schuyler Avenue to a
point 22 feet west
thereof
2020-17
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.1
AO:421
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
244 Wilson
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 590
feet west of the
southwest curbline of
Wilson Avenue and
Schuylar Avenue to a
point 22 feet west
thereof
2019-28
245 Wilson
Avenue
2009-35,
rescinded by
2014-6
261 Wilson
Avenue
2015-41,
rescinded by
2019-6
45 Windsor
Street
1 Beginning at a point 232
feet south of the
southwest curbline of
Bergen Avenue and
Windsor Street to a point
22 feet north thereof
2014-18
54 Windsor
Street
1 Beginning at a point 142
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Windsor Street and
Quincy Avenue to a point
22 feet north thereof
2012-60
79 Windsor
Street
1 Beginning at a point 215
feet north of the
northwest curbline of
Windsor Street and
Bergen to a point 22 feet
north thereof
82 Windsor
Street
2018-47,
rescinded by
2019-16
112 Windsor
Street
1 Beginning at a point 131
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Afton Street and Windsor
Street to a point 22 feet
north thereof
2014-32
§ 7-35.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.1
AO:422
Name of
Street
No. of
Spaces Location Ordinance
122 Windsor
Street
1 Beginning at a point 46
feet east of the northeast
curb line of Afton Street
and Windsor Avenue to a
point 22 feet east thereof
2017-28
128 Windsor
Street
2015-56,
rescinded by
2019-38
133 Windsor
Street
Rescinded by
2017-18,
2017-19,
rescinded by
2019-9
138 Windsor
Street
1 Beginning at a point 250
feet south of the
southeast curbline of
Windsor Street and
Halstead Street to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
2019-26
140 Windsor
Street
1 Beginning at a point 228
feet south of the
southeast curb line of
Windsor Street and
Halstead Street to a
point 22 feet south
thereof
2019-10
168 Windsor
Street
2015-44,
rescinded by
2018-4
202 Windsor
Street
Rescinded by
2016-38
243-2W45indsor
Street
Rescinded by
2015-10
82 Woodland
Avenue
1 Beginning at a point 30
feet west of the
southwest curbline of
Woodland Avenue and
Chestnut Street to a
point 22 feet west
thereof
2013-1
§ 7-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.2
AO:423
§ 7-35.2. Handicapped Parking in Front of or Near Residences;
Restricted Parking Permit. [Ord. No. 1997-21 § 125-40; Ord. No.
1997-37 § 1; Ord. No. 2000-O-26 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-22; Ord. No.
2016-7 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2016-18; Ord. No. 2018-33]
a. The Town of Kearny may, for good cause shown, by ordinance, establish
a restricted parking zone in front of a residence occupied by a disabled
person provided that such parking is not otherwise prohibited, does not
interfere with the normal flow of traffic or, in the discretion of the Town,
would create a shortage of on-street parking for non-handicapped
residents.
b. A restricted parking zone will only be established and permit issued if a
windshield placard or wheelchair symbol license plates have been
issued for a vehicle owned by the disabled person, or by another
occupant of the residence who is a member of the immediate family of
the disabled person, by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-204 et seq.
c. A restricted parking zone permit will be issued to persons who can
prove ownership and operation of the motor vehicle and residency at
the location where the restricted parking zone will be established.
d. Where the applicant seeking the establishment of a restricted parking
zone and permit, transports themselves, in addition to the requirements
of paragraphs a through c, the applicant must establish all of the
following criteria:
1. They are a disabled person as defined in this section;
2. The parking conditions in the disabled person's neighborhood
warrant a restricted parking space near the disabled person's
residence; and
3. The disabled person does not have the use of a driveway, carport,
garage or off-street space available and sufficient (in size) to use for
parking their vehicle on the tax lot on which the disabled person
resides or is within 100 feet of the perimeter of that tax lot. An offstreet
space shall be deemed available if the applicant is an owner
(or a family member of the owner) of the tax lot containing the offstreet
parking. If the disabled person is not an owner (or a family
member of the owner) of the tax lot on which he or she resides,
then off-street parking shall be deemed available unless the
landlord certifies that all off-street parking is used for other
occupants pursuant to Section 38-7 of the Town Code.
e. Where the applicant seeking the establishment of a restricted parking
zone and permit is transported by another person, in addition to the
requirements of paragraphs a through c, the applicant must establish
all of the following criteria:
§ 7-35.2 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.2
AO:424
1. That the person transported is a disabled person as defined in this
section;
2. The disabled person is transported at least four times per week
from the residence;
3. The disabled person's disability is such that it would preclude the
disabled person from waiting on the sidewalk, or other area near
the residence, until the nondisabled driver arrives with the vehicle
or finds parking for the vehicle near the residence;
4. The parking conditions in the disabled person's neighborhood
warrant a restricted parking space near the disabled person's
residence; and
5. The disabled person does not have the use of a driveway, carport,
garage or off-street space available and sufficient (in size) to use for
parking their vehicle on the tax lot on which the disabled person
resides or is within 100 feet of the perimeter of that tax lot. An offstreet
space shall be deemed available if the applicant is an owner
(or a family member of the owner) of the tax lot containing the offstreet
parking. If the disabled person is not an owner (or a family
member of the owner) of the tax lot on which he or she resides,
then off-street parking shall be deemed available unless the
landlord certifies that all off-street parking is used for other
occupants pursuant to Section 38-7 of the Town Code.
6. The person transporting the disabled person is (i) a family member
who resides in the same building; or (ii) a licensed health care
worker who resides in the same housing unit as the disabled
person.
f. The term "disabled person" means any person who has lost the use of
one or more lower limbs as a consequence of paralysis, amputation, or
other permanent disability or who is permanently disabled as to be
unable to ambulate without the aid of an assistance device or whose
ambulation is otherwise severely limited. In any case, the severity of the
mobility disability shall be similar to or approximate disablement by
reason of amputation.
A disability must fall into one of the following categories:
1. The person is so severely permanently disabled, as to be unable to
be mobile without the aid of a mechanical device, such as a
wheelchair, walker, crutches or leg brace(s).
2. The person suffers from any respiratory disease or ailment, as (i)
evidenced by the person's prescribed use of a portable oxygen tank
or (ii) determined by the person's physician and certified by the
Town's physician, after consideration of the extent that the Arterial
PO2 is less than 60 mmHg, the Forced Vital Capacity (FVC) is less
than 60% of the predicted value, the Forced Expiratory Volume is 1
§ 7-35.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.2
AO:425
second (FEV1) is less than 50% of the actual value when measured
in liters by a Spiro meter based on predicated normal values for
the individual's sex, age and height, as set forth in the "American
Medical Association: Guide to the Evaluation of permanent
Impairment" 2nd ed. Chicago, American Medical Association, 1984,
or as revised or amended.
3. The person has a cardiac condition to the extent that this person's
functional limitations are classified in severity as Class II, Class III
or Class IV according to the standards set by the American Heart
Association, and/or their cardiac ejection fraction measured by
echo cardiogram or nuclear stress test is less than 40%.
4. The person is severely or permanently limited in the ability to walk
because of a brain injury or neurological condition.
5. The person is severely and permanently limited in the ability to
walk because of arthritis or deformity of the spine or a major
weight bearing joint (due to any cause) if there is marked limitation
of motion on current examination and an imaging report
demonstrates gross anatomical deformity of the affected joint or
spine.
g. Application for a restricted parking zone and permit shall be made in
accordance with the following:
1. Applications for a restricted parking zone and permit shall be sent
to the Police Department, with the Kearny Town Clerk also
receiving copies;
2. The application shall include all required documentation to
establish the requirements of paragraphs a through f as applicable,
and shall include a release allowing the person's physician to
release medical information to the Town.
3. "Disabled person" as defined in paragraph f must be established by
a medical report completed by the applicant's personal physician
which shall include a certification by the physician on a
prescription pad stating that the applicant is a permanently
disabled person as described in paragraph f. Unless the disability is
visually obvious (such as a complete or partial loss of a leg or foot)
the Police Department shall refer the application to a physician
selected by the Town for review, and the applicant shall only be
deemed qualified if the Town's physician certifies the applicant's
disability.
4. Application and physician evaluation forms will be made available
by the Kearny Police Department; and
5. After the Police Department reviews the application and the Town's
physician certifies the disability (if required), and finds that all
required submissions have been made, the Police Department will
§ 7-35.2 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.2
AO:426
survey the parking area in question to determine whether it is a
location that can be designated as a restricted parking zone.
6. The Police Department shall notify the Mayor and Council of any
application which is denied. Approved applications shall be sent to
the Town Clerk for the creation of the restricted space by
Ordinance.
7. All medical information included in the application under this
subsection 7-35.2 shall be kept confidential according to law.
8. An application for renewal of a restricted parking permit shall not
require medical information if the applicant was determined to be
permanently disabled as part of the initial application.
h. If the Kearny Police Department determines that all requirements have
been met, and the parking zone is suitable as a restricted parking zone,
the applicant's name and address will be submitted to the Mayor and
Town Council so that a restricted parking zone may be created by
ordinance.
i. If the Kearny Police Department determines that the applicant has
failed to meet all the requirements of this subsection, or that the
proposed restricted parking space is not suitable for a restricted
parking designation, then the applicant will receive a written denial
stating the reasons for the denial.
j. Any applicant denied a restricted parking zone and permit shall have
the opportunity to request reconsideration of such decision. A letter
requesting reconsideration must be received by the Kearny Police
Department within 20 days after the date of the notice of denial. The
letter shall set forth the facts or other relevant materials that the
applicant believes were not considered by the Kearny Police
Department. The applicant will be notified in writing by mail of the
decision on reconsideration. No more than one reconsideration will be
given for each application. Thereafter, the applicant may reapply in
accordance with this subsection after one year has elapsed since the
date of the original denial, or denial after reconsideration, whichever is
later.
k. If the Town Council passes an ordinance creating a restricted parking
zone, the Police Department in conjunction with the Department of
Public Works shall establish a restricted parking zone as designated in
the ordinance. The Police Department shall issue a permit which
complies with N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.7. Only the motor vehicle for which a
valid permit has been issued and displayed shall be parked in the
restricted parking zone. Only one restricted parking permit shall be
issued to the applicant. No restricted parking zones, other than those
granted by the Police Department in emergencies, shall be approved
except in the manner provided in this subsection.
§ 7-35.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.2
AO:427
§ 7-35.3. Handicapped Parking in Municipal Parking Lots and on
Board of Education Property. [New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following offstreet
parking yards and Board of Education property are designated as
Handicapped Parking areas. Such spaces are for use by persons who have
been issued special identification cards, plates or placards by the New
Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard issued by the
Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
l. The fee for the issuance of a restricted parking permit pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.7 shall be $75 upon the initial application and $40 for
each one-year renewal period. Applications for renewals shall be denied
if the renewal fee is not paid within 60 days of expiration of the prior
permit. The Town may grant a hardship waiver of this fee if the
applicant's sole source of income is Social Security benefits or public
assistance from a state or county welfare agency.
m. Restricted parking zones and handicapped parking permits shall be
valid for one year and shall be renewed thereafter by the submission of
a new application in accordance with this subsection. A restricted
parking zone and permit may be reviewed earlier if conditions
concerning the applicant change.
n. All restricted parking zones and permits existing at the time this
subsection is passed will remain valid, subject, however, to the renewal
provisions set forth in paragraph m.
o. Temporary Non-Use Period.
1. A person for which a restricted parking space is issued shall notify
the Police Department if they will be out of the State for more than
30 consecutive days, which notice shall include the dates that they
will be out of State (the "Temporary Non-Use Period").
2. During the Temporary Non-Use Period the restricted parking space
shall be available for use by the general public and the Police
Department shall have the right to temporarily remove signs and
street markings during the Temporary Non-Use Period. The vehicle
for which the restricted parking permit was issued shall not be kept
in the restricted parking space during the Temporary Non-Use
Period.
3. Failure to notify the Police Department pursuant to this subsection
shall be grounds for non-renewal of the handicapped parking
permit.
§ 7-35.2 KEARNY CODE § 7-35.3
AO:428
Property Number of
Spaces
Location
Kearny High School
Parking Lot
2 Between Devon Street and
Chestnut Street, the 2 most
eastern spaces nearest Devon
Street on the south side of the lot
(Monday-Friday 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.)
§ 7-35.4. Handicapped Parking on Private Property Open to the
Public and to Which the Public Is Invited (Retail Business). [New;
Ord. No. 2003-(O)-57]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following
off-street parking yards are designated as Handicapped Parking areas.
Such spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special vehicle
identification cards, plates or placards by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle
Commission, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other
person shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
Property Number of
Spaces
Location
(Reserved)
In any space on public or private property appropriately marked for
vehicles for the physically handicapped pursuant to P.L. 1977 c202
(C.39:4-197.5), P.L. 1975 c217 (C.52:27D-119 et seq.) or any other
applicable law unless the vehicle is authorized by law to be parked therein
and a handicapped person is either the driver or a passenger in that
vehicle. State, County or municipal law enforcement officers shall enforce
the parking restrictions on spaces appropriately marked for vehicles for
the physically handicapped on both public and private property. (chgd. by
L1989, C201(1), eff. 6/1/90).
No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such
prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
Pursuant to P.L. 2003, c. 161, the penalties for violations must be $100 for
a first offense and for a subsequent offense must be a fine of at least $250
and up to 90 days community service on such terms and such form as the
Court shall deem appropriate, or any combination thereof.
§ 7-35.5. Handicapped Parking on all Other Private Property. [New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the following offstreet
parking yards are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, or
a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be
permitted to park in these spaces.34
§ 7-35.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-35.5
AO:429
Property Number of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 7-35.6. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance.
[New]
The owners of the premises referred to in this section shall provide and
install signs and pavement markings as required, which signage and
markings shall be in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement
markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property. The owner
shall, subsequent to the initial procurement and installation, maintain such
signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense to
the Town of Kearny. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and
restoration or replacement of same.
§ 7-35.7. Exempt from Application of Street Cleaning Ordinance.
[Ord. No. 2017-3]
§ 7-36. REVOCATION OF HANDICAPPED PARKING PERMIT.
§ 7-36.1. Parking Prohibition. [Ord. No. 2016-7 § 3]
A vehicle for which a handicapped parking permit has been issued may not
at any time be parked in any other curbside parking spot within a radius
of 200 feet of the perimeter of the tax lot on which the residence of the
handicapped person is located.
§ 7-36.2. Violations; Penalty; Revocation. [Ord. No. 2016-7 § 3]
A vehicle parked in violation of subsection 7-36.1 shall be subject to a
fine of $100 for the first offense. If found in violation of subsection 7-36.1
on a second offense, then the handicapped permit for the vehicle shall
be revoked and the handicapped person shall not be eligible to apply for
a. Any person who has been issued a handicapped parking permit
pursuant to subsection 7-35.2 shall be exempt from the provisions of
Section 7-12, entitled Parking Prohibited for Street Cleaning, at the
permitted site.
b. Any person who has been issued a handicapped parking permit and who
has been required to pay a fine for violation of the Street Cleaning
Ordinance at the permitted site during the period between June 1, 2016
and the date of enactment of this Ordinance No. 2017-3 shall be entitled
to a refund of that payment by application to the Town Clerk and proof
of that payment having been made. This right to a refund shall expire on
May 1, 2017.
34.Editor's Note: All sketches are on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
§ 7-35.5 KEARNY CODE § 7-36.2
AO:430
another handicapped parking permit in the Town of Kearny for a period of
two years.
§ 7-36.3. Exceptions to Parking Prohibition. [Ord. No. 2016-18 § 8]
The prohibition against parking within the 200 feet radius described in
subsection 7-36.1 shall not apply during the period that:
§ 7-37. CONTROL FOR MOVEMENT AND THE PARKING OF
TRAFFIC ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
§ 7-37.1. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Municipal Property and Board of Education Property. [New; 1973
Code § 132-12; Ord. 2-23-1987]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
Municipal and Board of Education Property shall have the movement of
traffic controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall
operate, or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated.
a. The handicapped parking space is vacated during street sweeping
operations; or
b. The handicapped parking space is not usable because of street or
underground utility construction or repair.
a. Parking Time Limited. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than
the time limit between the hours listed on any day (except Sundays and
public holidays) in any of the places described.
Name of Lot Areas Time Limit Location
(Reserved)
b. No Parking During Certain Hours. No person shall park or stand a
vehicle between the hours specified any day upon any of the places
described.35
Name of Area Hours
The parking space in the rear
of the Town Hall
During the time that the Town Hall is
closed for business except the
operation of the Police Department
The parking lot adjacent to and
behind the Town Hall
[Amended 3-10-2020 by
Ord. No. 2020-09]
Between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and
5:30 p.m. on days when the Town
Hall is open for business except:
35.Editor's Note: The provisions of this restriction shall not apply to employees of the Town
of Kearny while on Town business.
§ 7-36.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-37.1
AO:431
§ 7-37.2. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Private Property Open to the Public and to Which the Public Is
Invited (Retail Business). [New; Ord. No. 2007-(O)-15 § 1]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following
private property that is open to the public and to which the public is invited,
the movement of traffic shall be controlled by the types of regulations
indicated. No person shall operate or park a vehicle in violation of the
following regulations.
Property Regulation
101 Kearny Avenue
(a.k.a. the "Soporano's Lot")
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., 2 hour
parking
§ 7-37.3. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
All Other Private Property. [New]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 the regulations of
Subtitle 1 of the Title 39 are hereby made applicable to the properties listed
below.
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
Name of Area Hours
Municipal employees with parking
decals which shall be issued
through the personnel office
Persons conducting Town business
not to exceed 1 hour
Parking during other hours by the
public in spaces that are not
reserved for or occupied by
municipal vehicles or employees
shall be on a first-come basis
a. Violations of Provision of Subsection. For a violation of the provision of
this subsection or any supplement thereto for which no specific penalty
is provided, the offender shall be liable to a penalty of not more than
$50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both; except
that for a violation of a section of N.J.S.A. 39:4-80 et seq., N.J.S.A.
39:4-105 et seq., N.J.S.A. 39:123 et seq. or N.J.S.A. 39:4-140 et seq. or
any supplement thereto for which no specific penalty is provided, the
offender shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $50 or more than
$200 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.36
36.Editor's Note: See also Section 7-34
§ 7-37.1 KEARNY CODE § 7-38
AO:432
§ 7-38. REGULATIONS FOR USE OF PARKING METERS.
§ 7-38.1. Parking Meter Zones Designated. [1973 Code § 132-52;
Ord. No. 2001-O-25 §§ 1, 2]
There are hereby established zones to be known as parking meter zones on
Kearny Avenue in the Town of Kearny as follows:
§ 7-38.2. Duties of Chief of Police. [1973 Code § 132-53]
In the parking meter zones the Chief of Police shall cause parking meters
to be installed and shall cause parking meter spaces to be designated,
a. Between Belleville Turnpike and Seeley Avenue.
b. Between Locust Avenue and Lincoln School.
c. Between Oakwood Avenue and Grove Street.
d. Between Afton Street and Bergen Avenue.
e. On Kearny Avenue from Belleville Turnpike and south to the southern
terminus of Kearny Avenue located at the Erie Railroad Bridge.
f. Van Courtland Place from Kearny Avenue east to Morgan Place.
g. Elizabeth Avenue from Kearny Avenue west to Grand Place.
h. Midland Avenue from Franklin Place east to Davis Avenue.
i. Quincy Avenue from Chestnut Street west to Maple Street.
j. Grove Street from Kearny Avenue west to Maple Street.
k. Halstead Street from Chestnut Street west to Maple Street.
l. Garfield Avenue from Kearny Avenue east to Chestnut Street.
m. Bergen Avenue from Kearny Avenue east to Chestnut Street.
n. Wilson Avenue from Kearny Avenue east to Chestnut Street.
o. Elm Street from Erie Railroad south to Midland Avenue.
p. Elm Street from Belleville Turnpike south to Laurel Avenue.
q. Grand Place, 50 feet south from Belleville Turnpike.
r. Upon premises owned by the Town of Kearny located at the southwest
corner of Boyd Street and Chestnut Street, formerly known as the Boyd
Street Playground.
s. North side of Seeley Avenue west of Kearny Avenue between Kearny
Avenue and Grand Place.
t. The entire length of Garafolo Place.
§ 7-38 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-38.2
AO:433
as hereinafter provided, and the Chief of Police is hereby authorized and
directed to provide for the regulation, control, operation and use of the
parking meters and to maintain them in good, workable condition.
§ 7-38.3. Placement of Meters; Use Legend Indicated. [1973 Code
§ 132-54]
Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones, established as
provided in subsection 7-38.2 hereof, shall be placed upon the curb
immediately adjacent to the individual parking places hereinafter
described, or if such parking meters are installed on lands other than a
public street, they shall be placed immediately adjacent to the individual
parking places hereinafter described. Each parking meter shall be placed
in such manner as to show or display by a signal that the parking space
adjacent to such meter is or is not legally in use. Upon each parking meter
installed, there shall be indicated by a proper legend the legal parking time
established by the Town of Kearny, and when in operation shall indicate the
duration of legal parking, and on the expiration of such period shall indicate
illegal or overtime parking. Parking meters will not be installed in areas
where parking is prohibited pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-138.
§ 7-38.4. Designation of Parking Spaces. [1973 Code § 132-55]
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized and instructed to have lines or
markings painted or placed upon the curb and/or upon the street adjacent
to each parking meter for the purpose of designating the parking space for
which the meter is to be used, and each vehicle parked adjacent or next
to any parking meter shall park within the lines or markings so established
and with the foremost part of such vehicle nearest to the parking meter. It
shall be unlawful and a violation of this section to park any vehicle across
any such line or marking or to park the vehicle in such position that the
same shall not be entirely within the area so designated by such lines or
markings or so that the foremost part of such vehicle is not nearest to the
parking meter.
§ 7-38.5. Use of Meters by Operators. [1973 Code § 132-56]
When any vehicle shall be parked in any space adjacent to which a parking
meter is located in accordance with the provisions of this section, during
the hours and on the days as provided in subsection 7-38.6, the operator of
such vehicle shall, immediately after entering the parking space, deposit or
cause to be deposited in such parking meter a coin or coins of the United
States of America as provided in subsection 7-38.6 hereof and place the
parking meter in operation. Failure to deposit the coin or coins or failure to
place the parking meter in operation shall constitute a breach of this section
and shall subject such person to the penalty prescribed in subsection 7-38.8
hereof. Upon the deposit of the coin or coins and placing the parking meter
in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle
during the period of parking time prescribed in subsection 7-38.6. If the
vehicle shall remain parked in any such parking space beyond the parking
§ 7-38.2 KEARNY CODE § 7-38.5
AO:434
time fixed, the parking meter shall display a sign indicating same, and in
that event such vehicle shall be considered as parked overtime and beyond
the legal parking time and shall be in violation of this section.
§ 7-38.6. Rates. [1973 Code § 132-57; Ord. No. 2001-O-25 § 3; Ord.
No. 2001-O-37 § 1]
From 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. on all days except Sundays and holidays, a
vehicle may remain parked in a space adjacent to a parking meter for a
period of time not to exceed two hours, provided the operator of the vehicle
shall deposit or cause to be deposited in the parking meter a coin or coins
of the United States of America at the rate established by the Mayor and
Council by resolution.
Period of Time Coin or Coins Required
(Reserved)
§ 7-38.7. Violations. [1973 Code § 132-58; Ord. No. 2001-O-41 § 1]
§ 7-38.8. Reports of Violation. [1973 Code § 132-59; Ord. No.
2002-O-83 § 1]
a. (Reserved)
b. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section to
deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug, device
or metallic substitute for a coin of the United States of America.
c. It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this section for
any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully break,
destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under
the provisions of this section.
a. It shall be the duty of the Police Officers of the Town of Kearny, acting in
accordance with instructions issued by the Chief of Police, to report:
1. The number of each parking meter which indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space adjacent to such parking meter is or
has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this section.
2. The license number of such vehicle.
3. The length of time during which such vehicle is parked in violation
of any of the provisions of this section.
4. Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
b. Each Police Officer shall also attach to such vehicle a notice to the
owner thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a
provision of this section and instructing such owner to report at the
office of the regard to such violation.
§ 7-38.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 7-38.8
AO:435
§ 7-38.9. Purpose of Meter Deposits. [1973 Code § 132-60]
The coins required to be deposited in parking meters as provided herein are
hereby levied and assessed as fees to provide for the proper regulation and
control of traffic upon the public streets of the Town of Kearny.
§ 7-39. TRAFFIC SIGNALS. [Ord. No. 2010-36]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-8.3, installation of a traffic signal
is hereby authorized on Bergen Avenue at the location of the entrance exit
driveway of the New Jersey Meadowland Commission Keegan Landfill and
shall be installed thereat.
Chapter 8
ABATEMENT AND PREVENTION OF PUBLIC HEALTH
NUISANCES
§ 8-1. PURPOSE. [Ord. No. 2017-41]
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the public health
through the control, abatement and prevention of nuisances of a public
health concern. This chapter specifically authorizes the Town Health Officer
to enforce the New Jersey Public Health Nuisance Law N.J.S.A. 26:3-45,
et seq. (the "State Nuisance Law") in the Kearny Municipal Court and
provides additional definitions of what shall constitute a nuisance in public
and private places within the Town. Wherever there is a question as to the
significance of an alleged infraction or the factual existence of an alleged
infraction, the prudent judgment of the Health Officer or other enforcing
official will prevail in the determination of a violation.
§ 8-2. ENFORCEMENT OF THE NEW JERSEY PUBLIC HEALTH
NUISANCE LAW IN MUNICIPAL COURT. [Ord. No. 2017-41]
The Health Officer may enforce all aspects of the New Jersey Public Health
Nuisance Law and this Ordinance in Municipal Court. The Kearny Municipal
Court shall have jurisdiction over all such proceedings.
§ 8-3. NUISANCES DEFINED AND PROHIBITED. [Ord. No. 2017-41]
c. Fines for Violations:
1. Overtime meter parking: $20.
2. Prohibited area parking: $20.
a. In addition to a nuisance defined in the State Nuisance Law, the
following shall constitute a nuisance within the Town:
§ 7-38.8 KEARNY CODE § 8-3
AO:436
§ 8-4. ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES; RECOVERY OF COSTS BY
TOWN. [Ord. No. 2017-41]
Whenever any owner, tenant or occupant has not complied with a notice
as specified and the nuisance has not been abated or removed under
the direction of the Health Officer or other enforcing official, any cost
or expense incurred for abating or removing, or causing to be abated or
removed the nuisance or condition, may be recovered in the following
manner:
The enforcing official shall, upon completion of the work, certify the cost
thereof to the Town Council, who shall examine the certificate of cost, and, if
found correct, shall cause the costs as shown thereon to be charged against
the lands, and the amounts so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon
the lands and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes to be
assessed and levied upon the lands, the same to bear interest at the same
rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and
the same manner as taxes.
Where it is not possible or practical to proceed under this section the cost
or expense shall be recovered in an action at law in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
Regardless of how costs are actually recovered, they shall be in addition to
and shall not affect the imposition of any penalties for the violation of this
chapter.
§ 8-5. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. No. 2017-41]
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Health Officer
or other enforcing officials. Enforcement shall be in the Municipal Court
having jurisdiction over proceedings to enforce and collect any penalty
imposed because of a violation of any provision of this chapter. The
proceedings shall be summary and in accordance with the Penalty
Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.). Process shall be in the nature
of a summons or warrant and shall be issued by the Health Officer. In
the event that entry to any place or premises is denied by any owner or
tenant, the Health Officer shall obtain the appropriate warrant for entry
through the Municipal Court. Whenever a nuisance pursuant to this section
is found, a violation notice shall be given to the owner and tenant/occupant,
1. The keeping of any animal or animals in such a manner as to cause
or present a source of foulness, odors or breeding of insects,
rodents or other vermin.
2. Depositing, dumping, accumulating, maintaining or otherwise
allowing any matter or thing which serves as food for insects or
rodents and to which they may have access or which serves or
constitutes a breeding place or harborage for insects, rodents or
pigeons of a public health significance in or on any land, premises,
building or other place.
§ 8-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-5
AO:437
if applicable, in writing, by personal delivery or by regular mail, to remove
or abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein. The cost of
abatement shall be borne by the property owner.
If such person fails to comply with such notice within the time specified
therein, the Health Officer or other enforcing official may remove, abate or
cause the clean-up of the nuisance in the manner as herein provided.
§ 8-6. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2017-41]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by one or more of the following: a fine not
exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days or a
period of community service not exceeding 90 days at the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court.
Except as otherwise provided, every day in which a violation of any
provision of this chapter exists shall constitute a separate violation.
All fees and penalties collected under any provision of any chapter adopted
by the Town Council shall be payable to the Town of Kearny.
Chapter 9
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 8-5 KEARNY CODE § 8-6
AO:438
ARTICLE I
Dogs
§ 9-1. DEFINITIONS. [1973 Code § 68-7; Ord. No. 10-12-88; Ord.
No. 2016-26; Ord. No. 2018-46]
As used in this article:
DOG — Shall mean any male or female dog.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Shall mean a dog or dog hybrid
declared potentially dangerous by a municipal court pursuant to New Jersey
Statutes, N.J.S.A. 4:19-23 which provides that:
TETHERING — Shall mean the restraining of an animal by the tying to any
object or structure, including, without limitation, a house, tree, fence, post,
garage, weight or shed, by any means, including, without limitation, rope,
cord, leash or running line. For purposes of this definition, tethering shall
not include the use of a leash used to walk the animal, or forms of restraint
used in transportation of an animal.
VICIOUS DOG — Shall mean a dog or dog hybrid declared to be vicious
by a municipal court pursuant to New Jersey Statute N.J.S.A. 4:19-22 which
provides that:
The municipal court shall declare a dog to be potentially dangerous if it
finds by clear and convincing evidence that the dog:
Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S. 2C:11-1(a) to a person
during an unprovoked attack, and poses a serious threat of bodily
injury or death to a person, or
1.
Killed another domestic animal, and
(a) Poses a threat of serious bodily injury or death to a person; or
(b) Poses a threat of death to another domestic animal, or
2.
Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals.
3.
a.
The municipal court shall declare the dog vicious if it finds by clear and
convincing evidence that the dog:
Killed a person or caused serious bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.
2C:11-1(b) to a person or
1.
Has engaged in dog fighting activities as described in R.S. 4:22-24
and R.S. 4:22-26.
2.
a.
A dog shall not be declared vicious for inflicting death or serious
bodily injury as defined in N.J.S. 2C:11-1 (b) upon a person if the
dog was provoked. The municipality shall bear the burden of proof to
demonstrate that the dog was not provoked.
b.
§ 9-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-1
AO:439
WOLF HYBRID — Shall mean any animal known as a wolf-dog hybrid, which
is a cross between a domestic dog and a wolf or a descendant of a wolf-dog
hybrid.
§ 9-2. REGISTRATION; LICENSING.
§ 9-2.1. Required. [1973 Code § 68-1; Ord. No. 4-14-76; Ord. No.
6-23-82; Ord. No. 9-14-83; Ord. No. 10-24-90; Ord. No. 6-12-91; Ord.
No. 2002-O-83 § 2; Ord. No. 2003-(O)-3; Ord. No. 2007-(O)-40 § 1]
Any person in the Town of Kearny who owns, keeps or harbors any dog shall
have the same registered and numbered with the Health Officer, and shall
place upon the neck of each such dog, a collar having inscribed thereon
upon a metal tag the name of the owner of any such dog or the registered
number thereof. The person registering such dog shall pay to the Health
Officer the sum of:
Year 2008
2009 and Subsequent
Years
Unneutered or unspayed dog $18 $21
Neutered or spayed dog $15 $18
Fees shall include all charges due the State of New Jersey in accordance
with PL 1983, C. 172. All licenses shall be for a term of one year from the
1st of January in each year and all fees shall be paid in advance. Failure
to renewal any license on or before the 31st day of March of the licensing
year shall result in the imposition of a $25 late charge in addition to the
licensing fee. The fine for owning, keeping or maintaining an unlicensed
dog shall be $35 for a first offense.
§ 9-2.1A. License Fee for Potentially Dangerous Dogs. [Ord. No.
2013-5; Ord. No. 2018-46]
The sum to be paid annually and upon each renewal thereof for a license for
a "potentially dangerous dog", as defined in N.J.S.A. 4:19-23, shall be $700.
§ 9-2.2. Records. [1973 Code § 68-2]
It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to provide a book for the purpose of
registering the owner's name of every such dog and the number, numbering
them in the order of the owner's application for the registration and giving
to each person information of the registered number thereof.
§ 9-3. CONTROL AND MAINTENANCE OF DOGS.
If the municipal court declares a dog to be vicious, and no appeal
is made of this ruling pursuant to section 9 of P.L. 1989, c. 307
(C.4:19-25), the dog shall be destroyed in a humane and expeditious
manner, except that no dog may be destroyed during the pendency of
an appeal.
c.
§ 9-1 KEARNY CODE § 9-3.1
AO:440
§ 9-3.1. Leashing Required; Nuisances or Damage Prohibited. [1973
Code § 68-3]
It shall be the duty of the owner of every dog within the Town of Kearny
to keep the dog in a pen, enclosure or building except when on a leash
accompanied by a responsible person, and it shall also be the duty of the
owner of each dog, and of each person having a dog under his control,
to prevent the dog from depositing any excretions or from committing any
other nuisance, or from causing damage upon any public sidewalk, lawn,
park or building; any private grounds, lawns, fences, shrubbery, buildings
or structures not owned by the owner of the dog; or any private grounds,
lawns, fences, shrubbery, buildings or structures owned by the owner of the
dog which are used or occupied in whole or in part by the tenant or the
owner.
§ 9-3.2. Nuisances; Removal by Owner. [1973 Code § 68-3.1; Ord.
No. 12-23-74]
§ 9-3.3. Number of Dogs; Care Requirements. [1973 Code § 68-3.2;
Ord. No. 2-14-79]
Any person in the Town of Kearny in the County of Hudson who owns,
keeps or harbors five or more dogs of licensing age shall comply with the
Board of Health regulations, "Kennels, Pet Shops, Shelters and Pounds," or
its successor ordinance providing for the sanitary maintenance and care of
animals.
a. No person owning or in charge of any dog shall cause or allow such dog
to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance on any common
thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any
place where people congregate or walk, or upon any public property,
without the permission of the owner of the property.
b. Any person owning or in charge of any dog which soils, defiles,
defecates on or commits any nuisance on any common thoroughfare,
sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area, park or any place where
people congregate or walk, or upon any public property whatsoever, or
upon any private property, without the permission of the owner of the
property, shall immediately remove all feces deposited by any such dog
in a sanitary manner.
c. The feces removed from the aforementioned designated areas shall be
disposed of by the person owning or in charge of any such dog in a
sealed, nonabsorbent, leakproof container.
d. The provisions of paragraph c shall not apply to blind persons who may
use dogs as guides.
§ 9-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-3.4
AO:441
§ 9-3.4. Dogs at Large; Impoundment. [1973 Code § 68-4]
It shall be the duty of Police Officers or others so employed by the Town to
seize any dog found running at large or straying off the owner's premises.
Any dog so seized will be detained for seven days, and after owner or person
keeping or harboring the dog has claimed the dog and paid all expenses
incurred by reason of its detention, including maintenance, not exceeding
$0.50 per day and, if the dog be unlicensed at the time of the seizure and
the owner or person keeping or harboring the dog has not produced license
and registration tag for the dog, the Chief of Police or any person authorized
by him may cause the dog to be destroyed in a manner causing as little pain
as possible.
§ 9-3.5. Biting Dogs. [1973 Code § 68-5]
No person shall suffer any dog owned, kept or harbored by him to attack or
bite any person while upon any street or public place in the Town of Kearny
or while such dog is trespassing upon the property of another.
§ 9-3.6. Disturbing the Quiet.37 [1973 Code § 68-6]
No person shall permit any dog owned, kept or harbored by him to disturb
the comfort or sleep of the neighborhood by barking or howling.
§ 9-3.7. Potentially Dangerous Dogs. [1973 Code § 68-7A; Ord. No.
2018-46]
Owners of potentially dangerous dogs shall comply with all applicable New
Jersey Statutes, including: N.J.S.A. 4:19-24 which reads as follows:
"If the municipal court declares the dog to be potentially dangerous it shall
issue an order and a schedule for compliance which, in part:
a. Shall require the owner to comply with the following conditions:
1. To apply, at his own expense, to the municipal clerk or other official
designated to license dogs pursuant to section 2 of P.L. 1941, c. 151
(C. 4:19-15.2), for a special municipal potentially dangerous dog
license, municipal registration number, and red identification tag
issued pursuant to section 14 of this act. The owner shall, at his
own expense, have the registration number tattooed upon the dog
in a prominent location. A potentially dangerous dog shall be
impounded until the owner obtains a municipal potentially
dangerous dog license, municipal registration number, and red
identification tag;
2. To display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his premises warning
that a potentially dangerous dog is on the premises. The sign shall
be visible and legible from 50 feet of the enclosure required
pursuant to paragraph a.3 of this subsection.
37.Editor's Note: For additional regulations concerning noise, see Chapter 4, Section 4-12.
§ 9-3.4 KEARNY CODE § 9-3.7
AO:442
3. To immediately erect and maintain an enclosure for the potentially
dangerous dog will be kept and maintained, which has sound sides,
top and bottom to prevent the potentially dangerous dog from
escaping by climbing, jumping or digging and within a fence of at
least six feet in height separated by at least three feet from the
confined area. The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall
securely lock the enclosure to prevent the entry of the general
public and to preclude any release or escape of a potentially
dangerous dog by an unknowing child or other person. All
potentially dangerous dogs shall be confined in the enclosure or, if
taken out of the enclosure, securely muzzled and restrained with a
tether approved by the animal control officer and having a
minimum tensile strength sufficiently in excess of that required to
restrict the potentially dangerous dog's movements to a radius of
no more than three feet from the owner and under the direct
supervision of the owner.
b. Shall require the owner to maintain liability insurance in an amount
determined by the municipal court to cover any damage or injury
caused by the potentially dangerous dog. The liability insurance, which
may be separate from any other homeowner policy, shall contain a
provision requiring the municipality in which the owner resides to be
named as an additional insured for the sole purpose of being notified by
the insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of
the liability insurance policy." and N.J.S.A. 4:19-28 which reads as
follows:
"The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall:
1. Comply with the provisions of P.L. 1989, c. 307 (C. 4:19-17 et seq.)
in accordance with a schedule established by the municipal court,
but in no case more than 60 days subsequent to the date of
determination;
2. Notify the licensing authority, local police department or force, and
the animal control officer if a potentially dangerous dog is at large,
or has attacked a human begin or killed a domestic animal;
3. Notify the licensing authority, local police department or force, and
the animal control officer within 24 hours of the death, sale or
donation of a potentially dangerous dog;
4. Prior to selling or donating the dog, inform the prospective owner
that the dog has been declared potentially dangerous;
5. Upon the sale or donation of the dog to a person residing in a
different municipality, notify the department and the licensing
authority, police department or force, and animal control officer of
that municipality of the transfer of ownership and the name,
address and telephone of the new owner; and
§ 9-3.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-3.7
AO:443
§ 9-3.8. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 68-8; 2002-O-83 §§ 3,
4]
Each and every person violating this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit and pay a fine of not more than $500 or be imprisoned in the County
jail for not more than 90 days, or both.
The fee for the first offense of a dog running at large shall be $35. The fee
for the first offense for permitting a dog to commit a nuisance shall be $50.
§ 9-4. PET WASTE.
§ 9-4.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 2]
The purpose of this section is to amend and supplement requirements for
the proper disposal of pet solid waste in the Town of Kearny, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to
comply.
§ 9-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 2]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — Shall mean that the pet solid waste is removed at once,
without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Shall mean any person who shall possess, maintain,
house or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or
not the owner of such pet.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — Shall mean a domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance
animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Shall mean waste matter expelled from the bowels of
the pet; excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Shall mean placement in a designated waste
receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container
which is regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse
6. In addition to any license fee required pursuant to section 3 of P.L.
1941, c. 151 (C. 4:19-15.3), pay a potentially dangerous dog license
fee to the municipality as provided by section 15 of P.L. 1989, c. 307
(C. 4:19-31)"
§ 9-3.7 KEARNY CODE § 9-4.2
AO:444
collector; or disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for
proper treatment and disposal.
§ 9-4.3. Requirement for Disposal. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 2]
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, now owned or possessed by that person.
§ 9-4.4. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 2]
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal is
being used for that purpose.
§ 9-4.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 2]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Department of
Public Works of the Town of Kearny and any other department hereinafter
designated by the Town Administrator.
§ 9-4.6. Violations and Penalty. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 2]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each violation committed
hereunder. Each day's failure to comply with any section or subsection shall
constitute a separate violation.
Where a person has been convicted of a violation of this section and within
12 months thereafter has been found guilty of a second violation of this
section, the Judge of the Kearny Municipal Court may, if the Judge finds the
second offense was willful, sentence the offender to imprisonment in the
County jail for a period not to exceed 90 days in addition to or in lieu of the
fine set forth above.
§ 9-5. WILDLIFE FEEDING.
§ 9-5.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 3; Ord. No. 2017-42]
The purpose of this section is to prohibit the feeding of unconfined wildlife
in any public park, on or in the space above any public street, sidewalk or
right-of-way or on any other property owned or operated by the Town of
Kearny, so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe
penalties for failure to comply.
§ 9-5.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 3]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
§ 9-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-5.2
AO:445
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — Shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any
edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — Shall mean all animals that are neither human nor
domesticated.
§ 9-5.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 3; Ord. No.
2017-42]
No person shall feed, in any public park, on or in the space above any
public street, sidewalk or right-of way or on any other property owned or
operated by the Town of Kearny, any wildlife, excluding confined wildlife
(for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers, or feral cats as part
of an approved Trap-Neuter-Release program).
§ 9-5.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 3]
§ 9-5.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 3]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each violation committed
hereunder. Each day's failure to comply with any section or subsection shall
constitute a separate violation.
Where a person has been convicted of a violation of this section and within
12 months thereafter has been found guilty of a second violation of this
section, the Judge of the Kearny Municipal Court may, if the Judge finds the
second offense was willful, sentence the offender to imprisonment in the
County jail for a period not to exceed 90 days in addition to or in lieu of the
fine set forth above.
§ 9-6. TETHERING OF DOGS.
§ 9-6.1. Tethering of Dogs. [Ord. No. 2016-26; Ord. No. 2018-46]
a. This section shall be enforced by the Department of Public Works of the
Town of Kearny and any other department hereinafter designated by
the Town Administrator.
b. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 9-5.2 KEARNY CODE § 9-6.1
AO:446
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to tether, fasten, tie, restrain or
cause an unattended dog to be fastened, tied or restrained to houses,
trees, fences, garages, stakes or other stationary or highly immobile
objects by means of a rope, strap or other physical restraint for the
purpose of confinement, except in circumstances where all of the
following requirements are satisfied:
1. The tethering is for a total of no more than seven hours within a
twenty-four-hour period, with a maximum of four hours at any one
interval and a minimum one hour period between confinements.
2. The tether is attached to the dog by a non-choke type collar, swivels
at both ends, and attached to the stationary object by anchors,
latches, or similar devices in a manner which the dog is able to
move freely and prevents the tether from becoming entangled
around the dog or any object so as to limit the dog's freedom within
the tethered area or to prevent the dog, or any of its appendages,
from becoming entangled by the tether.
3. The tether shall be a type commonly used for the size of the dog
involved.
4. The construction of the tether shall be of a lightweight, yet durable
material, shall not exceed 20% of the animal's weight, and may not
be thicker than 1/8 inch.
5. The tether must be a minimum of 15 linear feet in length, less than
six feet above the ground, and shall remain tangle free.
6. The tethered dog has easy access to potable drinking water, edible
food, dry ground, and adequate shade and/or shelter within the
tethering area.
7. The tethering area shall be clean, clear of obstructions and/or
debris, and no less than 150 square feet/per dog in total area.
8. The dog, whether used for hunting, farming, breeding, or is an
otherwise working dog, is regularly monitored while tethered for
the aforementioned period of time.
b. No dog shall be tethered by means of a choke-type, pinch-type, prongtype,
or improperly fitting collar.
c. Chains shall be prohibited for use as a tethering device.
d. If there are multiple dogs, each dog shall be tethered separately and in
such a manner that the tethers shall not become entangled with each
other.
e. No dog shall be tethered within five feet of another person's property,
public thoroughfare, and/or right-of-way.
§ 9-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-6.1
AO:447
§ 9-6.2. Collars. [Ord. No. 2016-26]
§ 9-6.3. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2016-26]
This section shall be enforced by the Police Department of the Town of
Kearny, the Health Department of the Town of Kearny, the Department of
Public Works of the Town of Kearny and any other department hereinafter
designated by the Town Administrator.
§ 9-6.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2016-26]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each violation committed
hereunder.
§ 9-7. through § 9-8. (RESERVED).
f. No dog shall be tethered at a vacant structure or premises for any
purpose when it is not monitored by a competent adult who is present
at the property for the duration of such tethering.
g. Dogs that are not spayed or neutered shall not be tethered for any
period of time.
h. No dog under the age of one or under 20 pounds shall be tethered.
i. No dogs shall be tethered between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m.
j. The provisions of subsection 9-6.1 shall not alter or modify the
requirements of subsection 9-3.7 relating to Potentially Dangerous
Dogs.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to collar an animal with a choke-type
collar, prong-type collar, pinch-type collar, or rope.
b. The collar must be at least as large as the circumference of the animal's
neck plus one inch and cannot be constructed primarily of metal.
§ 9-6.1 KEARNY CODE § 9-7
AO:448
ARTICLE II
Cats
§ 9-9. DOMESTICATED CAT OWNERS.
§ 9-9.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 63-1; Ord. No. 7-14-76; Ord. No.
2014-41]
CAT — Shall mean any cat that is not a feral cat and is over the age of six
months.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean a house, apartment, store or other building,
whether or not used or designated for use as a dwelling.
FAMILY GROUP — Shall mean the immediate "family group" occupying one
dwelling unit.
§ 9-9.2. Responsibilities of Owners of Domesticated Cats. [Ord. No.
2014-41]
§ 9-10. LICENSING.
§ 9-10.1. Required. [1973 Code § 63-2; Ord. No. 7-14-76]
It shall be unlawful to own, harbor or maintain a cat of more than six months
of age, unless the owner thereof or the person harboring or maintaining
same shall have a valid license for such cat.
§ 9-10.2. Fees; Registration Tags. [1973 Code § 63-3; Ord. No.
7-14-76; Ord. No. 4-25-90; Ord. No. 10-24-90; Ord. No. 6-12-91; Ord.
No. 2007-(O)-40 § 2]
a. Adequate Food and Water. Owners of domesticated cats shall provide
appropriate and adequate food, water and shelter for their cats.
b. Cat Not to Create a Nuisance. The owner of a domesticated cat shall
exercise reasonable care to guard against the cat creating a nuisance.
c. Unspayed and Unneutered Cats. The owner of a sexually intact (not
spayed or neutered) domesticated cat shall not permit the cat to roam
unsupervised.
d. Abandonment Prohibited. An owner shall not abandon a domesticated
cat.
a. The annual license fee for cats over six months of age shall be:
Year 2008
2009 and Subsequent
Years
Unneutered or unspayed cat $18 $21
Neutered or spayed cat $15 $18
§ 9-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-10.2
AO:449
§ 9-10.3. Expiration of Licenses and Tags. [1973 Code § 63-4; Ord.
No. 7-14-76]
Each cat license and registration tag shall expire on the last day of January
of the calendar year following the calendar year in which it was issued.
§ 9-10.4. Records. [1973 Code § 63-5; Ord. No. 7-14-76]
The Health Officer shall keep a record book showing the names of the
owners, custodians or harborers of cats, the description of each cat owned
or harbored, the date of issuance of the license and the amount of the fee.
§ 9-11. CONTROL AND MAINTENANCE OF CATS.
§ 9-11.1. Cats Running at Large; Seizure; Notice. [1973 Code
§ 63-6; Ord. No. 4-25-90]
b. A metal tag marked with a number to correspond with the number of
the license, shall be issued with the license and shall be attached to a
collar and shall at all times be worn by the cat so licensed when at
large. The tag shall be procured from the Health Officer, who shall have
the responsibility of issuing the licenses hereunder. In the event that
the tag shall be lost or destroyed, the Health Officer is hereby
authorized to issue a duplicate tag for that particular cat, at a fee of
$0.50. Tags shall not be transferable to a cat other than the one for
which the tag was originally issued.
c. The fees collected under this chapter shall be deposited in the general
funds of the Town.
d. Failure to renew any license on or before the 31st day of March of the
licensing year shall result in the imposition of a $10 late charge in
addition to the license fee.
a. If any cat is seized while running at large and such cat is wearing a
collar or harness, having inscribed or attached thereto the name and
address of any person, or a registration tag, or if the owner or person
keeping the cat is known, the officer, official or person seizing the cat
shall cause to be served, on the person whose address is given on the
collar or on the owner or the person keeping or harboring the cat if
such owner or person is known, a notice, in writing, stating that the cat
has been seized and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not
claimed within seven days after service of the notice.
b. A notice under this subsection may be served by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served, by leaving it at the person's usual or
last known place of abode or at the address given on the collar, or by
forwarding it by mail in a prepared letter addressed to that person at
his usual place of abode or to the address given on the collar.
§ 9-10.2 KEARNY CODE § 9-11.1
AO:450
§ 9-11.2. Rabies Vaccination Required. [1973 Code § 63-7; Ord. No.
4-25-90]
Proof of current vaccination for rabies shall be required for each cat of more
than six months of age.
§ 9-11.3. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 63-8]
Each and every person violating this article shall, upon conviction thereof,
forfeit and pay a fine of not more than $500 or be imprisoned in the County
jail for not more than 90 days, or both.
§ 9-12. FERAL CAT PROGRAM.
§ 9-12.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2014-44]
As used in this subsection:
ANIMAL CONTROL PROVIDER — Shall mean any agency contracted or
hired by the Town to coordinate and monitor the TNR program.
CAREGIVER — Shall mean any person who provides food, water or shelter
to or otherwise cares for a cat.
CODE OFFICIAL — Shall mean any person or agency employed by the
Board of Health or appointed by the Town who is authorized to investigate
violations of laws and regulations concerning cats, and to issue citations in
accordance with New Jersey law and this Code.
DOMESTICATED CAT — Shall mean a cat that is socialized to humans and
is appropriate as a companion for humans.
EAR TIPPING — Shall mean a straight-line cutting of the tip of the left ear
of a cat by a licensed veterinarian while the cat is anesthetized.
FEEDING — Shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter
any edible material.
FERAL CAT — Shall mean a cat which is completely or substantially
unsocialized to humans. The usual and consistent temperament of a feral
cat is extreme fear and resistance to contact with humans. Feral cats are
either born in the wild, the offspring of tame or feral cats and not socialized;
or formerly tame cats who have been abandoned and have reverted to an
untamed state.
FERAL CAT COLONY — Shall mean an individual feral cat or a group of
cats which congregate together outside as a unit. Any non-feral cats who
congregate with a multiple-cat colony shall be deemed part of it.
c. Any cat which has been seized or captured by the Animal Control
Officer of the Town of Kearny, or other authorized agent, shall not be
released to any individual until the cat has received a valid rabies
vaccination and license.
§ 9-11.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-12.1
AO:451
NUISANCE — Shall mean disturbing the peace by habitually or continually
howling, crying or screaming, or the unreasonable destruction, desecration
or soiling of property against the wishes of the owner of the property.
OWNER — Shall mean any person, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, trust, estate, or any other legal entity.
STRAY CAT — Shall mean a cat which is regularly off the property of the
owner, is not under the physical control and restraint of the owner and is
not regularly provided with food by the owner.
SUITABLE SHELTER — Shall mean a shelter that provides protection from
rain, sun, and other elements that is adequate to protect the health of the
cat.
TAME CAT — Shall mean a cat which is socialized to humans and is
appropriate as a companion for humans.
TNR — Shall mean Trap, neuter and return.
TNR COMMITTEE — Shall mean any person or entity appointed by the
Town Council who will perform the duties and responsibilities as
established in this Article.
TNR PROGRAM — Shall mean a program pursuant to which feral and stray
cats are trapped, neutered or spayed, vaccinated against rabies, ear tipped
and returned to the location where they congregate.
§ 9-12.2. Feral Cat Colonies. [Ord. No. 2014-44]
Feral cat colonies shall be permitted and caregivers shall be entitled to
maintain them in accordance with the terms and conditions of this section.
§ 9-12.3. Animal Control Provider Responsibilities. [Ord. No.
2014-44]
It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Provider to:
§ 9-12.4. TNR Committee Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 2014-44]
It shall be the duty of the TNR Committee to:
a. Provide training for the cat colony caregivers;
b. Help to resolve any complaints over the conduct of a cat colony
caregiver or of cats within a colony;
c. Be responsible for any cost as provided in the Town agreement with
reference to the TNR Program.
a. Help resolve any complaints over the conduct of a colony caregiver or
of cats within a colony;
§ 9-12.1 KEARNY CODE § 9-12.4
AO:452
§ 9-12.5. Feral Cat Caregiver Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 2014-44;
Ord. No. 2015-5]
It shall be the duty of feral cat caregivers to:
b. Maintain records provided by colony caregivers on the registration, size
and location of the colonies, as well as the vaccination and spay/neuter
records of cats in the caregiver's colonies;
c. Report semiannually in writing to the Town Code Official on the status
of the colony, including data on the number and gender of all cats in the
colony, the number of cats who died or otherwise ceased being a part of
the colony during the prior six-month period, the number of kittens
born to colony cats and their disposition, the number of cats and kittens
spayed and neutered and the number of cats and kittens placed in
permanent homes as companion cats.
d. Provide the semi-annual report forms to caregivers and provide
assistance on request upon request by the caregiver in the preparation
of the forms.
a. Register the feral cat colony with the TNR Committee;
b. Take steps to vaccinate the colony population for rabies and update the
required vaccination protocols whenever possible; take steps to get all
cats in the colony population spayed/neutered by a licensed
veterinarian;
c. Maintain digital photos of each cat in the colony and copies of
documents evidencing that the cats have been vaccinated, spayed/
neutered and ear tipped; providing food, water and, if feasible, suitable
shelter for colony cats;
d. Observe the colony cats and keep a record of any illnesses or unusual
behavior noticed in any colony cats;
e. Obtaining the written approval of the owner of any property on which
the feral cat colony is located or the written approval of the owner of
any property over which the caregiver requires access so as to provide
colony care. The written approval shall be filed with the Code Official by
the caregiver. If the caregiver is unable to obtain the written approval
because either the access property or the property on which the colony
is located is abandoned, unused or unoccupied, the caregiver shall send
a request for approval to the owner of the property as listed on the
current tax rolls by certified mail, return receipt requested. If no
response is forthcoming for 10 days, the caregiver shall send a second
request by certified mail, return receipt requested. If no response is
forthcoming after a second ten-day period, the caregiver may file a
certification with the Code Official setting forth the two failed attempts
and attaching the two certified mail receipts after which approval shall
be presumed until the property owner's written response is obtained.
§ 9-12.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-12.5
AO:453
§ 9-12.6. Exemptions from Restrictive Ordinances. [Ord. No.
2014-44; Ord. No. 2015-5]
The following sections of the Town Code shall not apply to feral cat colonies
managed by the TNR Program or to any person or organization that is
providing care for a feral cat colony and is taking steps to trap and sterilize
the animals:
Section 9-10 Licensing
Section 9-11 Control and Maintenance of Cats
§ 9-12.7. Cat Colony Caregivers Registration-Ownership Exemption.
[Ord. No. 2014-44]
Any person undertaking the duties and responsibilities of a cat colony
caregiver shall first be registered with the Committee at no cost. A
registered caregiver shall not be considered an owner in or be subject to
regulations governing ownership or control of an animal, except as specified
in this subsection.
§ 9-12.8. Town's Right to Seize. [Ord. No. 2014-44]
The Town shall retain the following rights:
f. Take steps, in the event that kittens are born to a colony cat, to remove
the kittens from the colony after they have been weaned, and place the
kittens in homes, foster homes, or with animal shelters, rescue
organizations or veterinary offices for the purpose of subsequent
permanent placement;
g. Report semiannually in writing to the TNR Committee on the status of
the colony the total number of cats in the colony, including data on the
number and gender of all cats in the colony, the number of cats who
died or otherwise ceased being a part of the colony during the prior sixmonth
period, the number of kittens born to colony cats and their
disposition, the number of cats and kittens spayed and neutered and the
number of cats and kittens placed in permanent homes as companion
cats;
h. Obtaining proper medical attention for any colony cat who appears to
require it.
i. Undergoing training for themselves and their responsible substitutes in
the proper management of a colony as developed and verified by the
Animal Control;
j. Setting up consistent and monitored feeding schedules. Feeding shall
be limited to daylight hours. All remaining food must be removed daily;
k. "Ear tip" all cats with a single cut preferably on the left ear.
§ 9-12.5 KEARNY CODE § 9-12.8
AO:454
§ 9-12.9. Nuisance Complaints. [Ord. No. 2014-44]
The requirements of this section notwithstanding, Code Officials and Police
Officers may investigate any nuisance complaint. If a Code Official or Police
Officer determines that an ear-tipped feral colony cat is causing a nuisance
as defined by this section, the Code Official or Police Officer shall contact
the TNR Committee and allow the TNR Committee 60 days to resolve the
complaint or remove the cat before the officer takes further action. The
caregiver or TNR Committee must begin nuisance abatement procedures
within 48 hours after being notified of a nuisance and must take all
reasonable steps to resolve the nuisance in as short a time period as
possible, not to exceed 60 days. If the TNR Committee fails to resolve
the nuisance or remove the cat within the 60 days, the Code Official may
remove the cat. If a Code Official or Police Officer reasonably determines
that a cat is injured or poses a significant threat to public health, the Code
Official or Police Officer may reduce the time that the TNR Committee has
to resolve the complaint, as necessary to protect the cat and public health,
before taking further action. In the case of an emergency, the Code Official
or Police Officer may remove the cat, but within 24 hours the Town must
provide the TNR Committee with notice of the cat's whereabouts and allow
the TNR Committee an opportunity to retrieve the cat for treatment, return,
or relocation.
§ 9-12.10. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2014-44]
This section shall be enforced by the Code Official or Police Department and
any other Department hereinafter designated by the Town Administrator.
a. The right to seize or remove from a colony cats which have not been
vaccinated against rabies and who are demonstrating signs of the
disease.
b. The right to seize or remove from a colony a cat which is creating a
nuisance after the caregiver and sponsor have been given 60 days to
resolve the complaint or remove and relocate the cat and have failed to
do so.
c. The right to seize or remove a colony of cats when the caregiver
regularly fails to comply with the requirements of this section and the
TNR Committee has not been able to obtain a replacement or substitute
caregiver within 60 days of the Town's notice to the Committee of the
caregiver's failure to comply with this subsection.
d. The right to replace or remove a caregiver who fails to comply with the
responsibilities and requirements of this section after reasonable notice
is provided to the caregiver of noncompliance.
§ 9-12.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-12.11
AO:455
§ 9-12.11. Study and Review. [Ord. No. 2014-44]
Not later than January 31, 2016, the Town shall study the effectiveness of
the TNR Program and review the continuance of this section. This section,
however, shall continue as provided until specifically rescinded or amended.
§ 9-12.12. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 2014-44]
This section shall take effect upon final passage according to law.38
§ 9-13. SALE OF DOGS AND CATS.
§ 9-13.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2017-57]
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY — Means an animal control center or animal
shelter, maintained by or under contract with any state, county, or
municipality, whose mission and practice is, in whole, or significant part,
the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes or rescue
organizations.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — Means any not-for-profit organization
which has tax-exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States
Internal Revenue Code, whose mission and practice is, in whole or in
significant part, the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes.
CAT — Means a member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus.
DOG — Means a member of the species of domestic dog, Canis familiaris.
OFFER FOR SALE — Means to sell, offer for sale or adoption, advertise for
the sale of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose of a dog or cat.
PET SHOP — Means a retail establishment where dogs and cats are sold,
exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the general public
at retail. Such definition shall not include an animal care facility or animal
rescue organization, as defined above, or a hobby breeder that (i) offers for
sale no more than two litters per year, and (ii) where the consumer can see
directly the conditions in which the dogs or cats are bred and (iii) where the
consumer can confer in person directly with the breeder concerning those
conditions.
§ 9-13.2. Restrictions on the Sale of Animals. [Ord. No. 2017-57]
No pet store shall sell, deliver, offer for sale, barter, auction, give away, or
otherwise transfer or dispose of cats or dogs. Nothing in this section shall
prohibit pet stores from collaborating with animal care facilities, animal
rescue organizations or reputable hobby breeders to offer space for such
entities to showcase adoptable dogs and cats. This section shall not apply to
any pet store lawfully existing in the Town of Kearny prior to the effective
date of this Ordinance No. 2017-57, provided that such pet store is and
38.Section 9-12 was adopted November 12, 2014 by Ordinance No. 2014-44
§ 9-12.11 KEARNY CODE § 9-13.2
AO:456
continues to be at all times in compliance with all federal, state and local
laws.
§ 9-13.3. Severability. [Ord. No. 2017-57]
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
Section shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of this Section which shall continue
in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this Section are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 9-13.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2017-57]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this Section
9-13 shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 per violation. In addition
to those set forth in Section 9-16 of Chapter 9, this Section 9-13 shall be
enforceable by employees of both the Health Department and the Police
Department of the Town of Kearny.
§ 9-13.5. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 2017-57, adopted 10-24-2017]
This section shall become effective 90 days after passage.
§ 9-14. RAISING AND MAINTENANCE OF CHICKENS.
§ 9-14.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2017-60]
The purpose of this section is to define and establish applicable standards
and restrictions governing the raising, keeping and maintenance of
chickens within the Town of Kearny.
§ 9-14.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2017-60]
§ 9-14.3. Maximum Number. [Ord. No. 2017-60]
In no case shall any person or persons be permitted to keep live chickens
on their property in the Town, except that no more than four chickens may
be kept in the yard of a single family house or two family dwelling, subject
to compliance with the terms of this section.
a. As used in this section the term Chicken shall mean a female Chicken.
The term Chicken shall not include "rooster (s)". Unless provided
elsewhere in the Code, the raising, keeping and maintaining of roosters
shall not be permitted.
b. "Raising, keeping and maintenance" of chickens shall not include the
slaughtering, plucking and/or the processing of chickens for human
consumption, which is expressly prohibited.
§ 9-13.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-14.4
AO:457
§ 9-14.4. Roosters Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2017-60]
In no case shall any person or persons be permitted to raise, keep and/or
maintain roosters within the Town.
§ 9-14.5. Sale of Eggs Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2017-60]
In no case shall any person or persons be permitted to sell eggs to the
public; provided however that this section shall not prohibit licensed stores
or markets from selling chicken eggs.
§ 9-14.6. Confinement. [Ord. No. 2017-60]
§ 9-14.7. Location. [Ord. No. 2017-60]
§ 9-14.8. Requirements for Housing or Coops. [Ord. No. 2017-60]
The following regulations and conditions for the keeping and housing of
chickens shall be complied with. The housing of chickens must be the
primary purpose of the structure. Notwithstanding any other provisions of
this section, chickens must be housed and kept in a manner which will not
constitute a public or neighborhood nuisance.
a. No chicken shall be allowed to fly or run at large outside of resident's
enclosed property, but shall be confined in a suitable structure or coop
as set forth herein.
b. All chickens must be housed in coops or structures that are properly
designed for such use and completely apart from any building used
wholly, or in part, for dwelling purposes.
c. No chicken shall be permitted to free roam or free range outside of the
coop or structure.
d. The house/coop must meet all of the size limitations of an accessory
building as may be otherwise provided for in the code of the Town. All
plans for such structures and all structures intended for the use of
housing of chickens shall be in accordance with the Construction Codes
of the Town and shall be reviewed by the Construction Code Official.
a. The structure or coop to house the chicken(s) shall be located in the
rear yard and be no closer than 10 feet to a property line. In addition,
the structure of the coop shall not be closer than 30 feet to an adjoining
habitable residential or commercial building.
b. A sketch of the location of the house/coop and distances to adjoining
properties must be provided upon application for licensing.
a. The house/coop must be kept in good repair and in a clean, sanitary
condition at all times, and the utilization of a tarp as a portion of the
roof structure is not permitted.
§ 9-14.4 KEARNY CODE § 9-14.8
AO:458
§ 9-14.9. Keeping Chickens Inside Dwelling Places Prohibited. [Ord.
No. 2017-60]
Under no circumstances shall any chickens be kept or maintained inside a
house or multi-family dwelling building.
b. The house/coop shall not exceed 60 square feet and a maximum height
of six feet. The coop and enclosed run must be made predator-proof and
must be surrounded by a six-foot high fence. A wire porch attached to
the structure in which chickens are to be kept may be permitted. Such
porch shall be at least one foot above the surrounding ground and shall
consist of one inch mesh hardware cloth for the floor with any
convenient size wire for the sides and top and shall not extend more
than four feet from the house or coop. Any perch, run or runway
associated with the house/coop shall be included within the 60 square
foot limitation.
c. The house/coop and runway shall be constructed of such materials as to
prevent predators (cats, coyotes, fox, bear, raccoons, etc.) and/or
rodents from entering therein.
d. The structure or house/coop shall be dry and well ventilated, with
windows so placed, if possible, as to admit sunlight. The house or coop
shall have a floor impervious to moisture and waterproof.
e. The structure or house/coop must be constructed with a surface under
the chickens raised off the ground, made of wire, slatted wood or
similar materials, designed to allow animal waste to pass through and
be collected in trays or impervious material underneath to allow for
frequent disposal.
f. At least once a week, all of the droppings shall be removed from the
structure or house/coop and removed from the premises or otherwise
disposed of in a manner approved by the Board of Health, so as not to
breed flies or create a nuisance.
g. Drinking fountains in the area where the house or coop is located shall
be kept clean and supplied at all times with clean water.
h. The yard in the area where the house/coop is located shall be clean, free
from odors, and dust abatement techniques must be utilized.
i. All food for immediate consumption shall be placed in suitable feeding
troughs or similar containers and all other food shall be stored in
animal proof containers at all times, tightly sealed rodent and predator
proof container.
j. Waste shall be handled properly to prevent offensive odors or disposed
in an environmentally friendly manner. Runoff waste on adjacent
properties shall not be permitted.
§ 9-14.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-14.10
AO:459
§ 9-14.10. License Required; Fee; Expiration. [Ord. No. 2017-60]
No person shall keep chickens without having first obtained a license from
the Town Board of Health. Any license issued herein does not give the
Licensee the right to slaughter or "dress" chickens. There shall be an annual
fee of $50 and the license shall be renewed on a yearly basis.
§ 9-14.11. Applications for Registration; Issuance of License. [Ord.
No. 2017-60]
Applications for the license shall be made to the Town Board of Health,
annually. Such application shall set forth the name and address of the
applicant at the location of the property for which the license is sought.
If the applicant is a tenant, the application must also include the name
and signature of the property owner. The application shall also provide a
statement of the number of chickens to be kept. There shall also be included
a detailed sketch of the location of the house/coop, and a statement that
the location of the coop has been preliminary reviewed and approved by the
Construction Code Official. Before constructing the coop, the applicant shall
obtain any required building permit from the Construction Code Office and/
or zoning authorization.
§ 9-14.12. License is Not Transferable. [Ord. No. 2017-60]
Such license shall not be transferable and shall continue in force and effect
until the first day of January next ensuing the date of granting thereof.
§ 9-14.13. Revocation of License. [Ord. No. 2017-60]
If the above conditions and regulations are not complied with the license
shall be revoked.
§ 9-14.14. Enforcement/Procedure for Revocation or Suspension;
Hearing. [Ord. No. 2017-60]
a. In addition to those set forth in subsection 9-14.16 of this Chapter 9,
this Section 9-14 shall be enforced by employees of the Health
Department, Police Department and Construction Code Office. Nothing
herein shall limit the power of the Health Officer under Ordinance
2017-44 to declare or abate any nuisance associated with chickens.
b. The Health Officer and/or other enforcing agency are hereby
empowered to suspend or revoke the license held by any person who
violates any of the provisions of this section. No license shall be
suspended or revoked until after a hearing in Municipal Court. A notice
of five days, in writing, setting the time and place of such hearing shall
be served upon the licensee.
§ 9-14.10 KEARNY CODE § 9-14.15
AO:460
§ 9-14.15. Violation and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2017-60]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon, conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500 or a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days, or any combination thereof as determined
by the Municipal Court Judge. Each day on which a violation of this section
exists shall be considered a separate and distinct violation and shall be
subject to imposition of a separate penalty for each day of the violation as
the Municipal Court Judge may determine.
§ 9-14.16. Notification of Owner. [Ord. No. 2017-60]
Whenever a nuisance is declared under this Section 9-14 on any private plot
of land or premises, notice, in writing shall be given to the owner thereof
to remove or abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein,
but not less than five days from the date of service thereof. This five day
minimum is waived in the case of an imminent public health hazard as
determined by the Board of Health or its agents or employees. A duplicate
of the notice shall be left with one or more of the tenant or occupants
of the premises. If the owner resides out of state or cannot be notified
speedily, such notice shall be left at that place or premises with the tenants
or occupant thereof or posted on the premises, and such actions shall be
considered proper notification to the owner, tenant or occupant thereof.
§ 9-14.17. Time for Compliance by Persons Currently Maintaining
Chickens. [Ord. No. 2017-60, adopted 12-5-2017]
Those persons maintaining chickens at the time of the passage of the
Ordinance No. 2017-60 shall come into compliance with this Section 9-14
no later than 90 days after the effective date of this Ordinance.
§ 9-14.18. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 2017-60]
This section shall take effect upon adoption in accordance with law.
§ 9-15. (RESERVED)
§ 9-14.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-15
AO:461

ARTICLE III
Enforcement of Chapter
§ 9-16. ENLARGING NUMBER OF PERSONS AUTHORIZED TO
ISSUE SUMMONSES. [Ord. No. 2000-O-13]
Those employees of the Departments of Public Works and Recreation and
of other departments hereinafter designated by the Town Administrator
are hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of Chapter 9 and related
ordinances and pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:12-14 to issue summonses to
violators of the said chapter.
§ 9-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-16
AO:463
Chapter 10
PERSONNEL POLICIES
§ 10-1. RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS FOR EMPLOYEES.
§ 10-1.1. Residency Preference for Kearny and Newark Residents.
[1973 Code § 33-1; Ord. 2-9-93; Ord. No. 2011-44; Ord. No. 2012-23]
The Town of Kearny shall have the following residential preference with
respect to all hiring and appointments: (1) residents of the Town of Kearny
and the City of Newark; (2) Hudson and Essex Counties; (3) State of New
Jersey; and (4) United States of America.
§ 10-1.2. Exceptions. [1973 Code § 33-2; Ord. No. 2-9-93; Ord. No.
7-13-93; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-18 § 1]
Nothing herein contained shall apply to any person employed by the Town
of Kearny on the effective date of this section, nor shall this section be
construed contrary to New Jersey Statutes concerning the Fire Department
or Police Department of the Town of Kearny, nor shall it apply to the
following positions:
§ 10-2. SALARIES AND COMPENSATION.
§ 10-2.1. Annual Salary. [1973 Code § 41-1]
The salaries and compensation of all officers and employees of the Town
of Kearny shall be as set forth in the current Salary Ordinance and/or
Resolution.
§ 10-2.2. Copy on File. [1973 Code § 41-2]
A copy of the current Salary Ordinance and/or Resolution shall be kept on
file in the office of the Town Clerk for examination and inspection by the
public.
§ 10-3. INSURANCE PREMIUMS.
§ 10-3.1. Payment of Insurance Premiums. [1973 Code § 20-1]
a. Attorney.
b. Engineer.
c. Auditor.
d. Tax Assessor.
a. The Town of Kearny shall pay all the premiums on the group insurance
policy or policies for hospitalization, medical, surgical and major
§ 9-16 KEARNY CODE § 10-3.1
AO:464
§ 10-4. ANNUAL CLOTHING ALLOWANCE. [1973 Code § 20-2]
The Town of Kearny shall pay an annual clothing allowance of $150 to each
uniformed member of its Police and Fire Departments.
§ 10-5. PAID HOLIDAYS. [1973 Code § 20-3; New]
The Town of Kearny shall grant to the members of its Police and Fire
Departments the following paid holidays each year:
HOLIDAY SCHEDULE
Martin Luther King Day
Lincoln's Birthday
Washington's Birthday
Good Friday
Memorial Day
July 4th
Labor Day
Columbus Day
Election Day
Veteran's Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
Three floating holidays
Each employee may also observe his/her birthday by not working on that
day. If the birthday falls on Saturday or Sunday, the employee must take
Friday or Monday.
medical, covering the members of its Police and Fire Departments
and all active employees of the Town of Kearny, including all elected
officers, Town Attorney, Town Treasurer, Town Engineer, the Judge of
the Municipal Court and the wives or husbands and dependent children
under 23 years of age. The benefits are subject to, where applicable,
employee collective bargaining agreements.
b. The Town of Kearny shall also pay the premium on the group life
insurance policy, $4,000, covering the members of the Police and Fire
Departments and all active employees of the Town of Kearny, including
all elected officers, Town Attorney, Town Treasurer, Town Engineer and
the Judge of the Municipal Court.
§ 10-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-5
AO:465
A separate schedule will be done designating the three floating holidays for
employees who do not receive clothing allowance.
The above schedule does not apply to the uniformed employees of the Police
or Fire Departments.
§ 10-6. PENSIONS. [New]
Pensions for the Town of Kearny are governed by the Police and Fire
Retirement System for the State of New Jersey as it applies to all Police and
Firefighters. For all non-Police and Fire employees pensions are governed
by the Public Employees Retirement System of the State of New Jersey.
§ 10-7. DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION OF CLAIMS.
§ 10-7.1. Defense and Indemnification. [Ord. No. 2017-46]
Pursuant to the authority granted by N.J.S.A. 59:10-4 and other related
statutes, the Town shall hereafter provide all Town officials and employees a
defense against any claims or actions made against that official or employee
allegedly arising out of his or her official service or employment and shall
indemnify and hold that official or employee harmless against any liability,
loss, damages cost or expense which may arise from such claim or action.
This obligation shall extend to any cross-actions, counterclaims or crosscomplaints
and shall apply wherever there is no insurance coverage for
such claims.
§ 10-7.2. Exemplary or Punitive Damages. [Ord. No. 2017-46]
The indemnity provided for in subsection 10-7.1 may extend to exemplary
or punitive damages resulting from the civil violation of State or federal
law by the official or employee if in the opinion of the Mayor and Council
the acts committed by the official or employee upon which the damages are
based did not constitute actual fraud, actual malice, willful misconduct or
an intentional wrong.
§ 10-7.3. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2017-46]
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this section, the Town
shall not be responsible for defense or indemnification when the Mayor and
Council determine that:
a. The official or employee is found to have acted in violation of the Local
Government Ethics Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:22-1 et seq.
b. The act or omission was not within the scope of his or her official
service or employment.
c. The defense of the action or proceeding would create a conflict of
interest between the Town and the public official or employee.
d. Insurance coverage is available for payment.
§ 10-5 KEARNY CODE § 10-7.3
AO:466
§ 10-7.4. Control Over the Defense and Litigation. [Ord. No.
2017-46]
Defense of all claims under this section shall be provided by the Town
Attorney. When the Town Attorney is unable to undertake the defense, the
Mayor and Council shall employ other counsel as it deems appropriate.
Either the Town Attorney or other counsel chosen by the Mayor and Council
shall maintain exclusive control over the defense of the case and each
official or employee shall cooperate fully with that attorney or forfeit all of
the benefits afforded by this section.
§ 10-7.5. Own Attorney. [Ord. No. 2017-46]
If an official or employee refuses to accept defense counsel assigned by
the Town pursuant to subsection 10-7.4 and elects to retain his or her own
counsel, the Town shall not be responsible for payment of any fees to such
counsel and shall not be obliged to indemnify the official or employee for
any damages or costs that may result.
§ 10-7.6. Withholding Defense; Defense Under Reservation. [Ord.
No. 2017-46]
If it appears to the Mayor and Council that a particular claim, lawsuit,
action or proceeding may not be properly the subject for municipal
indemnification because of factual disputes which can only be resolved
as the case develops (during investigation, discovery, motion or trial), the
Mayor and Council may elect either to:
§ 10-7.7. Settlements. [Ord. No. 2017-46]
The Town shall not be required to indemnify or reimburse an official or
employee for an amount provided for in a settlement agreement unless the
Mayor and Council has approved the said settlement agreement.
e. The official or employee failed to deliver suit papers or full copies of the
same, to the Town Clerk within 10 calendar days after service.
f. The official or employee has failed to cooperate fully with the defense.
a. Withhold a defense until such time as the matter is established to be a
proper one for indemnification. In such case, the employee or official
may engage his or her own counsel to defend the claim, lawsuit, action
or proceeding, subject to reimbursement of reasonably necessary fees
and costs. Reimbursement shall be made only in the case of a later
determination that the claim was the proper subject of indemnification,
or
b. The Town may elect to provide a defense in such case but subject to a
reservation of rights with respect to any obligation to indemnify the
official or employee.
§ 10-7.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-7.7
AO:467
Chapter 11
PARKS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS
§ 11-1. CONDUCT IN PARKS.
§ 11-1.1. Soccer and Football Restricted. [1973 Code § 110-31.3]
No person shall engage in the playing of soccer, football or any other game
in which a ball is propelled with the foot in any playground of the Town of
Kearny unless such activity is with the permission of and under the direct
supervision of the Kearny Superintendent of Recreation.
§ 11-1.2. Ball Games Prohibited at Certain Parks. [1973 Code
§ 110-31.5]
No person shall engage in stickball, baseball and soccer games, whereby
the object/activity of the game is to hit and/or strike a ball at the following
locations:
Name of Park/Area
Dowd Playground Between Devon Terrace and Hoyt
Street
§ 11-1.3. Driving of Golf Balls Restricted. [1973 Code § 110-31.1]
No person shall engage in the driving of golf balls on any public ballfield in
the Town of Kearny without having first obtained written permission from
the Town of Kearny Superintendent of Recreation to do so.
§ 11-1.4. Dogs and Pets Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-41; Ord. No.
2010-25; Ord. No. 2012-34; Ord. No. 2012-45]
a. No person shall bring or allow any dog or pet in or onto any field or
playground at the following parks, playground or recreation areas:
1. Dowd Playground.
2. Gunnell Oval.
3. Harvey Field.
4. Veteran's Field.
5. Windsor Playground.
6. Bell Playground.
7. Miglin Playground.
8. Belgrove Drive Playground.
§ 10-7.7 KEARNY CODE § 11-1.4
AO:468
§ 11-1.5. Smoking Prohibited in Certain Places. [Ord. No.
2008-(O)-07; Ord. No. 2008-(O)-26 §§ 1 — 3; Ord. No. 2013-11; Ord.
No. 2013-17]
9. Columbia Playground.
10. Tappan Playground.
11. Brighton Avenue Playground.
12. Manor Playground.
b. Exemption. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dogs
used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "seeing eye
dogs."
a. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
PLAYGROUND — Shall mean municipally owned properties used for
and devoted to children's or adults' play activities as set forth in the
enumerated list in subsection 11-1.5b, but shall not include the parking
areas servicing those facilities.
SMOKING — Shall mean the inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying of
any lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe, or other similar devices that contain
tobacco and/or other similar devices that burn tobacco or similar
materials.
b. Smoking Prohibited in Playgrounds. No person shall smoke within the
boundary of the following playgrounds:
1. Belgrove Drive Playground located on Belgrove Drive near Park
Avenue.
2. Bell Playground located on Stewart Avenue between Chestnut
Street and Devon Street.
3. Columbia Playground located on the corner of Columbia Avenue
and Elm Street.
4. Coogan/Manor Playground located on the corner of West Bennett
and Jefferson Avenues.
5. Dowd Playground located on Devon Terrace between Davis Avenue
and Hamilton Avenue.
6. Gunnell Oval playground.
7. Miglin Playground located on the corner of Johnston and Sherman
Avenues.
8. Pettigrew Playground located on the corner of Highland and
Woodland Avenues.
§ 11-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-1.5
AO:469
§ 11-2. HOURS OF OPERATION.
9. Riverbank Park Playground across from West Bennett Avenue.
10. Tappan Playground located on Tappan Street between Davis
Avenue and Devon Street.
11. Windsor/Grove Playground located on the corner of Windsor and
Grove Streets.
12. Harvey Field.
13. Gunnel Oval Sports Complex.
14. Veteran's Memorial Park.
15. Corbett Hockey Field and Futsol Soccer Field at Riverbank Park
Marina Area.
16. Fairlawn Manor Park, Coogan Playground.
c. Smoking Prohibited in Public Parks. No person shall smoke within the
boundaries of any public park, provided, however, that this provision
shall not apply to: parking areas serving those facilities or the public
sidewalks immediately adjoining the public park.
d. Posting Signs. A "No Smoking" sign shall be clearly, sufficiently, and
conspicuously posted at every such playground facility where smoking
is prohibited by this subsection. The sign(s) shall have the words "No
Smoking" in lettering that is not less than two inches in height, and
shall contain the international no smoking sign or symbol.
e. Enforcement. The Kearny Police Department and Kearny Health
Department shall be charged with the diligent enforcement of the
provisions of this subsection.
f. Violations and Penalties. It shall be a violation of this subsection for any
person to smoke or carry a lighted cigarette, cigar, or pipe or other
similar devices where smoking is prohibited.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to
the following penalties:
1. For the first violation, a warning.
2. For the second violation, a fine not exceeding $100.
3. For the third violation, a fine not exceeding $200 but no less than
$100.
4. For the fourth violation, a fine not exceeding $500 but no less than
$200.
§ 11-1.5 KEARNY CODE § 11-2.1
AO:470
§ 11-2.1. Closing Provision. [1973 Code § 110-31.2]
No person shall remain in any of the public parks of the Town of Kearny
beyond 1/2 hour after sunset as established by prevailing time.
§ 11-3. BALLFIELD REGULATIONS FOR GUNNELL OVAL; HARVEY
FIELD; VETERAN'S FIELD.
§ 11-3.1. Ballfields Regulated. [Ord. No. 1996-45 § 1]
The use of all ballfields within the following parks and recreation areas shall
be governed by this section:
§ 11-3.2. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. No. 1996-45 § 2]
While in a recreation area, all persons shall conduct themselves in a proper
and orderly manner, and in particular no person shall:
a. Gunnell Oval.
b. Harvey Field.
c. Veteran's Field.
Basketball Courts and Playground Areas in the above facilities are not
subject to the provisions and regulations of this section.
a. Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or
remove any buildings, tables, benches, fencing or other public utilities
or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary
markers or other structures or equipment, or recreation area property
whatsoever, either real or personal;
b. Construct or erect any buildings or structure of whatever kind, whether
permanent or temporary, or run or string any public service utility into,
upon or across such lands, except on special written permit issued
hereunder; and,
c. Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a neat
and sanitary condition. No persons above the age of six years shall use
the rest rooms and washrooms designated for the opposite sex.
d. Bring or allow any animal or pet onto any field.
e. Bring alcoholic beverages or drink same at any time while in one of the
designated areas;
f. Enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public", nor shall any person use
or aid in the use of any such area, in violation of posted notices; and
g. Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party occupying
any area or participating in any activity under the authority of a permit.
§ 11-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-3.3
AO:471
§ 11-3.3. Hours of Operation. [Ord. No. 1996-45 § 3; Ord. No.
2002-O-32 § 1]
§ 11-3.4. Permits. [Ord. No. 1996-45 § 4; Ord. No. 2002-O-83 § 9;
Ord. No. 2012-22; Ord. No. 2013-2; Ord. No. 2019-15]
Permits are required for use of the Town Parks and Recreation Facilities.
There shall be a fee charged for the issuance of each permit, which fees
shall be as set forth in the Parks and Recreation fee ordinance.
a. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, recreation areas shall
be open to the public every day of the year from the hour of 9:00 a.m. to
one-half hour after sunset. No person shall enter upon or occupy any
recreation area except during such hours without the written
permission of the Kearny Recreation Department, which permission
shall be evidenced by a permit;
b. Any section or part of any recreation area may be declared closed to the
public at any time and for any interval of time, which intervals may be
temporary or regular, stated daily or otherwise, and may be either
entirely for field maintenance or for other certain uses.
a. No permit shall be issued for use of any recreation area by groups of
individuals of fewer than 15 in number. Organized teams of any
number/size must obtain a permit.
b. Permits for events in the recreation areas shall be requested from the
Kearny Recreation Department upon provision of the following:
1. The name and address of the applicant;
2. The name and address of the person, persons, group, corporation
or association sponsoring the activity, if any;
3. The activity/game/event for which the permit is requested;
4. The day and hours for which the permit is desired;
5. The recreation area or portion thereof for which such permit is
desired;
6. A copy of a Certificate of Insurance for the group, corporation,
association or activity is required. In the absence of a Certificate of
Insurance, any insurance charge will be assessed, which charge
shall be set forth in the fee ordinance for Parks and Recreation;
7. A hold harmless agreement, which shall be provided by the Town,
and shall hold the Town of Kearny harmless for any and all losses,
damages or injuries of any kind and of any cause, suffered in
relation to the use of the Kearny recreation facilities; and
§ 11-3.3 KEARNY CODE § 11-3.4
AO:472
8. Any other information which the Kearny Recreation Department
shall find reasonably necessary to make a fair determination as to
whether a permit should be issued hereunder.
c. An application for a use permit by the Kearny Recreation Department
will be reviewed with consideration to the following:
1. The proposed activity or use of the recreation area shall not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public
enjoyment of the area;
2. The proposed activity and use shall not unreasonably interfere with
or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety,
recreation and shall not include violence, crime or disorderly
conduct;
3. The facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at the
date and hour requested.
d. A permittee shall be bound by all recreation area rules and regulations
and all applicable ordinances fully, as though the same were explicitly
set forth in the permit.
e. Field/facility lighting charges (in addition to permit fees): $25 per
2-hour permit session. [Ord. No. 2019-15, applicable to all field/
facility uses occurring on and after September 1, 2019.
f. Field/facility use: [Ord. No. 2019-15, applicable to all field/facility
uses occurring on and after September 1, 2019.
1. Field/Facility permit, youth, 2 hours
per day
$75. Kearny private groups
$150. Non-Kearny private
groups
$25. Kearny nonprofit
groups
$50. Non-Kearny nonprofit
groups
2. Field/Facility permit, adult, 2 hours
per day
$100. Kearny private groups
$200. Non-Kearny private
groups
$50. Kearny nonprofit
groups
$100. Non-Kearny nonprofit
groups
3. Field/Facility permit, youth all day
(maximum 8 hours per day)
$150. Kearny private groups
§ 11-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-3.4
AO:473
$300. Non-Kearny private
groups
$50. Kearny nonprofit
groups
$100. Non-Kearny nonprofit
groups
4. Field/Facility permit, adult all day
(maximum 8 hours per day)
$250. Kearny private groups
$500. Non-Kearny private
groups
$150. Kearny nonprofit
groups
$300. Non-Kearny nonprofit
groups
5. Field/Facility permit, youth
seasonal fee (two hours per field/
day per week/season)
$300. Kearny private groups
$600. Non-Kearny private
groups
$100. Kearny nonprofit
groups
$200. Non-Kearny nonprofit
groups
6. Field/Facility permit, adult seasonal
fee (two hours per field/day per
week/season)
$400. Kearny private groups
$800. Non-Kearny private
groups
$250. Kearny nonprofit
groups
$500. Non-Kearny nonprofit
groups
Subject to receipt of prior approval from the Kearny Recreation
Commission, a Kearny non profit group that jointly administers its
sports program with a Town of Kearny Recreation sports program shall
not be required to pay field use fees under this subparagraph f or
lighting fees under subparagraph e for combined field usage by said
Kearny non profit group and the Town Recreation Department.
g. To qualify as a Kearny group, either profit or nonprofit, under
paragraph f., the group must be an organization where the office or the
place of business is Kearny and at least 80% of the participants are
Kearny residents.
§ 11-3.4 KEARNY CODE § 11-3.4
AO:474
§ 11-3.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 1996-45 § 5]
§ 11-3.6. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 1996-45 § 6]
This section shall not apply to any participants or spectators present at
the Kearny parks or recreation facilities in conjunction with any games
or events sponsored by, authorized by, and/or approved by the Kearny
Recreation Department.
§ 11-3.7. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 1996-45 § 7; New]
§ 11-4. RIVERBANK PARK.
§ 11-4.1. Permit; Fees. [1973 Code § 108-1; Ord. No. 2002-O-83 §§ 7,
8; Ord. No. 2012-22]
In order to provide the necessary funds to improve, maintain and police
the parklands and picnic areas within the Town of Kearny bordering on
the Passaic River and known as Riverbank Park, the following fees shall be
charged for the use of the facilities:
h. To qualify as a nonprofit group, either Kearny or non-Kearny, under
paragraph f, the group must be a group organized as such under New
Jersey law.
a. An appropriate permit shall be shown upon request to any Kearny
police officer, or member or employee of the Kearny Recreation
Department.
b. The Kearny Police Department shall have the authority to eject from the
recreation area any person or persons acting in violation of this section.
c. The Kearny Recreation Department shall have the authority to revoke a
permit upon finding of a violation of any rule or ordinance of the Town
of Kearny, any State statute or regulation, or upon good cause shown.
However, no member of the Kearny Recreation Department shall have
the authority to eject from the recreation area any person or persons
acting in violation of this section.
a. Every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this section shall
be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
b. Any violators will be subject to criminal trespass charges, as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 2C:18-3, and penalties attendant thereto.
a. Any individual, group or organization requesting a permit shall pay a
permit fee of:
1. Individual, group or organizations
Resident $100
Nonresident $200
§ 11-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-4.1
AO:475
§ 11-4.2. Rules and Regulations. [1973 Code § 108-2]
The following rules and regulations are hereby established, and it shall be
unlawful to:
§ 11-4.3. Revocation of Permit. [1973 Code § 108-3]
The Town of Kearny hereby reserves the right to revoke the permit granted
to any group of individuals for violation of the above rules and regulations.
Such revocation shall not preclude the imposition of any other penalties
provided for such violations herein.
§ 11-4.4. Penalty. [1973 Code § 108-4; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section or any of the rules
and regulations adopted hereunder, shall upon conviction thereof be liable
to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 11-4.5. Use of Norman Doyle Pavilion and Frank Vincent Marina.
[Ord. No. 2010-4]
2. Youth groups or organizations
Resident $50
Nonresident $100
3. Frank A. Vincent Marina
Resident $100
Nonresident $200
a. Camp or sleep overnight in any of the above noted parklands;
b. Act in a loud, indecent, obscene or offensive manner;
c. Throw, place, deposit or leave any bottles, glass, crockery, sharp or
pointed articles or things, paper, refuse or debris of any kind on the
parklands;
d. Start or maintain any fire on the parkland other than in those places
specifically designated for same.
a. No individual, group, youth group, organization, resident or
nonresident shall be issued a permit for the use of the Norman Doyle
Pavilion or the Frank Vincent Marina more than one time in any sixtyday
period and in no event more than three times in one calendar year.
b. For all purposes under this section, the Normal Doyle Pavilion and the
Frank Vincent Marina shall be deemed to be the same permitting unit.
By way of illustration, if an applicant is issued a permit for one, that
§ 11-4.1 KEARNY CODE § 11-4.5
AO:476
§ 11-5. LINCOLN SCHOOL POOL.
§ 11-5.1. Pool Badge Required; Fees. [1973 Code § 109.3; Ord. No.
2002-O-83 § 10; Ord. No. 2012-22]
§ 11-6. REGISTRATION FEES.
§ 11-6.1. Program Registration Fees. [Ord. No. 2012-22]
applicant is precluded from obtaining a permit for the other during that
sixty-day period.
c. No provision of this subsection shall be deemed to modify, alter or
change the provisions of Town Code subsections 4-21.1 through 4-21.4.
a. Any resident of the Town of Kearny shall be entitled, after obtaining a
resident pool badge, to utilize the Lincoln School Pool during Town of
Kearny Recreation Department programs.
b. Annual Fee.
0-12 years $20
13-61 years $30
62 years and over $10
a. An annual registration fee of $35 shall be imposed for each of the
following programs:
American Legion
Cheerleaders
Flag Football
Generals Football
Girls Softball
Kearny Youth Soccer
Little League Baseball
Mantle Baseball
Senior Baseball
Street Hockey
Wrestling
Youth Basketball
b. If a head coach in the program is also (i) the parent of a participating
child, (ii) continues as head coach for the entire season and (iii) is in
§ 11-4.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-6.1
AO:477
§ 11-6.2. Adult Golf Fees. [Ord. No. 2012-22]
§ 11-7. DOG PARK RULES.
§ 11-7.1. Rules. [Ord. No. 2016-19]
good standing at the end of the season, he or she shall be entitled to a
refund of the registration fee for one of his or her children at the end of
the season.
a. Adult residents of the Town who use public golf courses in Essex County
may register with the Recreation Department by completing an
application form and paying the following annual fee:
21 years of age to 61 years of
age
$20
62 years of age and older $10
b. Each registrant shall remain personally responsible for whatever fees
may be imposed by Essex County upon nonresidents for use of the
courses, but shall become entitled to the free use of an electric golf cart
for the entire season under rules and practices established by the
Recreation Department.
a. Dog Park use within Riverbank Park shall be in accordance with the
following rules:
1. Small dog park is limited to dogs weighing 25 lbs. or lighter.
2. Large dog park is limited to dogs weighing 25 lbs. or larger.
3. Dogs must be accompanied by an adult (18 years or older).
(a) Limit of three dogs per adult.
(b) No dogs in heat or puppies under four months allowed.
4. No children under 10 years old allowed in fenced area.
5. Dogs must have a current license.
6. Dogs must have current vaccinations and shots. No dogs permitted
with communicable diseases or infections.
7. Dogs must be kept on leash until inside gated area.
8. Collar must be kept on dog at all times.
9. Dogs must be removed from park at first sign of aggression.
10. Dogs must be removed if incessantly barking.
11. No spike or choke collars.
§ 11-6.1 KEARNY CODE § 11-7.1
AO:478
§ 11-7.2. Dog Park Hours of Operation. [Ord. No. 2016-19]
Dog Park shall be open everyday of the week from dawn to dusk. No person
shall enter the dog park at any other time.
§ 11-7.3. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2016-19]
The Kearny Police Department shall be charged with the enforcement of the
provisions of this section.
§ 11-7.4. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2016-19]
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to the
following penalties:
Chapter 12
TAXATION
12. Owners are required to clean up after their dog.
13. Park may be closed for maintenance without prior notice.
14. All dog bites must be reported to the Police Department.
15. No toys or balls allowed.
16. No food allowed.
17. No smoking allowed.
18. Use of the dog park is at the dog owner's sole risk.
19. Dog owners are responsible and liable for the actions and behavior
of their dogs at all times.
a. For the first violation a fine not exceeding $100.
b. For the second violation, a fine not exceeding $200 but no less than
$100.
c. For the third violation or any violation thereafter, a fine not exceeding
$500 but no less than $200.
§ 11-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-7.4
AO:479

ARTICLE I
Abatement
§ 12-1. TAX ABATEMENT.
§ 12-1.1. Abatement. [1973 Code § 43-1; Ord. No. 5-25-93; Ord. No.
2003-(O)-26; Ord. No. 2013-35]
The Mayor and Council hereby provides for tax abatement on residential
improvements, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A-21-1 et seq., as
amended and supplemented, for residential buildings containing no more
than three dwelling units, such that in determining the value of real
property, the municipality shall regard the first $15,000 in Assessor's full
and true value of improvements for each dwelling unit primarily and directly
affected by the improvement in any dwelling more than 20 years old,
as not increasing the value of the property for a period of five years,
notwithstanding that the value of the property to which the improvements
are made is increased thereby.39
§ 12-2. FIVE-YEAR TAX EXEMPTION AND ABATEMENT PROGRAM.
§ 12-2.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2002-O-11 § 1]
As used in this section:
ABATEMENT — Shall mean that portion of the assessed value of a property,
as it existed prior to construction, improvement or conversion of a building
or structure thereon, which portion is exempted from taxation pursuant to
this section.
ABATEMENT COMMITTEE — Shall consist of the Town Tax Assessor, Town
Tax Collector, Director of the Kearny Urban Enterprise Zone, Town Chief
Financial Officer, Town Administrator, Mayor and Council Finance
Committee Chair. This Committee shall serve in an advisory capacity only.
Its purpose is to review applications submitted pursuant to this section,
and to make recommendations to the Mayor and Council regarding said
application.
AREA IN NEED OF REHABILITATION — Shall mean a portion or all of
a municipality which has been determined to be an area in need of
rehabilitation or redevelopment pursuant to the "Local Redevelopment and
Housing Law," P.L. 1992, c. 79 (C. 40A:12A-1 et al.), a "blighted area"
as determined pursuant to the "Blighted Areas Act," P.L. 1949, c. 187
(C. 40:55-21.1 et seq.), or which has been determined to be in need of
rehabilitation pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 104 (C. 54:4-3.72 et seq.), P.L. 1977,
c. 12 (C. 54:4-3.95 et seq.), or P.L. 1979, c. 233 (C. 54:4-3.121 et seq.).
39.Editor's Note: Pursuant to Ordinance No. 2003-(O)-26 the tax abatement provided for
herein applies only to one- and two- family dwellings.
§ 12-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.1
AO:481
ASSESSOR — Shall mean the Tax Assessor of the Town, or his designee,
who is charged with the duty of assessing real property for the purpose of
general taxation.
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure
or part thereof used for the manufacturing, processing or assembling of
material or manufactured products, or for research, office, industrial,
commercial, retail, recreational, hotel or motel facilities, or warehousing
purposes, or for any combination thereof, which the Governing Body
determines will tend to maintain or provide gainful employment within
the municipality, assist in the economic development of the municipality,
maintain or increase the tax base of the municipality and maintain or
diversify and expand commerce within the municipality. It shall not include
any structure or part thereof used or to be used by any business relocated
from another qualifying municipality unless: the total square footage of
the floor area of the structure or part thereof used or to be used by the
business at the new site exceeds the total square footage of that utilized
by the business at its current site of operations by at least 10%; and
the property that the business is relocating to has been the subject of a
remedial action plan costing in excess of $250,000 performed pursuant to
an administrative consent order entered into pursuant to authority vested
in the Commissioner of Environmental Protection under P.L. 1970, c. 33
(C. 13:1D-1 et seq.), the "Water Pollution Control Act," p. 1977, c. 74 (C.
58:10A-1 et seq.), the "Solid Waste Management Act," P.L. 1970 c. 39 (C.
13:1E-1 et seq.); and the "Spill Compensation and Control Act," P.L. 1976, c.
141 (C. 58:10-23.11 et seq.).
COMPLETION — Shall mean substantially ready for the intended use for
which a building or structure is constructed, improved or converted, which
shall ordinarily mean the date on which the property receives or is eligible
to receive a Certificate of Occupancy, all as determined by the Town.
CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean the provision of a new commercial or
industrial structure, or the enlargement of the volume of an existing
commercial or industrial structure by more than 30%, but shall not mean
the conversion of an existing building or structure to another use.
EXEMPTION — Shall mean that portion of the assessor's full and true value
of any improvement, conversion, alteration, or construction not regarded as
increasing the taxable value of a property pursuant to the Tax Abatement
Law.
IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean a modernization, rehabilitation, renovation,
alteration or repair which produces a physical change in an existing
commercial or industrial building or structure that improves the safety,
sanitation, decency or attractiveness of the building or structure as a place
for work, and which does not change its permitted use. It shall not include
ordinary painting, repairs and replacement of maintenance items, or an
enlargement of the volume of an existing structure by more than 30%. In no
case shall it include the repair of fire or other damage to property for which
payment of a claim was received by any person from an insurance company
§ 12-2.1 KEARNY CODE § 12-2.1
AO:482
at any time during the three-year period immediately preceding the filing of
an application pursuant to this act.
PROJECT — Shall mean the improvement or new construction of a
commercial or industrial building or structure for which exemption or
abatement is sought under this section.
§ 12-2.2. Five Year Tax Exemption. [Ord. No. 2002-O-11 § II]
In accordance with Article VIII, Section I, Paragraph 6 of the New Jersey
Constitution, the Town hereby authorizes the utilization of tax exemption
and abatement and establishes the eligibility of commercial and industrial
structures and of improvements thereto for five year tax exemptions to
the maximum degree permitted by N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. (the "Tax
Abatement Law") throughout those portions of the municipality which have
been declared to be areas in need of rehabilitation as defined in the Tax
Abatement Law.
§ 12-2.3. Improvements to Commercial and Industrial Structures.
[Ord. No. 2002-O-11 § III; Ord. No. 2012-22]
a. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-7, improvements to commercial and
industrial structures which otherwise qualify under this section and the
Tax Abatement Law are eligible for tax exemption for a period of five
years.
b. Every application for an exemption under this section shall be filed with
the Mayor and Council, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee of
$1,500 to be paid as compensation for legal and related administrative
review by the Town.
c. No exemption shall be granted unless approved by ordinance of the
Town Council on an individual basis, following review and evaluation by
the Abatement Committee, as heretofore defined. No application which
is incomplete, or fails to meet the requirements of this section, shall be
approved. In such cases, the application shall be rejected without
prejudice to the right of the applicant to submit a conforming
application.
d. Contents of Application. Applicants for tax exemption and abatement
for improvements to commercial or industrial structures shall provide
the town Council with an application setting forth, at minimum, the
following:
1. A general description of both the improvements for which
exemption and abatement is sought and the structures to be
improved;
2. A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project;
§ 12-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.3
AO:483
3. Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
Governing Body to depict the structure and design of the proposed
improvements;
4. A description of the number, classes and type of employees, both
construction employees and permanent, to be employed at the
project site during the period beginning with construction and
ending two years following the completion of the project;
5. A statement of the reasons for seeking tax exemption and
abatement on the project, and a description of the benefits to be
realized by the applicant if a tax agreement is granted;
6. A good faith estimate of the cost of completing such project;
7. A statement showing (i) the real property taxes currently being
assessed on the project site and the structures to be improved; (ii)
an estimate of the assessed value of the proposed improvements
and the taxes which would be generated over the term of the
agreement if the improvements were not afforded tax abatement,
and (iii) an estimate of the tax payments that would be made by the
applicant on the project during the first full year following the
termination of the tax agreement;
8. A description of any lease agreements between the applicant and
proposed users of the structure to be improved, and a history and
description of the users' businesses;
9. A certification that all municipal taxes, penalties and other charges
levied against the project site and the structures to be improved
are current through the date of the application;
10. A certification that as of the date of the application, construction on
the proposed project has not commenced and will not commence
until the application is approved by ordinance of the Town Council
and an appropriate agreement executed by the Town and the
applicant;
11. A disclosure of all entities having an ownership interest in either
the project site and improvements or in applicant entity;
12. A draft of the proposed agreement between the Town and the
applicant conforming with the Tax Abatement Law; and
13. Such other pertinent information as the Town Council may require.
e. The decision to approve applications for exemption under this section
shall lie exclusively within the discretion of the Town Council. If an
exemption is approved, the Town in determining value shall regard the
assessor's full and true value of the improvements as not increasing the
value of the property for a period of five years, notwithstanding that the
value of the property to which the improvement is made is increased
thereby. During the exemption period, the assessment on the property
§ 12-2.3 KEARNY CODE § 12-2.3
AO:484
§ 12-2.4. Construction of New Commercial and Industrial
Structures. [Ord. No. 2002-O-11 § IV; Ord. No. 2012-22]
shall not be less than the assessment thereon existing immediately
prior to the improvements, unless there is damage to the structure
through action of the elements sufficient to warrant a reduction.
f. Upon adoption of an ordinance approving an application for exemption
hereunder, the Governing Body or its designated committee shall
prepare an agreement to be executed by the applicant and the Town
setting forth the terms and conditions of the exemption consistent with
the ordinance approving same.
a. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-8, newly constructed commercial and
industrial structures which otherwise qualify under the Tax Abatement
Law and this section shall be eligible for tax exemption for a period of
five years.
b. Every application for an exemption under this section shall be filed with
the Mayor and Council, and be accompanied by a filing fee of $1,500 to
be paid as compensation for legal and related administrative review by
the Town.
c. No exemption shall be granted unless approved by ordinance of the
Town Council on an individual basis, after review and evaluation by the
Abatement Committee, as heretofore defined. No application which is
incomplete, or fails to meet the requirements of this section, shall be
approved. In such cases, the application shall be rejected without
prejudice to the right of the applicant to submit a conforming
application.
d. Contents of Application. Applicants for tax exemption and abatement
for new construction of commercial or industrial structures shall
provide the Town Council with an application setting forth, at minimum,
the following:
1. A general description of the project for which exemption and
abatement is sought;
2. A legal description of all real estate necessary for the project;
3. Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
Governing Body to depict the structure and design of the project;
4. A description of the number, classes and type of employees, both
construction employees and permanent, to be employed at the
project site during the period beginning with construction and
ending two years following the completion of the project;
5. A statement of the reasons for seeking tax exemption and
abatement on the project, and a description of the benefits to be
realized by the applicant if a tax agreement is granted;
§ 12-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.4
AO:485
6. A good faith estimate of the cost of completing such project;
7. A statement showing (i) the real property taxes currently being
assessed on the project site; (ii) an estimate of the payments in lieu
of taxes which would be made by the applicant on the project
during the term of the agreement, and (iii) an estimate of the tax
payments that would be made by the applicant on the project
during the first full year following the termination of the tax
agreement;
8. A description of any lease agreements between the applicant and
proposed users of the project, and a history and description of the
users' businesses;
9. A certification that all municipal taxes, penalties and other charges
levied against the project site are current through the date of the
application;
10. A certification that as of the date of the application, construction on
the proposed project has not commenced and will not commence
until the application is approved by Ordinance of the Town Council
and an appropriate agreement executed by the Town and the
applicant;
11. A disclosure of all entities having an interest in either the project
site and improvements or in applicant entity.
12. A draft of the proposed agreement between the Town and the
applicant conforming with the Tax Abatement Law.
13. Such other pertinent information as the Governing Body may
require.
e. The decision to approve applications for exemption under this section
lies exclusively within the discretion of the Town Council. Where
approval is granted and the exemption allowed, it shall only be granted
and allowed to the degree that the application is consistent with the
provisions of this Ordinance and the Tax Abatement Law, and further
provided that the improvement, conversion, alteration or construction
for which the application is made qualifies as such, pursuant to the
provisions of the Tax Abatement Law and this section.
f. Upon receipt of a completed and approved application, the Governing
Body or its designated committee shall prepare an agreement to be
executed by the applicant and the Town.
1. Said agreement shall provide for the applicant to pay to the
municipality annual payments in lieu of full property tax. Said
payments shall consist of an amount equal to a percentage of taxes
otherwise due according to the schedule set forth in N.J.S.A.
40A:21-10c, as follows:
§ 12-2.4 KEARNY CODE § 12-2.4
AO:486
§ 12-2.5. Additional Improvements Eligible for Tax Exemption. [Ord.
No. 2002-O-11 § V]
An additional improvement or construction completed to a property already
granted an exemption during the period in which the exemption is in effect,
shall be eligible for an additional exemption, just as if such property had not
received previous exemption. The additional improvement or construction
shall be considered as separate for purposes of calculating the exemption,
except that the assessed value of any previous improvement, conversion
or construction shall be added to the assessed valuation as it was prior
to that improvement or construction, for the purpose of determining the
assessed value of the property from which any additional exemption is to be
subtracted.
§ 12-2.6. Ineligibility. [Ord. No. 2002-O-11 § VI]
(a) In the first full tax year after completion, no payment in lieu of
taxes otherwise due;
(b) In the second tax year, an amount not less than 20% of taxes
otherwise due;
(c) In the third tax year, an amount not less than 40% of taxes
otherwise due;
(d) In the fourth tax year, an amount not less than 60% of taxes
otherwise due;
(e) In the fifth tax year, an amount not less than 80% of taxes
otherwise due.
2. The agreement shall provide that the tax shall be billed and
collected in the same manner as any conventional taxes and any
arrearages shall accrue at the rate of interest charged for
delinquent real estate taxes and shall be subject to foreclosure.
3. The agreement shall be in effect for no more than the five full tax
years next following the date of completion of the project which has
triggered the agreement.
a. No exemptions shall be granted for any property for which property
taxes, municipal fines or penalties or any other municipal charges are
delinquent or remain unpaid, or for which penalties for nonpayment are
due.
b. No exemptions or abatements shall be granted for any project on which
construction has commenced prior to final approval of the application
by Ordinance adopted by the Town Council and the execution of an
agreement between the application and the Town pursuant to
subsection 12-2.3f and 12-2.4f.
§ 12-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.7
AO:487
§ 12-2.7. Amendments. [Ord. No. 2002-O-11 § VII]
This section may be amended by the Governing Body. However, no
amendment to this section shall affect any exemption, abatement, or tax
agreement previously granted and in force prior to the abatement.
§ 12-2.8. Record Keeping. [Ord. No. 2002-O-11 § VIII]
§ 12-2.9. Reporting Requirements. [Ord. No. 2002-O-11 § IX]
§ 12-2.10. Termination; Transfer. [Ord. No. 2002-O-11 § X]
a. The granting of an exemption and tax agreement under this section, if
appropriate, shall be recorded and made a permanent part of the
official tax records of the taxing district, which record shall contain a
notation as to the termination date thereof.
b. The Town Clerk shall forward a copy of all executed exemption
agreements to the Director of the Division of Local Government
Services in the Department of Community Affairs within 30 days of the
date of execution.
c. The granting of an exemption and tax agreement, if appropriate, shall
be recorded and made a permanent part of the official tax records of the
taxing district, which record shall contain a notation as to the
termination date thereof.
a. Every successful applicant for exemption under this section shall file
the application form prescribed by the Director of the New Jersey
Division of Taxation in the Department of Treasury, with the Tax
Assessor, as a condition to approval, within 30 days, including
Saturdays and Sundays following the completion of the improvement,
conversion or construction in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:21-16.
Failure to timely file the prescribed form may result in the denial of the
exemption.
b. On or before October 1 of each year, the Governing Body shall report to
the Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the
Department of Community Affairs, and to the Director of the Division of
Taxation in the Department of the Treasury, the total amount of
payments made in lieu of taxes pursuant to tax agreements for
construction of commercial or industrial structures. Said report shall
also contain a calculation of the difference between the total amount of
payments in lieu of taxes and the total amount of real property taxes
which would have been paid had the tax agreements not been in effect.
a. At the termination of a tax agreement, a project shall be subject to all
applicable real property taxes as provided by State law, and regulation
and local ordinance. Nothing herein shall prevent a project, at the
termination of an agreement, from qualifying for and receiving the full
benefits of any other tax preferences provided by law.
§ 12-2.7 KEARNY CODE § 12-2.10
AO:488
§ 12-2.11. Miscellaneous. [Ord. No. 2002-O-11 § XI]
§ 12-2.12. Notice. [Ord. No. 2002-O-11 § XII]
The Tax Collector shall include an appropriate notice in the mailing of the
annual property tax bills to each owner of a dwelling located in an area in
which exemptions may be allowed under this section.
§ 12-3. through § 12-5.(RESERVED)
b. In the event a property owner subject to a tax agreement ceases to
operate or disposes of the property or fails to meet the conditions for
qualifying for the exemption, the local property taxes due for all the
prior years subject to exemption and for the current year shall be
payable as if no exemption had been granted. The Town Council shall so
notify the property owner and Tax Collector. The Tax Collector shall
forthwith notify the property owner within 15 days of the date of
disqualification of the amount of taxes due. In the event the subject
property has been transferred to a new owner and it is determined that
the new owner will continue to use the property pursuant to the
qualifying conditions, no tax shall be due. The exemption shall continue
and the agreement shall remain in effect.
a. This section shall be in effect for 10 years from the date of adoption.
b. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:212-1, this section may be readopted by action
of the Governing Body.
c. No application for exemption or abatement may be accepted or granted
for the 11th tax year after adoption of this section, unless the Governing
Body has readopted this Ordinance.
d. All projects which are the subject of tax abatements or exemptions
pursuant to this Ordinance shall be subject to all applicable Federal,
State, and local laws and regulations on pollution control, worker
safety, employment discrimination, zoning, planning and building code
requirements.
e. For purposes of determining the reduced valuation of the property to be
included in valuation of the Town for determining equalization for
County tax apportionment and school aid during the term of a tax
agreement, the percentage which the payment in lieu of taxes bears to
the full property tax payments (which tax payments would have been
assessed but for the abatement or exemption granted pursuant to this
section), shall be applied to the valuation of the property.
§ 12-2.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-3
AO:489

ARTICLE II
Tax Exemptions
§ 12-6. TAX EXEMPTION ENVIRONMENTAL OPPORTUNITY ZONES.
§ 12-6.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 1999-O-19 § 1]
There are numerous properties in the Town of Kearny that are underutilized
or that have been abandoned and that are not being utilized for commercial
use because of contamination that exists on these properties.
These abandoned contaminated properties harm the Town of Kearny and
its residents by causing a burden on municipal services while failing to
contribute to the funding of those services.
It is in the best interest of the Town of Kearny to encourage the remediation
of these properties so that they can be reused or fully used for commercial
properties.
The Town of Kearny, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.150, et seq., makes known
its intention to utilize the tax exemption provision authorized by the New
Jersey State legislature to provide for exemptions of real property taxes for
environmental opportunity zones for terms of up to 15 years.
§ 12-6.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1999-O-19 § 2]
CONTAMINATION OR CONTAMINANT — Shall mean any discharged
hazardous substance as defined pursuant to section 3 of P.L. 1976, c. 141
(N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11b), hazardous waste as defined pursuant to section 1
of P.L. 1976, c. 99 (N.J.S.A. 13:1E-38), or pollutant as defined pursuant to
section 3 of P.L. 1977, c. 74 (N.J.S.A. 58:10A-3).
ENGINEERING CONTROLS — Shall mean any mechanism to contain or
stabilize contamination or ensure the effectiveness of remedial action.
Engineering controls may include, without limitation, caps, covers, dikes,
trenches, leachate collection systems, signs, fences and access controls.
ENVIRONMENTAL OPPORTUNITY ZONE — Shall mean any qualified real
property that has been designated by the governing body of the Town of
Kearny as an environmental opportunity zone pursuant to section 4 of P.L.
1977, c. 413 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.153).
INSTITUTIONAL CONTROLS — Shall mean a mechanism used to limit
human activities at or near a contaminated site, or to ensure the
effectiveness of the remedial action over time, when contaminants remain
at a contaminated site in levels or concentrations above the applicable
remediation standard that would allow unrestricted use of that property.
Institutional controls may include, without limitation, structure, land, and
natural use restrictions, well restriction areas, and deed notices.
LIMITED RESTRICTED USE REMEDIAL ACTION — Shall mean any
remedial action that requires the continued use of institutional controls but
does not require the use of an engineering control.
§ 12-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-6.2
AO:491
QUALIFIED REAL PROPERTY — Shall mean any parcel of real property
that is now vacant or underutilized, which is in need of a remediation due
to discharge or threatened discharge of a contaminant, and which is listed
in the most recent Department of Environmental Protection publication of
known hazardous discharge sites in New Jersey prepared pursuant to P.L.
1982, c. 202 (N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.15 et seq.)
REMEDIATION — Shall mean all necessary action to investigate and clean
up or respond to any known, suspected or threatened discharge of
contaminants, including, as necessary, the preliminary assessment, site
investigation, remedial investigation, and remedial action.
REMEDIATION COST — Shall mean cost associated with the
implementation of a remediation, including all direct and indirect legal,
administrative and capital costs, engineering costs, and annual operation,
maintenance, and monitoring costs.
TAX ASSESSOR — Shall mean the Tax Assessor for the Town of Kearny
appointed pursuant to the provisions of chapter 9 of Title 40A of the New
Jersey Statutes.
TAXES OTHERWISE DUE — Shall mean the amount determined by using
the assessed valuation of the environmental opportunity zone at the time
of the approval by the Tax Assessor of the exemption, regardless of any
improvement made to the environmental opportunity zone thereafter and as
if the designation of the environmental opportunity zone had not occurred.
UNRESTRICTED USE REMEDIAL ACTION — Shall mean any remedial
action that does not require the continued use of engineering or
institutional controls in order to meet the established health risk or
environmental standards.
§ 12-6.3. Application Procedure. [Ord. No. 1999-O-19 § 3]
The following conditions shall apply to all applications for tax exemption of
the environmental opportunity zone at the time of the application:
§ 12-6.4. Authorization for Tax Exemption. [Ord. No. 1999-O-19 § 4]
Each approved exemption shall be evidenced by a financial agreement
between the Town of Kearny and the applicant approved by ordinance of the
Town Council authorizing an agreement for tax exemption for a particular
environmental opportunity zone for a period of 10 years, except that a tax
exemption may be extended up to 15 years, at the Town of Kearny's option,
if the qualified real property is to be remediated with a limited restricted
use remedial action or an unrestricted use remedial action. The property
tax exemption shall end if (a) the difference between the real property taxes
a. The application shall be filed with the Tax Assessor on a form
prescribed by the Director of the Division of Taxation, in the
Department of the Treasury, State of New Jersey.
b. The application shall contain all information required by this section.
§ 12-6.2 KEARNY CODE § 12-6.4
AO:492
otherwise due and payments made in lieu of those taxes equals the total
remediation cost for the qualified real property or (b) once remediated, the
qualified real property is not used for a commercial, residential or industrial
purpose during the time period for which said property tax exemption is
given.
§ 12-6.5. Financial Agreement. [Ord. No. 1999-O-19 § 5]
Each approved exemption shall be evidenced by a financial agreement
between the Town of Kearny and the applicant. The agreement shall be
in a form prepared by the applicant and shall contain the representations
that are required by this section together with such other information as
may be required by the Town Attorney. The agreement shall provide for
the applicant to pay the Town of Kearny an amount in lieu of real property
taxes in accordance with subsection 12-6.6 of this section. The form of the
agreement shall be approved by the Town Attorney and shall be on file in
the office of the Town Clerk and the Tax Assessor.
Every application for an exemption may be approved and allowed by the
Town Council to the degree that the application is consistent with the
provisions of this enabling section. The exemption shall not be granted by
the Town Council until the owner of the property enters into a memorandum
of agreement or administrative consent order with the Department of
Environmental Protection, of the State of New Jersey, for the remediation.
An exemption that is granted shall take effect upon the approval by the
Town Council and it shall be recorded and made a permanent part of the
official tax records of the Town of Kearny, which record shall contain a
notice of the termination date of the exemption. The owner of the property
shall deliver a copy of the approved exemption application to the Division of
Local Government Services in the Department of Community Affairs, State
of New Jersey.
§ 12-6.6. Payment in Lieu of Taxes. [Ord. No. 1999-O-19 § 6]
Payments in lieu of real property taxes may be computed as a portion of the
real property taxes otherwise due, according to the following schedule:
a. In the first tax year following execution of a memorandum of agreement
or administrative consent order, no payment in lieu of taxes otherwise
due;
b. In the second tax year following execution of a memorandum of
agreement or administrative consent order, an amount not less than
10% of taxes otherwise due;
c. In the third tax year following execution of a memorandum of
agreement or administrative consent order, an amount not less than
20% of taxes otherwise due;
§ 12-6.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-6.6
AO:493
§ 12-6.7. Termination of Memorandum of Agreement. [Ord. No.
1999-O-19 § 7]
Notwithstanding any provision in P.L. 1995, c. 413 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.150, et
al.), the period of property tax exemption for an environmental opportunity
zone shall end if at any time the governing body of the municipality finds
that (a) the memorandum of agreement for remediation of said
d. In the fourth tax year following execution of a memorandum of
agreement or administrative consent order, an amount not less than
30% of taxes otherwise due;
e. In the fifth tax year following execution of a memorandum of agreement
or administrative consent order, an amount not less than 40% of taxes
otherwise due;
f. In the sixth tax year following execution of a memorandum of
agreement or administrative consent order, an amount not less than
50% of taxes otherwise due;
g. In the seventh tax year following execution of a memorandum of
agreement or administrative consent order, an amount not less than
60% of taxes otherwise due;
h. In the eighth tax year following execution of a memorandum of
agreement or administrative consent order, an amount not less than
70% of taxes otherwise due;
i. In the ninth tax year following execution of a memorandum of
agreement or administrative consent order, an amount not less than
80% of taxes otherwise due;
j. In the tenth and all subsequent tax years following execution of a
memorandum of agreement or administrative consent order, the
exemption shall expire and the full amount of the assessed real property
taxes, taking into account the value of the real property in its
remediated state, shall be due.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, where a property tax exemption has
been extended beyond 10 years because of the proposed
implementation of a limited restricted use remedial action or
unrestricted use remedial action, the Town of Kearny may provide for
a different schedule for payment in lieu of real property taxes, which
payments may not exceed the length of the property tax exemption.
The payments required pursuant to this section shall be made in
quarterly installments according to the same schedule as real property
taxes are due and payable. Failure to make these payments shall result
in the termination of the exemption. In addition to the remedy set forth
herein, the requirements imposed pursuant to Section 7 of P.L. 1995,
c. 413 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.156) shall be enforced in the same manner as is
provided for in real property taxes.
§ 12-6.6 KEARNY CODE § 12-6.7
AO:494
environmental opportunity zone has been terminated at the option of the
applicant and an administrative consent order is not issued in its place, or
(b) any of the conditions in the ordinance as required by subsection (e) of
section 5 of P.L. 1995, c. 413 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.154) is not met with respect to
said environmental opportunity zone.
§ 12-6.8. Completion of Remediation. [Ord. No. 1999-O-19 § 8]
Each financial agreement pursuant to subsection 12-6.5 of this section shall
require that: (a) the environmental opportunity zone will be remediated in
compliance with the remediation standards adopted by the Department of
Environmental Protection pursuant to P.L. 1993, c. 139 (N.J.S.A. 58:10B-1,
et al.); and (b) the owner of the environmental opportunity zone will
complete the remediation pursuant to the memorandum of agreement or
administrative consent order with the Department of Environmental
Protection.
§ 12-6.9. Tax Delinquencies. [Ord. No. 1999-O-19 § 9]
No tax exemption shall be granted pursuant to this section with respect to
any property for which property taxes are delinquent or remain unpaid or
for which penalties for nonpayment of taxes are due.
§ 12-6.10. Ineligibility. [Ord. No. 1999-O-19 § 10]
Any tax exemption authorized and granted under the provisions of P.L.
1995, c. 413 (N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.150 to 0.158), as amended and supplemented,
shall not be granted or applied in conjunction with any other exemption or
abatement authorized under other State law or statute.
§ 12-7. DESIGNATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL OPPORTUNITY ZONE.
§ 12-7.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2000-O-15 § 1]
a. Effective January 10, 1996, the New Jersey Environmental Opportunity
Zoning Act (the "Act") was adopted into law.
b. The Act was adopted to encourage the environmental remediation of
abandoned or underutilized contaminated properties that they can be
reserved for commercial or other productive uses.
c. Abandoned or underutilized contaminated properties in the Town of
Kearny harm the Town and its residents by causing a burden on
municipal services while failing to contribute to the funding of those
services.
d. In order to encourage the remediation of these properties so that they
can be reused or fully used for commercial purposes, the Town of
Kearny adopted Ordinance Number 1999-O-19, entitled "An Ordinance
Regarding Tax Exemption Of Qualified Real Property For
Environmental Opportunity Zones Of The Town Of Kearny" (the "Master
§ 12-6.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-7.1
AO:495
§ 12-7.2. Zones Designated. [Ord. No. 2000-O-15; Ord. No.
2000-O-21]
EOZ Ordinance"), codified as Section 12-6 of this chapter, which set
forth the basic parameters and procedures to be followed for the
designation of particular Environmental Opportunity Zones in the
Town.
a. Pursuant to the Master EOZ Ordinance, Transactionable Property
Solutions, L.L.C. ("TPS") submitted an application seeking
environmental opportunity zone designation for property located at
1035 Belleville Turnpike, Block 287, Lots 48, 49, 50, 51, 52 and 52R
(the "Property").
The Town of Kearny is willing to designate the property, as an
environmental opportunity zone subject to certain conditions hereafter
set forth. (The conditions referred to herein may be found on file in the
office of the Town Clerk.)
b. Pursuant to the Master EOZ Ordinance, Hartz Kearny L.L.C. submitted
an application seeking environmental opportunity zone designation for
property located at Harrison Avenue, Block 286, Lot 4 (the "Property").
The Town of Kearny is willing to designate the property, as an
environmental opportunity zone subject to certain conditions hereafter
set forth. (The conditions referred to herein may be found on file in the
office of the Town Clerk.)
§ 12-7.1 KEARNY CODE § 12-7.2
AO:496
ARTICLE III
Parking Tax
§ 12-8. PARKING TAX.
§ 12-8.1. Short Title. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-66 § 1]
This Article shall be known as the "Town of Kearny Parking Tax Ordinance."
§ 12-8.2. Tax Imposed. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-66 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-22]
§ 12-8.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-66 § 1]
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this Article clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the text, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
EMPLOYEE PARKING — Shall mean parking paid for by an employer on
behalf of its employees. The exemption does not apply to parking purchased
for business commuting or travel.
MUNICIPAL METERED PARKING — Shall exclude (i.e., fees collected are
subject to parking tax):
MUNICIPAL METERED PARKING — Shall mean:
a. There is hereby imposed a 15% tax on receipts for fees for parking,
garaging or storing of motor vehicles within the Town in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:48c-6.
b. The receipts for parking, storing or garaging a motor vehicle shall not
include charges for the following types of parking: residential parking;
employee parking, when provided by an employer or at a facility owned
or operated by the employer; municipal metered parking; and parking
receipts subject to a tax imposed by any other law or ordinance.
Any system where payment is made at a device in a central location(s)
in an open air lot.
1.
Parking spaces or stalls in a structure of any kind, whether controlled
by meters on a post, attended or unattended kiosk pay system, parking
attendants, or lift gates however controlled.
2.
Parking spaces or stalls located on a public street where the right to
park is purchased through a parking meter on a post, whether or not
coin operated.
1.
§ 12-8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-8.3
AO:497
RESIDENTIAL PARKING — Shall mean permits and fees, regardless of who
pays, for residents to park on local streets, off-street lots, or in garages that
are in close proximity to their residence. It does not include residents who
park in a facility for commuter or other purposes.
§ 12-8.4. Collection of Taxes. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-66 § 1]
§ 12-8.5. Delinquent Payment — Interest. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-66 § 1]
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at a rate of 12% per
annum on the amount of the tax due, and an additional penalty of 1/2 of 1%
of the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during
which the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where action
is brought for the recovery of any tax hereunder, the person liable shall, in
addition, be liable for the cost of collection and the interest and penalties
imposed.
Parking spaces or stalls located in an open air lot where each space is
controlled by an individual parking meter on a post, whether or not coin
operated.
2.
Parking spaces or stalls located on a public street where the right to
park is purchased through a pay and display device.
3.
a. All taxes imposed pursuant to this Article shall be collected on behalf of
the Town by the person providing parking services.
b. The Financial Officer of the Town is designated as collector of parking
taxes for the Town. The methods for reporting taxes due shall be on
forms and in accordance with procedures prescribed by the Financial
Officer from time to time.
c. Every person required to collect any taxes imposed by this Article shall
be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or required to be
collected. Any such person shall have the same right in respect to
collecting the tax from his customer or in respect to nonpayment of the
tax by the customer as if the tax were a part of the parking or storage
fees and payable at the same time; provided, however, that the
Financial Officer shall be joined as a party in any action brought to
collect the tax.
d. No person required to collect any tax hereunder shall advertise or hold
out to any person or to the public in general in any manner, directly or
indirectly, that the tax is not considered as an element in the fee
payable by the customer, that he will pay the tax, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer of that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
§ 12-8.3 KEARNY CODE § 12-8.6
AO:498
§ 12-8.6. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-66 § 1]
No tax shall be imposed with respect to any parking, garaging or motor
vehicle storing fees charged by any religious, charitable or educational
institution or nonprofit organization.
§ 12-8.7. Payment Due Date. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-66§ 1]
Taxes due under this chapter shall be paid quarterly. Returns for each
quarter are due on or before the fifteenth day of the month following the
end of the previous quarter, that is, April 15, July 15, October 15 and
January 15.
§ 12-8.8. Tax Returns. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-66 § 1]
A quarterly parking tax return shall be filed by every person responsible
for the collection of parking taxes, whether or not any tax is due for that
quarter. Payment of the tax due shall be made with the filed return.
§ 12-8.9. Books and Records — Collector Responsibility. [Ord. No.
2006-(O)-66 § 1]
Every person responsible for the collection of parking taxes shall maintain
books and/or records to substantiate the quarterly tax returns, even if no
tax is due.
§ 12-8.10. Failure to File Return or Allow Inspection of Records.
[Ord. No. 2006-(O)-66 § 1]
a. Pursuant to State statute, any person who fails to refuses to file any
return required under this Article, any person who refuses to permit an
officer or agent designated by the Town to examine his books, records
and papers and any person who knowingly files an incomplete, false or
fraudulent return or attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the
payment of the whole or any part thereof is a disorderly person.
b. The failure of any person to receive or procure the forms required for
filing returns required under this Article shall not excuse that person
from filing a return.
§ 12-8.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-8.10
AO:499

ARTICLE IV
Hotel Occupancy Tax
§ 12-9. HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX.
§ 12-9.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2016-44]
It is the purpose of this Section 12-9 adopted by Ordinance No. 2016-44
to implement the provisions of P.L. 2003, c. 114 (N.J.S.A. 40:48F-1, et
seq.), which authorizes the governing body of a municipality to adopt an
ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed 1% on
charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2003, but before July
1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy on or
after July 1, 2004, or a room or rooms in a hotel or motel subject to taxation
pursuant to subsection (d) of section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 40 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3),
which shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to
statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon the
occupancy of a hotel or motel room.
§ 12-9.2. Tax Imposed. [Ord. No. 2016-44]
There is hereby established and imposed a 3% tax on charges for the use
or occupancy of rooms in hotels as authorized by the "Hotel and Motel
Occupancy Tax Act," N.J.S.A. 40:48F-1, et seq. This tax shall be in addition
to any and all real estate (ad valorem) taxes or services charges; the tax
imposed by the "Sales and Use Tax Act," N.J.S.A. 54:32b-1 et seq.; or any
other fee, charge or tax imposed by law.
§ 12-9.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2016-44]
HOTEL — Shall mean a building or portion of it which is regularly used
and kept open as such for the lodging of guests, whether or not meals
are served, and also includes, but is not limited to an apartment hotel,
bed and breakfast, motel, inn, boarding house, rooming house, condotel, a
home, apartment, house, condo or dwelling irrespective of whether there
is a permanent resident residing in the building, and any other sleeping
accommodations that are available to the public on a transient basis. For
avoidance of doubt, a "Hotel" as defined herein shall not include units within
a rooming house or boarding house which are occupied by a person or
persons for more than 30 days as their permanent residence.
§ 12-9.4. Compliance with Other Laws. [Ord. No. 2016-44]
The Hotel Occupancy Tax authorized herein shall not be imposed on the
rent for an occupancy if the purchaser, user or consumer is an entity exempt
from the tax imposed on an occupancy under the "Sales and Use Tax Act"
pursuant to subsection (a) of section 9 of P.L. 1966, c. 30 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-9).
The payment or collection of this occupancy tax does not in any way
condone, exempt, or supersede the property in use from compliance with all
§ 12-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-9.4
AO:501
other building, zoning, insurance, or any other governmental agency law or
regulation.
§ 12-9.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2016-44]
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114 (N.J.S.A. 40:48F-1,
et seq.):
§ 12-9.6. Collection of Hotel Occupancy Tax. [Ord. No. 2016-44]
The tax imposed by this Section 12-9 shall be collected on behalf of the
Town by the person collecting the rent from the hotel customer. Each person
required to collect the tax herein imposed shall be personally liable for
the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected hereunder. Any such
person shall have the same rights in respect to collecting the tax from a
customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the same time;
providing that the Chief Financial Officer of the Town shall be joined as a
party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
The tax provisions of this Section 12-9 shall take effect on the first day
of the first full month occurring 90 days after the date of transmittal of
the adopted Ordinance No. 2016-44 to the State Treasurer as provided in
N.J.S.A. 40:48F-1.
a. All taxes imposed by this Section 12-9 shall be paid by the purchaser.
b. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this Section
12-9.
c. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer, or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
d. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
e. The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be a fine of
not less than $250 nor more than $1,000 or imprisonment for not more
than six months, or both, for each offense.
§ 12-9.4 KEARNY CODE § 12-9.6
AO:502
Chapter 13
(RESERVED)
Chapter 14
BUILDING AND HOUSING
§ 14-1. STATE UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCING
AGENCY.
§ 14-1.1. Enforcing Agency Established. [1973 Code § 66-1; Ord. No.
2-23-77; Ord. No. 11-10-92; Ord. No. 2015-3]
a. There is hereby established in the Town of Kearny a State Uniform
Construction Code enforcing agency to be known as the "Kearny
Construction Code Enforcement Department," consisting of a
Construction Official, Building Subcode Official, Assistant Building
Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical Subcode
Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and such other subcode
officials for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the
Department of Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter
adopt as part of the State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction
Official shall be the chief administrator of the enforcing department. All
subcode officials, their assistants and staff, for the purposes of the
regulations and their enforcement, are subject to the procedures and
policies of the enforcing agency and are primarily responsible to the
Construction Official.
b. Each official position created in paragraph a hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, as
amended, and N.J.A.C. 5:23, provided that, in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person, provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 217, and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
c. The public shall have the right at all times to do business with the
enforcing agency at one office location except for emergencies and
unforeseen or unavoidable circumstances.
d. The official positions as created by paragraph a shall be as follows:
1. Construction Official, which position shall be filled by the present
Building Inspector, provided that he is qualified to occupy the
position.
§ 12-9.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.1
AO:503
§ 14-1.2. Construction Board of Appeals. [1973 Code § 66-2]
2. Building Subcode Official, which position shall also be filled by the
present Building Inspector, provided that he is qualified to occupy
the position.40
3. Assistant Building Subcode Official, which position shall be filled by
the present person holding the title of Assistant Building Inspector
and Superintendent of Weights and Measures.
4. Plumbing Subcode Official, which position shall be filled by the
present Plumbing Inspector, provided that he is qualified to occupy
the position.
5. Fire Protection Subcode Official, which position shall be filled by
the present Chief Inspector of the Bureau of Combustibles of the
Kearny Fire Department, provided that he is qualified to occupy the
position.
6. The position of Electrical Subcode Official (05046) be and is hereby
established as positions in and for the Town of Kearny.
7. Assistant Construction Official, which position shall be filled by the
present Assistant Building Subcode Official, provided he is
qualified to occupy the position.
e. Salaries. The salaries of the Construction Official, Assistant
Construction Official, Building Subcode Official, Assistant Building
Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official and Fire Protection
Subcode Official shall be set forth in the annual ordinance of the Town
of Kearny.
f. Assistant Construction Official. The Assistant Construction Official shall
act in the capacity of the Construction Official in his absence.
g. Central Permit Office. A central permit office, under the supervision of
the Construction Official, will be located in the Municipal Building, 402
Kearny Avenue, Kearny, New Jersey, to be open during the hours of 9:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on normal business days of the municipality.
a. There is hereby established a Construction Board of Appeals to hear
appeals from decisions by the enforcing agency. The Board shall consist
of five members, which Board shall contain among its membership a
registered architect or licensed professional engineer of building
construction experience, a member qualified as a Plumbing Subcode
Official and one as qualified as an Electrical Subcode Official. No more
than two Board members shall be selected from the same business or
profession. Each Board member shall have had at last three years'
experience in construction, design or supervision as a licensed engineer
40.Editor's Note: For regulations concerning construction hours, see Chapter 4, Section 4-16.
For provisions regarding construction site debris, see Chapter 20, Section 20-4.
§ 14-1.1 KEARNY CODE § 14-1.2
AO:504
§ 14-1.3. Fees. [1973 Code § 66-3; Ord. No. 5-25-83; Ord. No.
6-8-83; Ord. No. 9-11-85; Ord. No. 4-13-88; Ord. No. 1-13-93; Ord.
No. 1999-0-16 § 1; Ord. No. 2015-8]
The following schedule of fees is hereby established for various activities
with the Town of Kearny.
Fee Schedule
1.A. New Structure Fees:
I. Use Groups: B, H & R
Volume of bldg. 0.031 per
cubic feet
= $
(Volume Fee)
II. Use Groups: A, I, F, S & M
Volume of bldg. 0.029 per
cubic feet
= $
(Volume Fee)
IIb. Use Group U
Volume
0.038 per
cubic feet = $
III. Commercial Farm Buildings
Maximum fee not to exceed
$1,145
Volume of bldg. 0.011 per
cubic feet
= $
(Volume Fee)
TOTAL FEE $
(Sum of above 3 fees)
1.B. Renovations, Alterations, Repair & Minor Work Fees:
(The applicant shall submit cost data by architect or engineer of record, a recognized
estimating firm or by contractor bid. The Department will review the construction cost
for acceptability.)
or registered architect, or, in the alternative, five years experience in
construction, design or supervision as an architect or engineer with a
bachelor's degree in architecture or engineering, respectively, from an
accredited institution of higher education, or, as a further alternative,
10 years' experience in construction, design or supervision as a
journeyman in construction trade or a construction contractor,
subcontractor or inspector.
b. Appointment; Terms. The Mayor and Town Council shall appoint the
Board members and any alternative members. For the members first
appointed, the Mayor and Council shall designate the appointees' terms
so that one shall be appointed for a term of one year, one shall be
appointed for a term of two years, one for a term of three years and two
for a term of four years. At the expiration of such terms and thereafter,
appointments shall be made for terms of four years. Vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired terms.
c. Conflicts. No regular or alternative Board member or any person
serving on the Board of Appeals may be on the staff of the enforcing
agency, the decisions of which are subject to the review of the Board.
§ 14-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.3
AO:505
A. Estimated cost up to and including $50,000 $20 per
$1,000 = $
B. Portion of cost $50,001 to & including
$100,000
$16 per
$1,000 = $
C. Portion of cost above $100,000 $15 per
$1,000 = $
Sum of
above items = $
D. For combination or renovation and addition:
The sum of the fees are computed separately as renovations and additions.
1) Inground pools shall be = $150
2) Above ground pools shall be = $65
3) Roofing & Siding on R-3, R-4 Use Groups shall be = $65
4) Residential Fences shall be = $50
5) All other Fences based on Fee Schedule
1.B. = $
2. Plumbing Fees:
A. Total number of fixtures x $15 = $
Fixtures to include all fixtures, pieces of equipment or appliances connected to
the plumbing system and for each appliance connected to the gas piping or, oil
piping system, except as indicated below:
B. Total number of special devices: x $91 = $
Special devices included but not limited to grease traps, oil separators,
refrigeration units, backflow preventers, active solar systems, sewer pumps,
interceptors and fuel oil piping.
C. Each domestic water service or commercial
sewer connection: x $65 = $
D. Each commercial water service or
commercial sewer connection: x $150 = $
E. Steam furnaces or hot water boilers shall be
as follows:
0 to 200,000 B.T.U.'s x $50 = $
201,000 to 500,000 B.T.U.'s x $91 = $
501,000 to and over B.T.U.'s x $175 = $
3. Electrical Fees:
(A. & B.: Fixtures and devices to be counted for these items include lighting outlets,
wall switches, fluorescent fixtures, convenience receptacles or similar fixtures and
motors or devices of 1 hp or 1 kw or less.)
§ 14-1.3 KEARNY CODE § 14-1.3
AO:506
A. Electrical fixtures and devices: first 50, the
fee shall be x $45 = $
B. Increments of 25 additional fixtures and
devices: x $10 = $
(C. Through F.: For the purpose of calculating the following electrical fees, all motors
except those in plug-in appliances shall be counted including control equipment,
generators, transformers and all heating, cooking or other devices consuming or
generating electrical current.)
C. Each motor or electrical device greater than 1 hp and less than or equal to 10 hp
and for transformers and generators greater than 1 kw and less than or equal to
10 kw:
x $12 = $
D. Each motor or electrical device greater than 10 hp and less than or equal to 50
hp and for each service panel, service entrance or sub panel less than or equal to
200 amperes and for all transformers and generators greater than 10 kw and
less than or equal to 45 kw and for each utility load management device.
x $56 = $
E. Each motor or electrical device greater than 50 hp and less than or equal to 100
hp; for each service panel, service entrance or sub panel greater than 200
amperes and less than or equal to 1,000 amperes; and for transformers and
generators greater than 45 kw and less than or equal to 112.5 kw.
x $135 = $
F. Each motor or electrical device greater than 100 hp, for each service panel,
service entrance or sub panel greater than 1,000 amperes and for each
transformer or generator greater than 112.5
x $640 = $
G. The fee for required annual inspections of swimming pools shall be:
x $77 = $
4. Asbestos Abatement Fee:
As currently established pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-8.9 (A) 1 & 2 = $
5. Elevator Fee:
The percentage of the current departmental fees pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.20 (c) 6 &
7 and N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.6 (a), (b) and (c) as established by the contract between the third
party agency and the municipality.
6. Fire Protection and Hazardous Equipment Fee:
(Fire protection and other hazardous equipment, sprinklers, standpipes, detectors
(smoke and heat), pre-engineered suppression systems, gas and oil fired appliances not
connected to the plumbing systems, kitchen exhaust systems, incinerators and
crematoriums:)
A. Number of standpipes: x $321 = $
§ 14-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.3
AO:507
B. Sprinkler heads or detectors:
1 to 20 heads or detectors x $50 = $
21 to 100 heads or detectors x $125 = $
101 to 200 heads or detectors x $260 = $
201 to 400 heads or detectors x $831 = $
401 to 1,000 heads or detectors x $1,150 = $
Over 1,000 heads or detectors x $1,469 = $
C. Gas or oil fired appliance, which is not connected to the plumbing system:
Number of appliances: x $65 = $
D. Kitchen exhaust system:
Number of systems: x $65 = $
E. Incinerator:
Number of incinerators: x $511 = $
F. Crematorium:
Number of crematoriums: x $511 = $
G. Pre-engineered system:
Number of systems: x $135 = $
7. Demolition or Removal Permit (if needed):
A. For Use Group U:
1.) Residential garage/oil tank: Minimum
Fee = $50
2.) Number of gas and/or oil tanks: x $135 = $135
B. For a structure less than 5,000 square feet. In
area and less than 30 feet in height, for one
or two family residences, and for structures
on farms, including commercial farm
buildings: x $160 = $
C. All other structures: x $420 = $
8. Signs:
*Note: Fee to be based on 1 side of double-sided
sign:
x $1.20/
square feet/
or = $
Minimum
Fee = $65
9. Certificate of Occupancy Fees:
A. New construction of Use Groups:
R-2, R-3, R-4 $150 = $
§ 14-1.3 KEARNY CODE § 14-1.3
AO:508
For Use Groups: B, M, E&U $250 = $
B. New construction of all other Use Groups: $300 = $
C. Alterations or renovations requiring a
Certificate of Occupancy shall be as follows:
1) Use Groups: R-1, R-2, R-3 and U x $40 per
unit = $
2) All other Use Groups: x $250 = $
D. Residential swimming pools x $20 = $
E. Commercial swimming pools x $155 = $
F. The fee for a Certificate of Occupancy
pursuant to a change in a Use Group shall be: x $250 = $
G. The fee for a Continued Certificate of
Occupancy shall be: x $150 = $
H. The fee to renew a Temporary Certificate of
Occupancy shall be: x $2 5 = $
10. Plan Review Fees:
For a building for compliance under the alternate systems and non-depletable energy
source Provisions of the Energy Subcode shall be:
A. For one and two family homes (Use Group
R-3 of the Building Subcode), for light
commercial structures having the indoor
temperature controlled from a single point: x $275 = $
B. For all other structures: x $1,625 = $
11. Variation Fees:
In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be: = $
A. Class I structures: x $821 = $
B. Class II and III structures: x $120 = $
C. For resubmission of an application:
1) Class I structures: x $321 = $
2) Class II structures: x $65 = $
12. Lead Hazard Abatement Fees:
A. Lead hazard abatement work: x $140 = $
B. Lead abatement clearance certificate: x $28 = $
13. Cross Connections and Backflow Preventers Fees:
For cross connections and backflow preventers that
are subject to testing, requiring re-inspections
annually, the fee shall be for each device when they
are tested: x $65 = $
§ 14-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.3
AO:509
14. State Training and Certification Fees:
A. Current fees pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19: = $
B. For tank removal or demolition No State or C/O
Fee
15. Grand Total of All Fees:
A. Minimum fee for each subcode, exclusive of
elevators, shall be: $50 = $
B. In the case of a discontinuance of a building
project, the plan review fees are 20% of the
cost of the permit fee and are NON-REFUNDABLE
C. Flat fee for sheds under 200 square feet shall
be: x $60 = $
§ 14-2. FIRE LIMITS. [1973 Code § 66-4]
a. The fire limits of the Town of Kearny, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.7 are
hereby established as follows.
1. Description-First Tract-Kearny Avenue.
Beginning at a point of the southerly Kearny Town Line between
East Newark at the north side of the Erie-Lackawanna Railroad
right-of-way and west side of Kearny Avenue continuing in a
northerly direction taking in all lots, in their entirety, fronting
on the west side of Kearny Avenue to the southwest corner of
Washington Avenue.
2. Description-Second Tract-Kearny Avenue.
Beginning at a point of the northwest corner of Kearny Avenue and
Elizabeth Avenue continuing in a northerly direction taking in all
lots, in their entirety, fronting on the west side of Kearny Avenue
to the southwest corner of Kearny Avenue and Belleville Turnpike
being the northerly Kearny Town line between North Arlington.
3. Description-Third Tract-Kearny Avenue.
Beginning at a point of the southerly Kearny Town line between
Harrison at the north side of the Erie Railroad right-of-way and on
the east side of Kearny Avenue continuing in a northerly direction
taking in all lots, in their entirety, fronting on the east side of
Kearny Avenue to the southeast corner of Kearny Avenue and
Quincy Avenue; starting again at the point formed by the
intersection of Kearny Avenue and Beech Street taking in all of
Block 206 which is circumferenced by Kearny Avenue, Beech Street
and Oakwood Avenue, and continuing in a northerly direction
taking in all lots in their entirety fronting on the east side of Kearny
Avenue to the southeast corner of Columbia Avenue.
§ 14-1.3 KEARNY CODE § 14-2
AO:510
4. Description-Fourth Tract-Kearny Avenue.
Beginning at a point of the northeast corner of Kearny Avenue and
Seeley Avenue continuing in a northerly direction taking in all lots,
in their entirety, fronting on the east side of Kearny Avenue to the
southeast corner of Kearny Avenue and Belleville Turnpike being
the northerly Kearny Town line between North Arlington.
5. Description-Fifth Tract-Belleville Turnpike.
Beginning at a point of the southeast corner of Kearny Avenue
and Belleville Turnpike continuing in an easterly direction taking
in all lots in their entirety, fronting on the south side of Belleville
Turnpike to the southwest corner of Belleville Turnpike and
Schuyler Avenue.
6. Description-Sixth Tract-Midland Avenue.
Beginning at a point of the southeast corner of Kearny Avenue and
Midland Avenue continuing in an easterly direction taking in all
lots in their entirety, fronting on the south side of Midland Avenue
to the southwest corner of Midland Avenue and Davis Avenue and
henceforth continuing in a southerly direction on Davis Avenue
taking in all lots in their entirety, fronting on the west side of Davis
Avenue for a distance of 152.5 feet.
7. Description-Seventh Tract-Midland Avenue.
Beginning at a point of the northeast corner of Kearny Avenue and
Midland Avenue continuing in an easterly direction taking in all
lots, in their entirety, fronting on the north side of Midland Avenue
to the northwest corner of Midland Avenue and Forest Street.
8. Description-Eighth Tract-Elm Street.
Beginning at a point of the northwest corner of Midland Avenue
and Elm Street continuing in a northerly direction taking in all
lots in their entirety, fronting on the west side of Elm Street to
the south side of the Greenwood Lake Branch-Erie Lackawanna
Railroad right-of-way.
b. The Construction Official shall prepare and submit to the Mayor and
Council, biannually, a report reevaluating the delineation of the fire
limits. This report shall indicate the recommendations of the
Construction Official, the Building Subcode Official and the Fire
Subcode Official regarding those areas which should be designated as
within fire limits, with the reasons therefor.
§ 14-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-3
AO:511
§ 14-3. BUILDING PERMITS WHEN THE PROPOSED
CONSTRUCTION WILL DISTURB OR PENETRATE ANY STREET OR
ROADWAY IN THE TOWN. [Ord. No. 2002-O-77; Ord. No.
2002-(O)-06]
When an applicant for a building permit proposes to do work which will
disrupt or impact in any way any street or roadway in the Town, such
applicant, in addition to satisfying all other requirements applicable to
the issuance of building permits in the Town, shall satisfy the following
additional requirements before receiving a building permit:
a. The applicant shall submit the following documents to the Construction
Code Enforcement Department:
1. Plans, at a proper scale, illustrating the proposed work;
2. Photographs of the street or roadway which will be impacted by the
proposed work and the areas immediately adjacent thereto as it
exists at the time of the application for the building permit;
3. A utility mark-out within the area affected;
4. A written agreement to completely restore the area affected within
a specified number of calendar days after the first disruption
thereof to the condition it was in at the time it was first completed.
The selected period of time is subject to the approval of a
representative of the Construction Code Enforcement Department;
5. Specifications, matching those used to construct the street or
roadway in the first place, for the complete restoration of any and
all bituminous paving, concrete sidewalks, concrete curbs, brick
pavers, bollards, light poles, benches, trash receptacles, planters,
sign posts and all other aspects of the street or roadway that may
be disrupted or impacted in any way by such work;
6. An itemized and detailed estimate of the cost of the proposed work,
including the cost of the complete restoration of the street or
roadway, prepared by the applicant's architect or engineer;
7. A written agreement to submit photographs of the street or
roadway once the Construction Code Enforcement representative
has approved the complete restoration of the street or roadway.
b. The applicant shall pay an application review and site inspection fee of
$100.
c. The applicant shall post security to ensure the complete restoration of
the street or roadway in an amount equal to 120% of the estimated cost
of the proposed work, including the complete restoration of the street
or roadway, as determined by either the Town's engineers or the
Construction Code Enforcement representative, which estimate may
exceed that submitted by the applicant's engineer or architect. The
applicant shall post this security by either (i) posting a bond in such
§ 14-3 KEARNY CODE § 14-3
AO:512
§ 14-4. (RESERVED)
§ 14-5. UNSAFE BUILDINGS.41
§ 14-5.1. Declaration of Unsafe and Dangerous Structures. [1973
Code § 62-1]
Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department or the Construction Official
shall declare that any building, wall or structure is or may become
dangerous to life or health, or might tend to extend a conflagration, it shall
be the duty of the Construction Official to cause the removal and destruction
of any such building, wall or structure.
§ 14-5.2. Costs for Removal to Become Liens. [1973 Code § 62-2]
The cost of such removal or destruction, as herein provided, shall be
assessed as a municipal lien against the lands whereon any such building,
wall or structure is located, and the assessment shall be made on notice by
the Board of Assessors in the same manner as improvement assessments
are made.
§ 14-5.3. Proceedings. [1973 Code § 62-3]
All proceedings taken under the provisions of this section shall be made
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.
amount or (ii) depositing cash in such amount in the Town's escrow
account maintained by the Chief Financial Officer. There shall be filed
with the posted security a written consent that if the restoration work
has not been completed by the date specified in paragraph a,4, the
Town may retain a private contractor to perform the restoration work
and draw upon the security to pay him.
d. The Construction Code Enforcement Department shall issue a building
permit to the applicant when it determines that (i) the above documents
are acceptable in form and substance, (ii) the applicant has paid the
review and inspection fee, (iii) the applicant has posted sufficient
security, (iv) the applicant has satisfied all other requirements
applicable to the issuance of building permits in the Town of Kearny and
(v) the Town Engineer has confirmed that the requirements of
paragraph a,5 have been met.
e. If the restoration does not occur by the time prescribed in paragraph
a,4, the Town may retain a private contractor to restore the street or
roadway and shall draw upon the posted security to compensate the
said contractor.
41.Editor's Note: For regulations requiring fences or walls to protect streets and sidewalks
from unsafe places, see Chapter 23, Streets and Sidewalks, Section 23-14.
§ 14-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.4
AO:513
§ 14-5.4. Authority. [1973 Code § 62-4; Ord. No. 12-10-80]
The Construction Code Official is hereby designated and appointed to
exercise the following powers enumerated in the within sections relating to
buildings deemed unfit for human habitation, occupancy and use.
§ 14-5.5. Procedure for Abatement. [1973 Code § 62-5; Ord. No.
12-10-80]
a. Petition; Charges and Complaints. Whenever a petition is filed with the
Construction Code Official by the Mayor and Town Council or by at least
five residents of the municipality charging that any building is unfit for
human habitation, occupancy or use, or whenever it appears to the
Construction Code Official, on his own motion, that any building is unfit
for human habitation or occupancy or use, the public officer shall, if his
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and
cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such
building a complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing
a notice that a hearing will be held before the public officer or his
designated agent at a place therein fixed not less than seven days nor
more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint; that the owner
and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer to the
complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at
the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of evidence
prevailing in the Courts shall not be controlling in hearings before the
public officer.
b. Findings and Order. If after such notice and hearing, the public officer
determines that the building under construction is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use, he shall state in writing his findings or
fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be
served upon the owner thereof and parties in interest an order:
1. Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of the building to
be made by the owner, within a reasonable time, which time shall
be set forth in the order or at the option of the owner to vacate or
have the building vacated and closed within the time set forth in
the order; and
2. If the building is in such a condition as to make it dangerous to the
health and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the
owner fails to repair, alter or improve the building within the time
specified in the order, then the owner shall be required to remove
or demolish the building within a reasonable time as specified in
the order of removal.
c. Failure to Comply.
1. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve
or, at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the
Construction Code Official may cause such building to be repaired,
§ 14-5.4 KEARNY CODE § 14-5.5
AO:514
§ 14-5.6. Establishment of Municipal Liens. [1973 Code § 62-6; Ord.
No. 12-10-80]
The amount of:
altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed; that the public
officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building
so closed, a placard with the following words:
"This building is unfit for human habitation, or occupancy or use;
the use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
2. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish
the building, the public officer may, after obtaining a consent
resolution from the Mayor and Town Council, cause such building
to be removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or
demolition thereof after advertisement for and receipt of bids
therefor.
a. The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witness fees, search fees
and advertising charges incurred in the course of any proceeding taken
under this act determined in favor of the municipality; and
b. The cost of repairs, alterations, or improvements or vacating and
closing or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the balance
thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from the
sale of materials derived from such building or from any contract for
removal or demolition thereof, shall be a municipal lien against the real
property upon which such cost was incurred.
c. If the building is removed or demolished by the public officer, he shall
sell the materials of such building, and there shall be credited against
the cost of the removal or demolition thereof, including the clearance
and, if necessary, leveling of the site, the proceeds of any sale of such
materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or
demolition of the building. If there are no such credits or if the sum
total of such costs exceeds the total of such credits, a detailed
statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount so due shall be filed
with the municipal tax assessor or other custodian of the records of the
tax liens and a copy thereof shall be forthwith forwarded to the owner
by registered mail. If the total of the credits exceed such costs, the
balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the
public officer, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by
such Court, and shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment
of the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or
judgment of such Court.
d. Any owner or party in interest may, within 30 days from the date of the
filing of the lien certificate, proceed in a summary manner in the
Superior Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the
accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 14-5.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-5.7
AO:515
§ 14-5.7. Emergency Measures. [1973 Code § 62-7; Ord. No.
12-10-80]
If an actual and immediate danger to life is posed by the threatened collapse
of any fire damages or other structurally unsafe building, the Construction
Code Official or his designee may, after taking such measures as may be
necessary to make such building temporarily safe, seek a judgment in a
summary proceeding in the Superior Court for the demolition thereof.
§ 14-5.8. Cumulative Remedies. [1973 Code § 62-8; Ord. No.
12-10-80]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way
the power of the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause
their removal or abatement, by summary proceedings or otherwise, nor
is anything in this act intended to limit the authority of the enforcing
agency or Construction Official under the "State Uniform Construction Code
Act," (P.L. 1975, C217) (52:27D-119), or any rules or regulations adopted
thereunder.
§ 14-6. MINIMUM OCCUPANCY STANDARDS.
§ 14-6.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2001-O-38 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-20
§§ 1 — 3; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-29; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-30 §§ 1 — 3]
BATHROOM FACILITIES — Shall mean a room equipped with a bathtub or
shower, a sink and a toilet.
BEDROOM — Shall mean any room used in whole or in part for sleeping
purposes regardless of whether such room may be utilized for other
purposes as well.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean one or more rooms (a) occupied as separate
living quarters or designed so that it or they may be occupied as a separate
living quarters, (b) isolated and secure from access to all other portions of
the building in which it or they are located, and (c) which include all of the
following:
HABITABLE SPACE — Shall mean, for the purposes of this section, a space
used for living or sleeping. Kitchens, bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls,
storage and utility spaces and similar areas shall be considered
nonhabitable spaces for purposes of this ordinance.
KITCHEN FACILITIES — Shall mean an area with a stove or an oven where
food is cooked or prepared.
(i) Bathroom facilities not shared by occupants of any other dwelling unit,
(ii) Kitchen facilities, and
A separate means of egress not requiring access or passage through a
private portion of another dwelling unit.
(iii)
§ 14-5.7 KEARNY CODE § 14-6.1
AO:516
OCCUPANT — Shall mean any individual above the age of two years old
living or sleeping in a building or portion thereof.
§ 14-6.2. Bedroom Requirements. [Ord. No. 2001-O-38 § 1]
Every bedroom shall comply with the following requirements:
a. Area for Sleeping Purposes. Every bedroom occupied by one person
shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area and every bedroom
occupied by more than one person shall contain at least 50 square feet
of floor area for each person thereof. If a room does not include the floor
space as described in this section, the room shall not be utilized for
sleeping purposes.
b. Efficiency Units. An efficiency unit occupied by not more than two
occupants shall have a clear floor area of not less than 220 square feet.
An efficiency unit occupied by three occupants shall have a clear floor
area of not less than 320 square feet. The maximum number of
occupants in an efficiency unit shall not exceed three.
c. Access from Bedrooms. Bedrooms shall not constitute the only access
to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only
means of egress from other habitable spaces; provided, that in units
that contain not more than three bedrooms, access to another bedroom
or habitable space and egress from a habitable space may be
accomplished through not more than one bedroom.
d. Bathroom Facilities. Every bedroom shall have access to at least one
toilet facility and one lavatory without passing through another
bedroom; provided, that this requirement shall not apply to units
having three or fewer bedrooms.
e. Prohibited Occupancy. Nonhabitable spaces as defined by this section
shall not be used for sleeping purposes.
f. Other Requirements. Bedrooms shall comply with the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:23 and its adopted standards, including but not limited to
light, ventilation, heating facilities, electrical receptacle requirements,
means of egress and emergency escape requirements and smoke
detector requirements.
g. Overcrowding. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more occupants
than permitted by the minimum area requirements of subsections
14-6.2a and b.
h. Habitability. No person shall occupy any space for living or sleeping
purposes other than a habitable space contained completely within a
legally existing dwelling unit or a legally existing rooming or boarding
house that is licensed by the State for that purpose.
§ 14-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-6.3
AO:517
§ 14-6.3. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2001-O-38 § 1]
The Construction Official shall be responsible for the enforcement of the
provisions of this section.
§ 14-6.4. Violations. [Ord. No. 2001-O-38 § 1]
a. Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for any owner or tenant to allow the
number of occupants of any dwelling unit to exceed the number
permitted by subsections 14-6.2a or b or to violate any other provision
of this section.
b. Notice of Violation. Whenever the Construction Official determines that
there is a violation of this section or has grounds to believe that a
violation exists, notice shall be served on the owner and person or
persons responsible for the violations.
c. Contents of Notice. This notice shall contain:
1. The address and apartment number at which the violation exists.
2. The name and address of the owner of the property.
3. A statement describing the violation.
4. The time period within which the violation is to be corrected.
5. The right of the person served to request a hearing.
6. A statement that the notice shall automatically become an order of
the Construction Official in 30 days unless a hearing is requested.
d. Final Order; Request for Hearing. Thirty business days after the date of
service, the notice shall constitute a final order unless a person affected
by the notice serves a written request for a hearing upon the
Construction Official before that time. Such a request for a hearing
shall set forth briefly the grounds or reasons on which the request is
based and the factual matters contained in the notice of violation which
are to be disputed at the hearing. The application shall be accompanied
by a fee in the sum of $50. However, the fee shall be refundable if no
correction or abatement is found necessary by the Construction Board
of Appeals.
Within 30 days of receipt of the request, the Construction Official shall
set the matter down for hearing before the Construction Board of
Appeals. The party requesting the hearing shall receive at least five
business days' notice of the hearing.
If the person who receives notice of a violation hereof is a property
owner who, within 30 days of receipt of said notice, commences a
legal action to dispossess, evict or eject the occupants who cause
the violation and provides satisfactory proof of such legal action to
the Construction Official, no further action hereunder shall be taken
§ 14-6.3 KEARNY CODE § 14-6.4
AO:518
against the owner so long as such legal action is pending in Court and
is prosecuted expeditiously and in good faith.
e. Hearings: Determination: Appeals. The Construction Official shall make
available to the Construction Board of Appeals the full record of the
application, including a detailed explanation of the reasons for the
notice of violation.
All hearings shall be open to the public. The appellant, his
representatives or legal counsel and the Construction Official or his
representative shall be granted an opportunity to address the
Construction Board of Appeals, which may take testimony under oath.
If fewer than four members of the Construction Board of Appeals
are present to consider a specific matter, either the appellant or the
Construction Official shall be entitled to a postponement of the hearing.
In such cases, the proceedings shall not be stayed more than 90 days.
If there is no request to postpone, any decision made by the Board
members present shall be binding.
No hearing shall be conducted unless there are at least three members
of the Construction Board of Appeals present.
The Construction Board of Appeals shall hear the appeal, render a
decision thereon and file its decision with a statement of the reasons
therefore with the Construction Official not later than 10 business days
following the hearing.
The Construction Board of Appeals may affirm, reverse or modify the
decision of the Construction Official or remand the matter to the
Construction Official for further action.
Decision of the Construction Board of Appeals shall be by a concurring
vote of at least three members. If three concurring votes are not
obtained, the decision of the Construction Official shall be deemed
affirmed.
The Construction Official shall take immediate action in accordance
with the decision of the Construction Board of Appeals, unless the
Board's decision is stayed by a Court of competent jurisdiction.
f. Penalties. Any person, whether owner or tenant, violating any
provisions of this section shall upon conviction be subject to the
following penalties:
1. First offense: $100.
2. Second offense: $500.
3. Third and subsequent offenses: $1,000 or imprisonment not
exceeding 90 days or both.
§ 14-6.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-6.4
AO:519
§ 14-7. HEATING OF BUILDINGS.
§ 14-7.1. Duty to Furnish Heat. [1973 Code § 89-1; Ord. No.
4-11-90]
§ 14-7.2. Duty to Repair Defective Apparatus. [1973 Code § 89-2]
Whenever a building is heated by means of a furnace, boiler or apparatus
under the control of the owner, agent or lessee, in the event that the
furnace, boiler or apparatus becomes defective, it shall be the duty of the
owner, agent or lessee to properly and immediately repair the same.
§ 14-7.3. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 89-3; New]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 14-8. SECURITY DOORS OR GRILLES ON COMMERCIAL
ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 14-8.1. Solid Grilles Banned; Restrictions. [1973 Code § 60-1; Ord.
No. 9-13-89]
Each day that a violation occurs or is committed shall constitute a
separate offense.
The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude
the Town of Kearny from instituting an appropriate action or
proceeding to restrain, correct or abate a violation of the provisions
of this section.
a. It shall be the duty of every person who shall have contracted,
undertaken or agreed, or shall be bound under the terms of any lease,
contract or agreement to heat or to furnish heat for any building,
tenement or apartment house or portion thereof, to heat or to furnish
heat for every occupied room in such building or portion thereof, so that
a minimum temperature of 70° F. shall be maintained therein at all
times between the hours of 6:30 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on each and every
day and at a minimum temperature of 60° F. between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:30 a.m. on each and every day, whenever the outside
temperature shall fall below 55° F.
b. For the purpose of this section, whenever a building, tenement or
apartment house is heated by means of furnace, boiler or other
apparatus under the control of the owner, agent or lessee of the
building, tenement or apartment house, such person, in the absence of
a contract or agreement to the contrary, shall be deemed to have
contracted, undertaken or agreed to furnish heat in accordance with
the provisions of this section.
§ 14-6.4 KEARNY CODE § 14-8.1
AO:520
§ 14-8.2. Existing Grilles. [1973 Code § 60-2; Ord. No. 9-13-89]
Nothing contained herein shall apply to any such solid, sliding or rolled
horizontal or vertical security grille that is already installed or existing on
any commercial establishment on the effective date hereof.
§ 14-8.3. Preemption. [1973 Code § 60-3; Ord. No. 9-13-89]
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to repeal, amend or modify any
provision of the Uniform Construction Code of the State of New Jersey, and
in the event of any inconsistency between the terms of this section and the
provisions of the Uniform Construction Code, the provisions of the Uniform
Construction Code shall prevail.
§ 14-8.4. Permits. [1973 Code § 60-4; Ord. No. 9-13-89]
No person shall install any security grille or any alarm or smoke detector in
any building in the Town of Kearny without first obtaining a permit therefor
from the Construction Code Official or his designee.
§ 14-8.5. Penalties. [1973 Code § 60-5; Ord. No. 9-13-89; New]
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalties stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
a. It shall be unlawful for any owner, operator, or lessee of any commercial
establishment in the Town of Kearny to install or maintain any solid
sliding, or rolled horizontal or vertical grille on the front of any such
commercial establishment, provided however that it shall be lawful to
continue the use of any such solid, sliding or rolled, horizontal or
vertical, security grille that was installed or in use as of March 22, 1989
(the effective date of the final passage of the first ordinance prohibiting
same) and provided further that all such existing grilles, solid or open,
shall be retrofitted to comply with paragraphs b, c and d hereof.
b. Any security grille installed on any commercial establishment in the
Town of Kearny shall be installed so as not to block any cellar door when
the security grille is in closed or open position.
c. All commercial buildings equipped with security grilles shall install an
alarm bell, siren, or horn; together with a warning light on the exterior
of the building, which alarm, bell or siren, shall be wired to an AC
powered smoke detector or system located in the interior of said
commercial establishment. Smoke detectors shall be installed on all
levels or floors of tenants use, and said smoke detectors and
interconnected alarm shall be wired directly into a constantly active
120V AC building circuit.
d. A sign shall be posted in the immediate area of the exterior alarm
stating as follows:
"Notify Fire Department if alarm or warning lights are activated."
§ 14-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-9
AO:521
§ 14-9. through § 14-11. (RESERVED)
§ 14-12. NUMBERING OF HOUSES.
§ 14-12.1. Numbering System Designated. [1973 Code § 104-1]
The numbers on all houses erected or to be erected within the limits of the
Town of Kearny shall correspond to the street numbers on the tax maps of
the Town filed in the office of the Board of Assessors of the Town; and it
shall be the duty of all property owners to have their houses numbered in
conformity with the street numbers as the same are designated on the tax
maps.
§ 14-12.2. Application for Correct Number. [1973 Code § 104-2]
In all cases where any number is or shall be hereafter affixed to any house,
it shall be the duty of the owner thereof to apply to the Clerk of the Board of
Assessors for the correct number of the house as the same as indicated on
the tax maps of the Town, and upon the application the Clerk shall furnish
to the applicant, the correct number to designate his property, and the
property owner shall thereupon place and affix to his house a sign indicating
the number of his house on the street whereon it is situated, in conformity
with the street number of the lot as furnished by the Clerk on which the
house is located.
§ 14-12.3. Failure to Comply; Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code
§ 104-3; New]
If any owner of any house erected or to be erected in the Town of Kearny
shall fail to number or cause to be renumbered his house in conformity
with the street numbers designated on the tax maps of the Town of Kearny
as aforesaid and in accordance with the two previous subsections of this
section, he shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 14-13. SMOKE AND CARBON MONOXIDE DETECTOR
COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE FOR R-3 PROPERTIES. [Ord. No.
2003-(O)-18; Ord. No. 2003-(O)-33 § 1]
Chapter 15
RENTAL HOUSING
a. When any R-3 property is sold, leased or otherwise subjected to a
change of occupancy for residential purposes, a smoke and carbon
monoxide detector compliance certificate as required by the laws of the
State of New Jersey must be obtained from the Construction Official/
Zoning Officer prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The
fee for the compliance certificate shall be $30 as required by New
Jersey statutes.
§ 14-9 KEARNY CODE § 15-1
AO:522
§ 15-1. (RESERVED)
Former Section 15-1, Landlord Tenant Resource Center previously codified
herein and containing portions of 1973 Code §§ 117-1 — 117-3 and
Ordinance 10-25-89 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2011-52
§ 15-2. RELOCATION ASSISTANCE BENEFITS. [Ord. No.
2002-O-26]
§ 15-3. RESTRICTIONS ON SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
a. A tenant who receives a notice of eviction from an owner-landlord
because of zoning or code enforcement by the Town for an illegal
occupancy, deemed a "displaced person" by N.J.S.A. 20:4-1, et seq. and
N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1g, shall be entitled to relocation assistance in an
amount equal to six times the displaced person's monthly rent from the
owner-landlord. The owner-landlord shall pay the relocation assistance
directly to the displaced person.
b. An additional fine for zoning or housing code violations for an illegal
occupancy may be assessed by the Town against the owner-landlord in
an amount up to six times the displaced person's monthly rent.
c. Upon a second or subsequent violation for an illegal occupancy, after
the opportunity for a hearing, an owner-landlord may be fined in an
amount equal to the annual tuition cost of any resident of the illegally
occupied unit attending a public school. This fine is in addition to the
fine set forth in paragraph b and shall be recovered in a civil action by
summary proceeding in the name of the Town of Kearny pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10, et seq. The Municipal Court and the Superior Court
shall have jurisdiction of the proceedings for the enforcement of this
penalty. The tuition cost shall be determined in the manner prescribed
for nonresident pupils, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 18A:28-19 and the payment
of the fine shall be remitted to the Town's school district.
d. For purposes of this section, the owner-landlord of a structure shall not
include mortgagees in possession of a structure through foreclosure.
e. For purposes of this section, a "second or subsequent violation for an
illegal occupancy," as set forth in paragraph c., shall be limited to those
violations that are new and are a result of distinct and separate zoning
or code enforcement activities and shall not include any continuing
violations for which citations are issued by a zoning or code
enforcement agency during the time period required for summary
dispossession proceedings to conclude if the owner has initiated
eviction proceedings in a court of proper jurisdiction.
f. The Town of Kearny shall not be responsible for the payment of
relocation assistance to any tenant who is deemed a displaced person
as a result of this section.
§ 15-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-3.1
AO:523
§ 15-3.1. Short-Term Rental of Single Family Houses - Rental for
Certain Time Periods Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2017-61]
§ 15-3.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2017-61]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVERTISE OR ADVERTISING — Shall mean any form of solicitation,
promotion and communication for marketing, used to solicit, encourage,
persuade, or manipulate viewers, readers, or listeners into contracting for
goods and/or services in violation of this article, as same may be viewed
through various media, including, but not limited to, newspapers,
magazines, flyers, handbills, pamphlets, commercials, radio, direct mail,
internet websites, or text or other electronic messages for the purpose of
establishing occupancies or uses of single family houses, for consideration,
which are prohibited by this section.
CONSIDERATION — Shall mean soliciting, charging, demanding, receiving
or accepting any legally recognized form of consideration, including a
promise or benefit, a quid pro quo, rent, fees, other form of payment, or
thing of value.
OCCUPANT — Shall mean any individual using, inhabiting, living,
gathering, entertaining, being entertained as a guest, or sleeping in a
dwelling unit, or portion thereof, or having other permission or possessory
right(s) within a single family house.
OWNER — Shall mean any person(s) or entity(ies), association, limited
liability company, corporation, or partnership, or any combination, who
legally use, possess, own, lease, sublease or license (including and operator,
principal, shareholder, director, agent, or employee, individually or
collectively) that has charge, care, control, or participates in the expenses
and/or profit of a single family house pursuant to a written or unwritten
agreement, rental, lease, license, use, occupancy agreement or any other
agreement.
a. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Town of
Kearny Code, it shall be unlawful for an owner, lessor, sub-lessor, any
other person(s), or entity(ies) with possessory or use right(s) in a single
family house, their principals, partner or shareholders, or their agents,
employees, representative and other person(s) or entity(ies), acting in
concert or a combination thereof, to receive or obtain actual or
anticipated consideration for soliciting, advertising, offering, and/or
permitting, allowing, or failing to discontinue the use or occupancy of
any single family house, as defined herein, for a period of 30 days or
less.
b. Nothing in this section will prevent formation of an otherwise lawful
occupancy of a dwelling unit for a rental period of more than 30 days.
§ 15-3.1 KEARNY CODE § 15-3.2
AO:524
PERSON — Shall mean an individual, firm, corporation, association,
partnership, limited liability company, association, entity, and any other
person(s) and/or entity(ies) acting in concert or any combination thereof.
SINGLE FAMILY — Shall mean and constitutes a family-type situation
involving one or more persons living together that exhibit the kind of
stability, permanency and functional lifestyle equivalent to that of a
traditional family unit, as further described in the applicable reported and
unreported decisions of the New Jersey Superior Court.
SINGLE FAMILY HOUSE — Shall mean any structure, or portion thereof,
whether furnished or unfurnished, which is, or intended, arranged,
permitted or designed to be occupied by a single family.
§ 15-3.3. Permitted Uses. [Ord. No. 2017-61]
The residential occupancy of an otherwise lawful and lawfully occupied
single family house for a period of 30 days or less, without consideration,
by relatives or friends of any member of the single family that occupies the
single family house, is permitted.
§ 15-3.4. Advertising Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2017-61]
It shall be unlawful to advertise, solicit or promote by any means short term
rentals of single family house in violation of subsection 15-3. la above.
§ 15-3.5. Enforcement; Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2017-61]
a. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Building Code
Official, Fire Official, Health Department, other Subcode Code Official,
or law enforcement agent of the Kearny Police Department, as their
jurisdiction may arise, including legal counsel for the Town or other
persons designated by the Town of Kearny to issue municipal civil
infractions directing alleged violators of this section to appear in court
or file civil complaints.
b. A violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, a
nuisance per se, and is hereby further found and declared to be
offensive to the public health, safety and welfare.
c. Any person found to have violated any provision of this article, without
regard to intent of knowledge, shall be liable for a maximum civil
penalty, upon an adjudicated violation of admission, of a fine not
exceeding $1,000. Each day of such violation shall be a new and
separate violation of this section.
d. The penalty imposed herein shall be in addition to any other remedies
that may accrue under any other law, including, but not limited to,
eviction proceedings and/or injunction, reasonable attorney's fees or
other fees and costs, in the Town's Municipal Court or the Superior
Court of New Jersey in the Vicinage of Hudson County, or in such other
§ 15-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-3.5
AO:525
Chapter 16
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
§ 16-1. TITLE. [1973 Code § 47-1; Ord. No. 8-8-90]
This Ordinance shall be known as the "Affordable Housing Procedures
Regulations" of the Town of Kearny.
§ 16-2. PURPOSE. [1973 Code § 47-2; Ord. No. 8-8-90]
The purpose of this chapter is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of the responsibilities of the Town of Kearny to
assist in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing
Act of 1985. (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq.)
§ 16-3. DEFINITIONS. [1973 Code § 47-3; Ord. No. 8-8-90]
As used in this chapter:
All definitions found in the Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Kearny and the
Municipal Land Use Law of the State of New Jersey shall be incorporated
by reference herein.
LOW INCOME — Shall mean a total gross household income no greater
than 50% of the median household income of the Hudson-Bergen-Passaic
Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area (Region One Housing Region as
defined by the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing (COAH), adjusted
for household size, based on most recent income limits published by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
MODERATE INCOME — Shall mean a total gross household income no
greater than 80% and no less than 50% of the median household income of
the Hudson-Bergen-Passaic Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area (Region
One Housing Region as defined by the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing), adjusted for household size, based on the most recent income
limits published by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD).
§ 16-4. AFFORDABLE HOUSING TRUST FUND. [1973 Code § 47-4;
Ord. No. 8-8-90]
There is hereby established within the Town of Kearny an Affordable
Housing Trust Fund which shall be maintained by the Town Treasurer as
a separate fund to be used and applied solely for the purposes set forth
herein.
court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction, by either summary
disposition or by zoning or construction code municipal proceedings.
a. It shall be permissible for the Treasurer to place the monies deposited
to such fund into the general depository interest-bearing accounts of
§ 15-3.5 KEARNY CODE § 16-4
AO:526
§ 16-5. AFFORDABLE HOUSING BOARD. [1973 Code § 47-5; Ord.
No. 8-8-90]
the Town provided a separate accounting for such money is maintained
by the Treasurer.
b. All funds collected from developers or other persons pursuant to
Developer's Agreements, settlement of litigation, or by donation, shall
be deposited into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund in accordance
with this chapter.
c. In the event the Town receives funds from any governmental sources or
from a private organization authorized by the County, State or Federal
government to engage in funding for affordable housing projects which
are required to be held in a separate account, the Treasurer shall be
authorized to establish such separate account and to provide for the
keeping of appropriate records thereon but such funds shall be
otherwise considered as part of the Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
d. Disbursements from the Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall be made
by the Treasurer upon authorization of the Town Council by resolution
carried by the affirmative votes of the majority of the full authorized
Council. The Town Council may authorize the expenditures from the
Affordable Housing Trust for the following purposes:
1. Payments to assist in the rehabilitation of substandard housing in
the Town by removal of health and safety code violations in housing
qualifying under the provisions of the Fair Housing Act.
2. Payments to provide for the maintenance, repair, replacement and/
or improvement of affordable housing in the Town of Kearny.
3. Payments to provide for the implementation of an affirmative
marketing program to market the designated low and moderate
income units in the Town.
a. There is hereby established an Affordable Housing Board which shall
consist of five members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Town Council. The members shall serve without
compensation.
b. The Board shall be composed of two members of the Town Council, who
will serve two years, two residents of the Town, who will serve three
years and the Construction Code Official, who will serve one year.
Appointments to fill vacancies resulting from resignation or removal
from office shall be for the departing member's unexpired term.
c. The powers of the Board shall be as follows:
1. To recommend to the Town Council the adoption of rules and
regulations.
§ 16-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-5
AO:527
(a) To govern the sale or rental of affordable housing units to
lower and moderate income persons pursuant to the Affordable
Housing Ordinance of the Town of Kearny;
(b) To assure that the housing units built or rehabilitated for
affordable housing pursuant to the Affordable Housing
Ordinance and the Zoning Ordinance will remain available to
lower and moderate income persons for the appropriate period
of time as required by the Substantive Rules issued by the
Council on Affordable Housing (N.J.A.C. 5:92-1 et seq.);
(c) To establish eligibility criteria for persons wishing to purchase
or rent affordable housing in the Town in accordance with the
Affordable Housing Ordinance and the Substantive Rules
issued by the Council on Affordable Housing provided that no
eligibility priorities shall be established other than those
specifically set forth in the Affordable Housing Ordinance;
(d) To establish screening mechanisms to ensure that all
affordable housing units are occupied only by lower and
moderate income households;
(e) To recommend to the Town Council appropriate expenditures
of those funds made available to the Town's Affordable Housing
Fund;
(f) To regulate the resale of affordable housing units so as to allow
lower and moderate income households to recoup the value of
any improvements to the units while providing for the
recapture by the Town of any windfall profits from the resale of
the units, pursuant to COAH rules (N.J.A.C. 5:92-12.1 et seq.),
consistent with this Affordable Housing Procedures Ordinance;
(g) To regulate the calculation of rents and other charges for
affordable housing rental units for the purposes of ensuring
that affordable housing rental units are rented only to and
remain occupied by lower and moderate income households;
(h) To provide for a fair and equitable disbursal of funds from the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund, to the extent such funds are
available for rehabilitation of substandard housing occupied by
lower and moderate income households and for such other
purposes, including senior citizens housing construction, as
may be authorized by the Town Council; and
(i) To carry out such additional responsibilities as may be
necessary to fulfill the Town's affordable housing program in
accordance with the Fair Housing Act of 1985 and
amendments thereto, and the Substantive Rules issued by the
Council on Affordable Housing.
§ 16-5 KEARNY CODE § 16-5
AO:528
§ 16-6. ACTION BY TOWN COUNCIL. [1973 Code § 47-6; Ord. No.
8-8-90]
In the absence of the appointment of an Affordable Housing Board, the
Town Council shall act in its stead.
§ 16-7. SCREENING AND QUALIFICATION OF PROSPECTIVE
PURCHASERS AND TENANTS OF LOW AND MODERATE INCOME
UNITS. [1973 Code § 47-7; Ord. No. 8-8-90]
2. To ascertain the extent and location of substandard housing and,
upon authorization by the Town Council, to conduct a survey or to
arrange to have a survey conducted.
3. To seek out sources of government funding that will assist the Town
in meeting its goals of supplying affordable housing as set forth in
the Housing Plan Element of the Master Plan, and, upon
authorization by the Town Council, to prepare and submit
applications to secure such funding.
4. To prepare an annual budget for the Affordable Housing Board
including salaries and expenditures incurred in administering the
affordable housing regulations of the Zoning Ordinance and the
Affordable Housing Ordinance, exclusive of expenditures for
rehabilitation. The budget shall be prepared in accordance with
proper Town accounting procedures and submitted to the Town
Council for approval as part of the Town budget.
5. To recommend to the Town Council the disbursement of funds from
the Housing Fund, if such funds are available, for rehabilitation of
housing and for such other purposes as may be authorized by the
Town Council.
6. To provide an annual written report to the Mayor, Town Council,
and Planning Board on its activities and the progress and problems
in providing affordable housing and assuring the continued
affordability of this housing.
7. To undertake such other activities as may be authorized by law to
carry out the obligations of the Town to assist in providing
affordable housing in accordance with the Fair Housing Act of 1985
and amendments thereto and the Substantive Rules issued by the
Council on Affordable Housing.
a. The Town Affordable Housing Board shall screen and determine
whether prospective purchasers and tenants qualify for the newly
designated low and moderate income units built or rehabilitated within
the Town. Qualification criteria shall include household income, place of
residence, and place of employment.
b. The Board shall maintain a registry of income eligible applicants for
purchase or rental of low and moderate income housing.
§ 16-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-7
AO:529
§ 16-8. HOUSEHOLD SIZE AND DWELLING UNIT TYPE. [1973 Code
§ 47-8; Ord. No. 8-8-90]
§ 16-9. ANNUAL INDEXED INCREASES. [1973 Code § 47-9; Ord. No.
8-8-90]
The rents of affordable housing units may increase annually based on the
percentage increase in the median income for the three County Hudson-
Bergen-Passaic Housing Region, as determined from the uncapped Section
8 Program income limits, as published by U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) and available from COAH.
§ 16-10. CONTROLS ON AFFORDABILITY. [1973 Code § 47-10; Ord.
No. 8-8-90]
c. Occupancy preference for new low and moderate income units.
1. A maximum of 50% of the designated low and moderate income
housing units may be reserved initially for income eligible current
residents of the Town or households who work in the Town and
reside elsewhere.
2. After 50% of the designated low and moderate income housing
units have been purchased or leased by Town residents the
remaining income eligible applicants shall be pooled and selected
on a random basis.
d. The Board shall recommend eligible prospective purchasers and
tenants to the developer(s) of low and moderate income housing.
a. Maximum rents of low and moderate income housing units shall be
determined on the basis of the following assumptions on occupancy of
dwelling units by household size:
1. Efficiency units shall be affordable to one person households;
2. One bedroom units shall be affordable to two person households;
3. Two bedroom units shall be affordable to three person households;
4. Three bedroom units shall be affordable to five person households;
5. Four bedroom units shall be affordable to seven person households.
a. Length and Mechanism of Controls.
1. Controls on rehabilitated owner-occupied single family housing
units that are improved shall extend for six years from the date of
completion of the rehabilitation; and
2. Controls on rehabilitated renter-occupied housing units that are
improved shall extend for 10 years from the date of initial rental of
the rehabilitated unit.
§ 16-7 KEARNY CODE § 16-10
AO:530
§ 16-11. IMPACT OF FORECLOSURE. [1973 Code § 47-11; Ord. No.
8-8-90]
A judgment of foreclosure or a deed in lieu of foreclosure by a financial
institution regulated by State and/or Federal law shall extinguish controls
on affordability, provided the owner of the affordable housing unit shall
be personally obligated to pay to the Board any surplus funds, but only to
the extent such surplus funds exceed the difference between the maximum
price permitted at the time of foreclosure and the amount necessary to
redeem the debt to the financial institution, including the costs of
foreclosure.
§ 16-12. LIEN REQUIREMENT. [1973 Code § 47-12; Ord. No. 8-8-90]
A homeowner or investor-landlord participating in the local rehabilitation
program shall execute a lien in favor of the Town of Kearny in consideration
for the funds granted for the cost of rehabilitation and for the period of
controls on affordability. Prior to execution, the lien shall be reviewed as to
form by the Town Attorney.
§ 16-13. MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON.
§ 16-13.1. Position Established. [Ord. No. 2008-(O)-24 § 1]
There is hereby established the position of Municipal Housing Liaison.
§ 16-13.2. Duties. [Ord. No. 2008-(O)-24 § 2]
The Municipal Housing Liaison will administer the Town's affordable
housing program and shall enforce the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:94-7 and
N.J.A.C. 5:80-261.
Chapter 17
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 17-1. TRASH, BRUSH, WEEDS, OBNOXIOUS GROWTH.
3. The controls of affordability shall be implemented and enforced for
rehabilitated units, both (a) owner-occupied units and (b) investorowned
and renter-occupied units, by a lien in favor of the Town.
4. Controls on resales and rents of new, low and moderate income
units shall extend for 20 years from the date of initial purchase or
rental, and be subject to the recapture provisions of COAH Rules
(N.J.A.C. 5:92-12.1 et seq.).
§ 16-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-1.1
AO:531
§ 17-1.1. Prohibited Accumulation; Growth. [1973 Code § 58-1]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant of any lot or land to
dump or permit to be dumped thereon, or allow to accumulate or remain
thereon, or to permit to grow thereon, brush, weeds, dead and dying trees,
stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and other debris, or
any other offensive or unsightly matter and material.
§ 17-1.2. Dumping Prohibited. [1973 Code § 58-2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit upon any property belonging
to another person, without express permission of the owner, lessee, or any
other person entitled to the possession thereof, or upon any public street,
sidewalk or waterway, any brush, weeds, dead trees, old stumps and roots,
filth, garbage, trash, debris or other offensive or unsightly matter. In case
any such material shall be deposited with the consent of the owner, leasee,
or any other person entitled to the possession thereof, the responsibility
thereof shall then pass to the owner, lessee, or other person legally entitled
to the possession thereof, in accordance with the provisions of subsection
17-1.1.
§ 17-1.3. Encroachment of Hedges, Shrubbery Upon Streets or
Sidewalks Prohibited.42 [1973 Code § 58-3]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, lessee or occupant of any property to
maintain any hedge, shrubbery or other vegetation in such manner as to
encroach upon any sidewalk or street, or in such manner as to interfere with
the free and unobstructed passage of persons upon the sidewalks or streets.
§ 17-1.4. Failure to Remove; Lien Upon Land. [1973 Code § 58-4]
In the event that the owner, lessee or occupant of lands fails to remove or
eliminate the brush, weeds, old and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious
growths, filth, garbage, trash, debris and other unsightly matter and
material within 10 days after notice to remove and eliminate the same, the
Town of Kearny shall cause the same to be done under the direction of the
Street Commissioner. The Street Commissioner shall, upon the completion
of the work, certify the cost thereof to the Town Council, who shall examine
the certificate of cost, and, if found correct, shall cause the cost as shown
thereon to be charged against the lands, and the amount so charged shall
forthwith become a lien upon the lands and shall be added to and become
and form part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon the lands,
the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected
and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
42.Editor's Note: For additional regulations concerning growth at intersections, see Chapter
23, Section 23-10.
§ 17-1.1 KEARNY CODE § 17-1.5
AO:532
§ 17-1.5. Service of Notice. [1973 Code § 58-5]
The notice hereinabove provided for shall be in writing and shall be served
upon the last known owner as the same appears upon the tax records at
the office of the Tax Collector. If the last known owner be a resident of the
Town of Kearny, service shall be effected by handing a copy of the notice
to the owner personally or by leaving it at his usual place of abode. If the
owner be a nonresident of the Town of Kearny, service shall be effected by
mailing a copy of the notice to his last known address, as shown by the
tax records, by registered mail, return receipt requested. If the owner be
a corporation, service shall be effected upon the registered agent in the
manner hereinabove set forth.
§ 17-1.6. Purpose. [1973 Code § 58-6]
The purpose of this section is to preserve the public health, safety, general
welfare, and to eliminate fire hazards in the Town of Kearny.
§ 17-1.7. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 58-7; New]
Any person violating any provision of this section shall be liable, upon
conviction thereof, to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. Each day
on which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 17-1.8. Penalty and/or Lien Not Exclusive Remedy. [1973 Code
§ 58-8]
The creation of a lien upon the lands involved in accordance with the
provisions of this section shall not be considered in lieu of the imposition
of a penalty in accordance with the provisions of subsection 17-1.7, and
likewise, the imposition of a penalty in accordance with subsection 17-1.7,
shall not be considered in lieu of the creation of a lien.
§ 17-2. WASTE DISPOSAL BINS.
§ 17-2.1. Open or Overflowing Waste Disposal Bins Prohibited.
[1973 Code § 83-29]
It shall be unlawful for any residential or commercial property owner to
permit open or overflowing waste disposal bins on his or her property.
§ 17-3. LITTER; NUISANCES ON SIDEWALKS, BACKYARDS AND
ALLEYS.43
43.Editor's Note: For additional regulations concerning streets and sidewalks, see Chapter
23.
§ 17-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-3.1
AO:533
§ 17-3.1. Responsibility of Owner or Tenant to Remove
Obstructions; Nuisance; Litter. [1973 Code § 83-30]
It shall be the duty of the owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in
charge of any structure to keep and cause to be kept the sidewalk and
curb abutting the building or structure free from obstruction or nuisances
of every kind and to keep sidewalks, areaways, backyards, courts and alleys
free from litter and other offensive material. No person shall sweep into
or deposit in any gutter, street, catch basin or other public place any litter
or accumulation of litter from any public or private sidewalk or driveway.
Every person who owns or occupies property shall keep the sidewalk in
front of his or her premises free from litter. All sweepings shall be collected
and property containerized for disposal.
§ 17-4. OUTDOOR STORAGE OF BULKY HOUSEHOLD WASTE
RESTRICTED.
§ 17-4.1. Storage of Household Appliances, Furniture and Bulky
Waste Restricted. [1973 Code § 83-23]
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to store or permit
storage of any bulky household waste, including household appliances,
furniture and mattresses, in areas zoned residential, except in a fully
enclosed structure or during days designated for the collection of bulky
items.
§ 17-4.2. Storage of Tires Restricted. [1973 Code § 83-24]
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to store or permit
the storage of tires in areas zoned residential except in a fully enclosed
structure or on days designated for the collection of tires.
§ 17-5. PARKING ON RESIDENTIAL LAWNS.
§ 17-5.1. Prohibited. [1973 Code § 83-25]
It shall be unlawful for any residential property owner to park or permit the
parking of any vehicle on his or her residential lawn.
§ 17-6. STORAGE OF VEHICLES.
§ 17-6.1. Wrecked; Damaged; Unregistered Vehicles Prohibited.
[1973 Code § 83-26]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or permit the keeping on streets,
vacant lots and residential lawns except in a fully enclosed structure, any
motor vehicle, trailer or semi-trailer, which is:
a. Missing tires, wheels, engine or any essential parts; or
b. Which displays extensive body damage or deterioration; or
§ 17-3.1 KEARNY CODE § 17-6.1
AO:534
§ 17-7. FENCING ON CERTAIN LANDS.
§ 17-7.1. Required. [1973 Code § 76-1]
The owner of any property in the Town which consists primarily of virgin,
undeveloped meadowland, which contains any service road leading to or
from a public road, shall erect and maintain a fence across the service road,
sufficient to impede the travel of any motor vehicle.
§ 17-7.2. Gate and Lock Requirements. [1973 Code § 76-2]
Such fence shall be equipped with a gate which may be locked or unlocked;
provided, however, that a key to the gate must be left with the Chief of the
Fire Department or his authorized agent at all times.
§ 17-7.3. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 76-3; New]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 17-8. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.
§ 17-8.1. Short Title. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42 § 17-8.1]
This section shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code of the Town
of Kearny" and will be referred to in this chapter as "this code" or "the
code."
§ 17-8.2. Findings and Declaration of Policy. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42
§ 17-8.2]
The Mayor and Council hereby find, determine and declare that there exists,
have existed and persist in the Town of Kearny conditions of deterioration
in housing, in commercial and industrial installations and in other physical
components of community life which constitute a menace to the health,
safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the Town, but that such conditions
are amenable to correction and amelioration by a concerted strategy
embodied in this code.
§ 17-8.3. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42 § 17-8.3]
The purpose of this code is (1) to protect the public health, safety and
welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance,
appearance, condition and occupancy of both residential and nonresidential
premises; (2) to establish minimum standards to make facilities fit for
human habitation, occupancy and use; (3) to fix certain responsibilities and
duties upon owners, operators and occupants; and (4) to fix penalties for
c. Which does not display a current, valid State license; or
d. Which is wrecked, disassembled or partially disassembled.
§ 17-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-8.3
AO:535
the violation of this code. It is intended that this code be construed liberally
to effectuate the purposes stated herein.
§ 17-8.4. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42 § 17-8.4]
As used in this code, the following words have the following definitions,
unless the context otherwise indicates:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Shall mean a building that is used for the
benefit of a main building on the same lot and under the same ownership or
control.
DETERIORATION — Shall mean the condition or appearance of a building
or part thereof, characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking,
peeling, rusting or other evidence of physical decay, neglect, lack of
maintenance or excessive use.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Shall mean those portions of a building
which are exposed to public view and the open space on any premises
outside of any building.
GARBAGE — Shall mean putrescible animal and vegetable waste resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INFESTATION — Shall mean the presence of insects, rodents, vermin or
other pests which constitute a health hazard.
NUISANCE — Shall mean:
OPERATOR — Shall mean any person who has charge, care or control of
a dwelling or premises, or a part thereof, whether with or without the
knowledge and consent of the owner.
OWNER — Shall mean any person (1) who, alone or jointly or severally with
others, has legal or equitable title to any premises, whether or not in actual
possession thereof, or (2) who has charge, care or control of any dwelling
unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as a fiduciary, or as a mortgagee
in possession regardless of how such possession was obtained. Any person
Any public nuisances recognized by the courts of New Jersey to be such
and any conditions which unreasonably interfere with the health, safety,
peace, comfort or convenience of the general Kearny community;
a.
Any attractive nuisance detrimental to the health or safety of children
whether in a building or on premises where a building is located, or
upon an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to, abandoned
wells, shafts, basements, excavations, abandoned ice-boxes,
refrigerators, motor vehicles, lumber, trash or debris and any
structurally unsound fences or structures;
b.
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to the
health of persons on or near the premises where the conditions exist;
c.
Unsanitary conditions or conditions which render air, food or drink
detrimental to the health of human beings.
d.
§ 17-8.3 KEARNY CODE § 17-8.4
AO:536
who is a lessee, sublessee or assignee under any lease or sublease of any
part or all of any dwelling or dwelling unit shall, for purposes of this code,
be deemed to be a co-owner of, and shall have joint responsibility with the
owner respecting the part of the premises covered by the lease or sublease.
PREMISES — Shall mean a lot, plot or parcel of land, including the
buildings or structures thereon.
REFUSE — Shall mean putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes
including, but not limited to, garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead
animals, abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings,
cigarettes, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean anything that is built or constructed and
permanently affixed over or under the ground or upon another structure or
building.
§ 17-8.5. Residential and Nonresidential Buildings to Comply. [Ord.
No. 2000-0-42 § 17-8.5]
Every residential and nonresidential building and the premises on which
it is situated, previously or presently used or intended to be used for
dwelling, commercial, business or industrial occupancy, shall comply with
the provisions of this code, whether or not such building shall have been
constructed, altered or repaired before or after the enactment of this code,
and irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued
for the use or occupancy of the building or for the installation or repair of
equipment or facilities prior to the effective date of this code. This code
establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy and
use of all such buildings and does not replace or modify standards otherwise
established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of the building,
equipment or facilities contained herein, except as provided in subsection
17-8.6.
§ 17-8.6. Higher Standard to Prevail in Cases of Conflict with Other
Laws or Ordinances. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42 § 17-8.6]
In any case where the provisions of this code impose a standard higher than
set forth in other ordinances of the Town or under the laws of the State
of New Jersey, the standards as set forth herein shall prevail. However, if
the provisions of this code impose a lower standard than those set forth in
other ordinances of the Town or laws of the State of New Jersey, the higher
standard contained in any such other ordinances or laws shall prevail.
§ 17-8.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-8.7
AO:537
§ 17-8.7. Enforcement of and Compliance with Other Ordinances.
[Ord. No. 2000-0-42 § 17-8.7]
No certificate of compliance with this code shall constitute a defense
against noncompliance with any other ordinance of the Town.
§ 17-8.8. Responsibilities of Owner and Operator to be Independent
of Each Other. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42 § 17-8.8]
§ 17-8.9. Maintenance of Exterior of Premises-Residential and
Nonresidential. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42 § 17-8.9]
The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept free
of any hazards or threats to the safety of occupants, pedestrians or other
persons utilizing the premises, and shall be kept free of unsightly or
unsanitary conditions. Any such hazards shall be removed promptly and
abated. Hazards and unsightly or unsanitary conditions shall include, but
shall not be limited to, the following:
a. Owners and Operators. Owners and operators shall have all the
obligations and responsibilities prescribed in this code and shall not be
relieved therefrom, nor be entitled to defend against any charge of a
violation thereof, by reason of the fact that the occupant is also
responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
b. Contract Not to Alter Responsibilities. Unless expressly provided to the
contrary in this code, the respective obligations and responsibilities of
an owner and operator on one hand and an occupant on the other, shall
not be altered, affected or diminished by any agreement or contract by
and between any of the aforesaid or between them and other parties.
a. Refuse including, without limitation, junk, debris, scrap lumber, scrap
metal, inoperable machinery or parts and fragments thereof, glass,
stumps and trash.
b. Loose and overhanging objects including, without limitation, dead and
dying trees, accumulations of ice and other similar conditions which by
reason of their location above ground level constitute a hazard to
persons in the vicinity thereof.
c. Ground surface hazards including, without limitation, holes,
excavations, breaks, projections and obstructions.
d. Inadequate foundation or retaining walls, piers, columns or similar
loadbearing components which are not capable of bearing imposed
loads safely.
e. Unsafe exterior facilities including, without limitation, exterior porches,
landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes. All such shall be kept
structurally sound and in good repair and shall be provided with
banisters or railings property designed and maintained.
§ 17-8.7 KEARNY CODE § 17-8.9
AO:538
§ 17-8.10. Appearance of Exterior of Premises and Structures-
Residential. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42 § 17-8.10]
The exterior of premises, including the exteriors of dwelling structures and
accessory structures, shall be maintained so that the appearance of the
premises and all buildings thereon shall not constitute a blight factor.
f. Inadequate run-off drains which shall fail to eliminate recurrent or
excessive accumulations of stormwater.
g. Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto not maintained
structurally sound and free from defects and not maintained as to
capably perform at all times the functions for which they were
designed. Chimneys, flues, gas vents or other draft-producing
equipment shall provide sufficient draft to develop the rated output of
the connected equipment and shall be structurally safe, durable,
smoketight and capable of withstanding the action of flue gases.
h. Snow and ice which shall not have been removed from sidewalks,
entrance stairways and walkways connecting entrance stairways to
sidewalks as provided in Section 23-11 of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Town of Kearny so as to constitute a hazard to
persons using the premises.
i. Sidewalks which are not unencumbered, broom clean, free from filth,
slops and litter.
a. General Maintenance. To preserve property values, eliminate safety
hazards and protect adjoining properties and the neighborhood from
blighting influences, the exterior of every structure or accessory
structure, including fences, shall be maintained in good repair. All
surfaces thereof shall be kept free of broken glass, loose shingles,
crumbling stone and brick or excessive peeling paint.
b. Storage. Equipment and materials relating to business, commercial or
industrial uses shall not be stored on the premises unless permitted
under the zoning ordinances.
c. Motor Vehicles. No unregistered, uninspected or inoperable motor
vehicle shall be parked outside on any residential property. At no time
shall any vehicle in a state of major disassembly, disrepair or in the
process of being stripped or dismantled be parked outside on any
residential property. However, nothing herein shall prevent ordinary
repairs or maintenance to be made on any personally owned
noncommercial vehicles by residents of the property on which the
vehicles are located.
d. Front Yard Parking. No person shall park, stop or stand any motor
vehicle, or permit or suffer any vehicle to be parked, stopped or
standing, in the front yard area of any residential premises except on
driveways and parking areas constructed and installed in compliance
with applicable Town ordinances.
§ 17-8.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-8.10
AO:539
§ 17-8.11. Appearance of Exterior of Premises and Structures -
Nonresidential. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42 § 17-8.11]
The exteriors of premises and accessory structures shall be maintained so
that the appearance of the premises and all buildings shall not constitute a
blight factor.
e. Waterways, Brooks, Etc. All waterways, brooks, drainage ditches and
swales located on or immediately adjacent to the premises shall be
maintained in good condition, free from debris or other obstructions.
a. General Maintenance. To preserve property values, eliminate safety
hazards and protect adjoining properties and the neighborhood from
blighting influences, the exterior of every structure or accessory
structure, including fences shall be maintained in good repair and all
surfaces thereof shall be kept free of broken glass, loose shingles,
crumbling stone or brick and excessive peeling paint.
b. Conditions of Approval. All conditions of approval incorporated in other
ordinances or resolutions of the Town, or of any duly constituted board
or agency of the Town, shall be adhered to and shall be construed to
impose continuing conditions of approval hereunder. On-site
improvements of every kind or nature, including, without limitation,
sidewalks, curbs, catch basins, storm drains and driveways shall be
maintained in good and serviceable condition at all times.
c. Windows. No storage of materials, stock or inventory shall be permitted
in window display areas unless the areas are first screened from the
public view by drapes, venetian blinds or other permanent rendering of
the windows opaque to the public view. All such screening of interiors
shall be maintained in a clean and attractive manner and in a good state
of repair. This section shall not apply to the ordinary display of goods
and materials offered for sale at that location.
d. Store Fronts. All store fronts and all surfaces thereof shall be
maintained in good repair. In the event repairs to a portion of a store
front are made, such repairs shall be performed with materials identical
or compatible with the materials used in the area not undergoing repair
so that the appearance of the store front shall be uniform and attractive
and shall not constitute a blighting factor depreciating adjoining
properties.
e. Motor Vehicles. Unregistered, uninspected or inoperable motor
vehicles shall not be permitted on any property in any business,
commercial or industrial zone. At no time shall any vehicle be in any
state of major disassembly, disrepair or in the process of being stripped
or dismantled, except at an approved automobile repair facility and
then only when such vehicle is in the process of being repaired. At no
time shall any vehicle of any type undergo major overhauling, including
body work, in a business, commercial or industrial zone, except at an
approved automobile repair facility when such vehicle is in the process
§ 17-8.10 KEARNY CODE § 17-8.11
AO:540
§ 17-8.12. Maintenance of Dwellings and Structures. [Ord. No.
2000-0-42 § 17-8.12]
of being repaired. This section shall not apply to junkyards which shall
be governed by Section 5-54 of the Ordinances of the Town of Kearny.
f. Awnings and Marquees. Any awning or marquee and its accompanying
structural members which extend over any street, sidewalk or other
portion of the premises shall be maintained in good repair and shall not
constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard. If such awnings or marquees
are not properly maintained in accordance with the foregoing, they, and
their supporting members, shall be removed forthwith. If the awnings
or marquees are made of cloth, plastic or of similar materials, the cloth
or plastic, where exposed to public view, shall be maintained in good
condition and shall not show evidence of excessive weathering,
discoloration, ripping, tearing or holes. Notwithstanding, nothing
herein shall be construed to authorized any encroachment not
otherwise permitted on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the public
domain.
g. Signs. All signs, including the structural and supporting components
thereof, and all light stanchions and poles shall be maintained in good
repair.
h. Parking Lines. All parking areas shall be marked with clearly visible
parking lines and necessary directional arrows. Such markings shall be
consistent with requirements as to parking areas imposed by other
ordinances or resolutions.
i. Waterways, Brooks, Etc. All waterways, brooks, drainage ditches and
swales, to the extent that the same are located on or immediately
adjacent to the premises, shall be maintained in good condition, free
from debris, plantings or other obstructions.
a. Residential. Every dwelling and accessory structure, and every part
thereof, shall be kept structurally sound and in a state of good repair to
avoid safety or health hazards.
1. Exterior Walls, Sidings and Roofs. Exterior walls, sidings and roofs
shall be kept structurally sound in good repair and free from
defects.
2. Structures or portions of structures showing signs of rot, leakage,
deterioration or corrosion are to be restored and protected against
weathering or seepage.
b. Nonresidential. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure,
including fences and store fronts, shall be maintained in good repair. All
surfaces shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose brick, excessive
peeling paint, or other conditions reflective of deterioration or
inadequate maintenance. All reconstruction of walls and siding shall be
of standard quality and appearance commensurate with the character
§ 17-8.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-8.12
AO:541
§ 17-8.13. Vacant Buildings - Residential and Nonresidential. [Ord.
No. 2000-0-42 § 17-8.14]
Vacant buildings shall be locked. All windows, doors and other openings,
shall be kept adequately secured to exclude trespassers, but shall not be
boarded up except on a temporary basis with the prior approval of the
Construction Official.
§ 17-8.14. Enforcement Officer. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42 § 17-8.14]
The Construction Official shall be responsible for all inspections,
regulations and enforcement. All hearings on violations of the provisions
of this code, unless expressly stated to the contrary, shall be under his
direction and supervision.
§ 17-8.15. Inspections. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42 § 17-8.15]
All buildings and premises subject to this code are subject to inspections
by the Construction Official for compliance with the provisions of this code.
Such inspections shall be made only between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. unless
the Construction Official obtains prior approval from the Mayor and Council
or where there is reason to believe that a violation exists of a character
which is an immediate threat to health or safety, requiring inspection and
abatement without delay.
§ 17-8.16. Interference with Entry of Official. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42
§ 17-8.16]
The Construction Official shall request consent of the owner, or other
person in charge of a structure prior to entry. If any owner, or person in
charge of a structures refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with, restricts
or obstructs entry, the Construction Official may seek a warrant as per
subsection 17-8.18.
§ 17-8.17. Application for and Issuance of Search Warrant. [Ord.
No. 2000-0-42 § 17-8.17]
The Construction Official may apply to the Judge of the Kearny Municipal
Court for a search warrant, setting forth factually in his sworn application
the conditions and circumstances which he alleges provide a reasonable
basis for believing that a violation of this code exits.
§ 17-8.18. Notice of Violation. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42 § 17-8.18]
Where a violation of this code is found to exist, a written notice from the
Construction Official shall be served on the person or persons responsible
for the correction thereof.
of the properties in the zoning district in which the premises are
located.
§ 17-8.12 KEARNY CODE § 17-8.19
AO:542
§ 17-8.19. Contents of Notice. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42 § 17-8.19]
The notice shall specify (1) the violation or violations committed, (2) what
must be done to correct the same, (3) a reasonable period of time, not
to exceed 30 days, within which to correct or abate the violation, (4) the
right of the person served to request a hearing, and (5) that the notice
automatically shall become an order for the Construction Official in 15
business days after service unless a hearing is requested.
§ 17-8.20. Service of Notice. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42 § 17-8.20]
The notice of violation may be served personally or by certified mail,
addressed to the last known address of the person to be served. Where it is
ascertained that the owner does not reside on the premises, the last known
address shall be the address of the owner as shown on the tax rolls. If the
last known address cannot be ascertained, the notice may be posted on the
outside front entrance of the building.
The Construction Official shall file and provide notice to any owner, operator
or occupant of any violation at an address other than the last known address
if such other address is filed with the Construction Official. Service upon an
owner, operator or occupant also may be effected by service of the notice
upon a member of the family of the owner, operator or occupant. The date
of service of the notice, where service is by mail, shall be the day shown on
the certified receipt.
§ 17-8.21. Final Order; Request for Hearing. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42
§ 17-8.21]
Ten business days after the date of service, the notice shall constitute a final
order unless a person affected by the notice serves a written request for a
hearing upon the Construction Official before that time. Such a request for
a hearing shall set forth briefly the grounds or reasons on which the request
is based and the factual matters contained in the notice of violation which
are to be disputed at the hearing. The application shall be accompanied by
a fee in the sum of $25 for residential properties and $50 for nonresidential
properties. However, the said fees shall be refundable if no correction or
abatement is found necessary by the Construction Board of Appeals. Within
30 days of receipt of the request, the Construction Official shall set the
matter down for hearing before the Construction Board of Appeals. The
party requesting the hearing shall receive at least five business days' notice
of the hearing.
§ 17-8.22. Hearings: Determination: Appeals. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42
§ 17-8.22]
The Construction Official shall make available to the Board the full record
of the application, including a detailed explanation of the reasons for the
notice of violation.
§ 17-8.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-8.22
AO:543
All hearings shall be open to the public. The appellant, his representatives
or legal counsel, and the Construction Official shall be granted an
opportunity to address the Board, which may take testimony under oath.
If fewer than four members of the Board are present to consider a specific
matter, either the appellant or the Construction Official shall be entitled to
a postponement of the hearing. In such cases, the proceedings shall not be
stayed more than 90 days. If there is no request to postpone, any decision
made by the Board members present shall be binding.
No hearing shall be conducted unless there are at least three members of
the Board present.
The Board shall hear the appeal, render a decision thereon, and file its
decision with a statement of the reasons therefor with the Construction
Official not later than 10 business days following the hearing.
The Board may affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the Construction
Official or remand the matter to the Construction Official for further action.
Decisions of the Board shall be by a concurring vote of at least three
members. If three concurring votes are not obtained, the decision of the
Construction Official shall be deemed affirmed.
The Construction Official shall take immediate action in accordance with
the decision of the Board, unless the decision is stayed by a Court of
competent jurisdiction.
Any party, including the Construction Official, may appeal from the decision
of the Board to a Court of competent jurisdiction within 30 days of the
decision.
§ 17-8.23. Extensions for Correction or Abatement. [Ord. No.
2000-0-42 § 17-8.23]
The Construction Official may extend the time for correction or abatement
of the violations for an additional period of time not to exceed 30 days,
except where major capital improvements or renovations are involved. In
such event the time for completion may be extended for a period not to
exceed 90 days beyond the expiration date of the original notice.
§ 17-8.24. Abatement in Emergency Situations. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42
§ 17-8.24]
Where the violation or condition existing on the premises is of such a
nature as to constitute an immediate threat to health or safety unless abated
without delay, the Construction Official may either abate the violation or
condition immediately or direct the owner, operator or occupant to correct
the violation or condition within a period of time not to exceed three days.
If the owner, operator or occupant fails to do so, the Construction Official
shall immediately abate the condition.
§ 17-8.22 KEARNY CODE § 17-8.25
AO:544
§ 17-8.25. Collection of Cost of Abatement. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42
§ 17-8.25]
Where abatement of any nuisance, correction of a defect or rendering the
premises in compliance with any ordinance or State law requires expending
Town moneys, the Construction Official shall present a report of work
proposed to be done to accomplish the foregoing to the Mayor and Council,
with an estimate of the cost thereof.
The Mayor and Council may thereupon by resolution authorize the
abatement of the nuisance, correction of the defect, or the work necessary
to place the premises in compliance. If the Mayor and Council authorizes
the work, the Construction Official may thereafter proceed to have the
work performed at Town expense not to exceed the amount specified in the
resolution. Upon completion of the work, he shall submit a report of the
moneys expended and costs to the Mayor and Council. After review of the
same, the Mayor and Council may approve said costs, and any other costs
related to the matter whereupon the same shall become a lien against the
premises collectible as provided by law. A copy of the resolution approving
said costs shall be certified by the Mayor and filed with the Tax Collector
who shall be responsible for the collection thereof. The Tax Collector shall
forthwith forward to the owner as his, her or its name appears on the tax
rolls a detailed copy of the costs and the amount due by certified mail.
§ 17-8.26. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2000-0-42 § 17-8.26]
Any failure to correct or abate violations in accordance with the
requirements of this code shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500 for each violation committed hereunder. Each violation of a section
or subsection of this code shall constitute a separate violation independent
of any other section or subsection. Each day's failure to comply with any
such section or subsection shall constitute a separate violation. No fine
may be levied against an owner-occupant or a nonowner-occupant of a
residential unit who submits adequate proof that he or she is not financially
able to correct the violations, but such circumstance shall not preclude the
construction official from proceeding pursuant to Section 8-25 of this code.
Where an owner or operator has been convicted of a violation of this code
and within 12 months thereafter has been found guilty of a second violation
of this code, the Judge of the Kearny Municipal Court may, if he finds
the second offense was willful and inexcusable, sentence the offender, to
imprisonment in the County jail for a period not to exceed 90 days in
addition to or in lieu of the fine set forth.
§ 17-9. CONTAINERIZED YARD WASTE.
§ 17-9.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 5]
The purpose of this section is to establish requirements for the proper
handling of yard waste in the Town of Kearny, so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 17-8.25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-9.2
AO:545
§ 17-9.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 5]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — Shall mean the placement of yard waste in a trash can,
bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling
or blowing out into the street or coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing State, County, or municipal
roadway, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Shall mean leaves and grass clippings.
§ 17-9.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 5]
Other than in the manner and at the times provided for in Section 17-10
Yard Waste Collection Program, the owner or occupant of any property, or
any employee or contractor of such owner or occupant engaged to provide
lawn care or landscaping services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise
place yard waste, unless the yard waste is containerized, in the street.
If yard waste that is not containerized is placed in the street, the party
responsible for placement of yard waste must remove the yard waste from
the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this section.
§ 17-9.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 5]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Public Works
Department, the Health Department of the Town of Kearny and any other
department hereinafter designated by the Town Administrator.
§ 17-9.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 5]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each violation committed
hereunder. Each day's failure to comply with any section or subsection shall
constitute a separate violation.
Where a person has been convicted of a violation of this section and within
12 months thereafter has been found guilty of a second violation of this
section, the Judge of the Kearny Municipal Court may, if the Judge finds the
§ 17-9.2 KEARNY CODE § 17-9.5
AO:546
second offense was willful, sentence the offender to imprisonment in the
County jail for a period not to exceed 90 days in addition to or in lieu of the
fine set forth above.
§ 17-10. YARD WASTE COLLECTION PROGRAM.
§ 17-10.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 6]
The purpose of this section is to establish a yard waste collection and
disposal program in the Town of Kearny, so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 17-10.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 6]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — Shall mean the placement of yard waste in a trash can,
bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling
or blowing out into the street or coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing State, County, or municipal
roadway, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Shall mean leaves and grass clippings.
§ 17-10.3. Yard Waste Collection. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 6]
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and shall not be
placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such
yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other
manner is a violation of this section. If such placement of yard waste occurs,
the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove the
yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this
section.
§ 17-9.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-10.4
AO:547
§ 17-10.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 6]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Construction Official
of the Town of Kearny and any other department hereinafter designated by
the Town Administrator.
§ 17-10.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 6]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each violation committed
hereunder. Each day's failure to comply with any section or subsection shall
constitute a separate violation.
Where a person has been convicted of a violation of this section and within
12 months thereafter has been found guilty of a second violation of this
section, the Judge of the Kearny Municipal Court may, if the Judge finds the
second offense was willful, sentence the offender to imprisonment in the
County jail for a period not to exceed 90 days in addition to or in lieu of the
fine set forth above.
§ 17-11. PORTABLE STORAGE UNITS.
§ 17-11.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2012-39]
For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:
PORTABLE STORAGE UNIT — Shall mean any container designed for the
outdoor storage of personal property, including a "POD" or similar storage
container, which is typically rented to owners or occupants of property for
their temporary use and which is delivered and removed by vehicle.
SITE OR PROPERTY — Shall mean a piece, parcel, tract or plot of land
occupied or that may be occupied by one or more buildings or uses and their
accessory buildings and accessory uses which is generally considered to be
one unified parcel.
USER — Shall mean the owner or occupant of property entering into an
agreement with a portable storage unit company or other person or entity
for the placement of a portable storage unit on a site located in the Town of
Kearny.
§ 17-11.2. Placement. [Ord. No. 2012-39]
a. No portable storage unit shall be placed or maintained by any private
person or entity in or on any property, street or right-of-way in the Town
without a valid permit issued by the Construction Official or his
designee.
b. No portable storage unit may be placed or maintained on any private
property unless it complies with one of more of the following provisions:
1. Such containers may be placed or maintained on a driveway or
other suitably paved area, at the furthest accessible point from the
§ 17-10.4 KEARNY CODE § 17-11.2
AO:548
§ 17-11.3. Permits Required. [Ord. No. 2012-39]
Before the placement of a portable storage unit on any private property
the owner of the property using the portable storage unit or the person
contracting for the use of such portable storage unit shall apply for and
receive a permit from the Town in accordance with the requirements and
standards set forth herein.
street, for purposes of packing or unpacking goods and materials
of the owner or occupant of the property in preparation for or
subsequent to moving in or out of the property for a period of not
more than 30 consecutive days.
2. Such containers may be placed or maintained on a driveway or
other suitably paved area, at the furthest accessible point from the
street, for purposes of storing the personal property of the owner
or occupant of the property when necessary during renovation or
rehabilitation of the structure located on the property in which the
personal property would otherwise be located during the period of
renovation or rehabilitation, but in no event for more than a total of
30 consecutive days.
a. An application for a permit shall be made to the Construction Official or
his designee on a form provided by the Town. The application shall
require, among other things, the full name, address and other contact
information for the owner of the portable storage unit, the owner of the
property with which the use of the portable storage unit is associated,
and the person contracting for the use of the portable storage unit (if
such person is not the owner of the property for which the portable
storage unit is to be used). Every application for a permit shall be
accompanied by a permit fee of $25.
b. Any portable storage unit placed on private property shall be placed on
a suitable base to assure stability. If, in the opinion of the Construction
Official or his designee, the location is sufficiently close to a vehicular
intersection or pedestrian path, the permit may require that the unit be
equipped with appropriate reflectors or other safety markings so that
the unit will not constitute a hazard to traffic or pedestrians. The
specific number, location and type of markings shall be determined by
the Construction Official or his designee and noted on the permit at the
time of its issuance or at any time thereafter.
c. Any permit issued for placement of a portable storage unit on private
property shall be valid for a period of 30 days and a sticker or notice
shall be prominently displayed on the portable storage unit or on the
property upon which the unit is placed indicating the commencement
and expiration dates of the permit.
d. Upon a showing of continued need for the portable storage unit (such as
during the course of major construction projects), the Construction
Official or his designee may renew a permit for up to two additional
§ 17-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-11.3
AO:549
§ 17-11.4. General Restrictions and Requirements. [Ord. No.
2012-39]
periods, not to exceed 30 days each, upon the filing of an application
for renewal and payment of a fee of $25 for each renewal.
e. An application for an additional extension beyond the time periods
specified in paragraph d may be made to the Construction Official or his
designee on a form provided by the Town. The application shall contain
complete identifying information regarding the portable storage unit,
the permit number, the time the portable storage unit has been at the
site, and the reason for its use. The application for an additional
extension shall be accompanied by a fee of $50.
1. The application shall be reviewed and a determination made as to
whether an additional extension should be granted, and the
duration of that extension, within 10 business days of the filing of a
complete application.
2. In considering the application, the Construction Official or his
designee shall consider the following:
(a) The length of time the portable storage unit has been in place;
(b) The particular use of the portable storage unit;
(c) The reasonableness of the time required to complete that
purpose in light of all attendant circumstances;
(d) The location of the portable storage unit;
(e) The visual impact, nature of the neighborhood, and similar
issues;
(f) Whether noise, litter or other quality of life issues have been
associated with the use of the portable storage unit;
(g) Whether the delay in completing the work or project for which
the portable storage unit is necessary is beyond the reasonable
control of the owner of the property;
(h) The additional time reasonably necessary to complete the work
or project; and
(i) Such other factors deemed reasonable and appropriate under
the circumstances.
a. No more than one portable storage unit may be placed on any property
at one time and no more than one permit may be issued for any
property, including any renewals of said permit, during a twelve-month
period.
b. No hazardous material or organic waste shall be placed in a portable
storage unit.
§ 17-11.3 KEARNY CODE § 17-11.4
AO:550
§ 17-11.5. Responsibility for Compliance. [Ord. No. 2012-39]
The person contracting for the use of a portable storage unit and the
owner of the property associated with its use shall be jointly responsible
for compliance with the provisions of this section. Copies of the penalty
provisions of this section shall be appended to the permit and shall be
mailed with a copy of the permit to the owner of the portable storage unit,
the property owner, and any other interested party.
§ 17-11.6. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2012-39]
§ 17-12. VACANT AND ABANDONED PROPERTY.
§ 17-12.1. Purpose, Rights and Obligations. [Ord. No. 2016-53]
The purpose of this Section 17-12 adopted by Ordinance No. 2016-53 is
to notify property owners, lien holders and other interested parties of
properties within the Town of Kearny of the intent of the Town to adopt
the Abandoned Properties and Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.
its provisions, procedures, authority and lawful remedies, empowering the
Town and its officials to act under the authority of that act. This Section
incorporates all substantive rights and obligation of the Act.
c. No portable storage unit shall be used for the storage of construction
debris business inventory, commercial goods, or any personal property
which is not owned by the owner or occupant of the property where the
unit is located. Upon reasonable notice to the permit holder the Town
may inspect the contents of any portable storage unit for compliance
with this section.
d. The owner of the portable storage unit and the owner of the site on
which the unit is located shall be jointly responsible to ensure that the
portable storage unit is in good condition, free from evidence of
deterioration, weathering, discoloration, rust, ripping, tearing or other
holes or breaks.
e. A portable storage unit shall be no larger than 130 square feet in area
and no higher than 10 feet above grade.
a. It shall be unlawful for a portable storage unit to remain on any
property in excess of the time period set forth in the permit issued by
the Town. Each day a portable storage unit remains on a property in
violation of the provisions of this section shall be considered a separate
violation subject to the penalty provisions set forth below.
b. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction in Municipal Court or any other court having jurisdiction, be
liable for a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500.
§ 17-11.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-12.2
AO:551
§ 17-12.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2016-53]
PUBLIC OFFICER — Means the person designated or appointed by the
Mayor and Council by resolution to exercise the powers and authority
prescribed by the Ordinance.
TOWN — Means the Town of Kearny.
§ 17-12.3. Abandoned Property; Criteria (N.J.S.A. 55:19-81). [Ord.
No. 2016-53]
Except as provided in N.J.S.A. 55:19-83, any property that has not been
legally occupied for a period of six months and which meets any one of the
following additional criteria may be deemed to be abandoned property upon
a determination by the public officer that:
§ 17-12.4. Nuisance Property; Criteria (N.J.S.A. 55:19-82). [Ord. No.
2016-53]
A property may be determined to be a nuisance if:
a. The property is in need of rehabilitation in the reasonable judgment of
the public officer, and no rehabilitation has taken place during that sixmonth
period;
b. Construction was initiated on the property and was discontinued prior
to completion, leaving the building unsuitable for occupancy, and no
construction has taken place for at least six months as of the date of a
determination by the public officer pursuant to this section;
c. At least one installment of property tax remains unpaid and delinquent
on that property in accordance with Chapter 4 of Title 54 of the Revised
Statutes as of the date of a determination by the public officer pursuant
to this section; or
d. The property has been determined to be a nuisance by the public officer
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 55:19-82.
A property which contains both residential and non-residential space
may be considered abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et al. so
long as two-thirds or more of the total net square footage of the building
was previously legally occupied as residential space and none of the
residential space has been legally occupied for at least six months at
the time of the determination of abandonment by the public officer and
the property meets the criteria of either subsection a or subsection d of
this section.
a. The property has been found to be unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3;
b. The condition and vacancy of the property materially increases the risk
of fire to the property and adjacent properties;
§ 17-12.2 KEARNY CODE § 17-12.4
AO:552
§ 17-12.5. Inventory of Abandoned Property, List to be Maintained;
Publication in Official Newspaper, Notice to Owner of Record;
Challenge by Owner (N.J.S.A. 55:19-55). [Ord. No. 2016-53]
c. The property is subject to unauthorized entry leading to potential
health and safety hazards; the owner has failed to take reasonable and
necessary measures to secure the property; or the Town has secured
the property in order to prevent such hazards after the owner has failed
to do so;
d. The presence of vermin or the accumulation of debris, uncut vegetation
or physical deterioration of the structure or grounds have created
potential health and safety hazards and the owner has failed to take
reasonable and necessary measures to remove the hazards; or
e. The dilapidated appearance or other condition of the property
materially affects the welfare, including the economic welfare, of the
residents for the area in close proximity to the property, and the owner
has failed to take reasonable and necessary measures to remedy the
conditions.
The public officer who determines a property to be a nuisance pursuant
to paragraphs b through e of this subsection shall follow the notification
procedures set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 et seq.
a. The Mayor and Council hereby direct the public officer to identify
"abandoned property" for the purpose of establishing an "abandoned
property list" of abandoned property throughout the entire Town. Each
parcel so identified shall include the tax lot and block number, the name
of the owner of record, if known, and the street address of the lot.
b. The public officer may add properties to the abandoned property list at
any time and alternatively may delete or remove properties from the list
at any time when the public officer finds that the property no longer
meets the criteria of an abandoned property.
c. An abandoned property shall not be included on the abandoned
property list if rehabilitation is being performed in a timely manner, as
evidenced by building permits issued and diligent pursuit of
rehabilitation work authorized by the permits. Removal of certain
properties from the abandoned property list may be performed in
accordance with any and all provisions of the Abandoned Properties
Rehabilitation Act, N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et seq.
d. The public officer shall establish the abandoned property list by
publication in an official newspaper of the Town, which publication shall
constitute public notice, and, within 10 days after publication, the
public officer shall send a notice, by regular and certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the record owner of each and every property
included on the published list. The publication shall include the name of
the record owner, tax lot and block number and street address. The
§ 17-12.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-12.5
AO:553
§ 17-12.6. Property Deemed Not Abandoned; Criteria of
Abandonment Provided Upon Request (N.J.S.A. 55:19-83). [Ord. No.
2016-53]
public officer, in consultation with the Assessor, shall also send out a
notice by regular mail to any known mortgagee, servicing organization,
or property tax processing organization that regularly receives a
duplicate copy of the tax bill for the property. The mailed Notice shall
indicate the factual basis for the public officer's determination that the
property is abandoned property specifying the rules and regulations
promulgated and the information relied upon in making such finding.
The public officer is further required to satisfy all other prescribed
notices and filings pursuant to the Abandoned Properties Rehabilitation
Act and is entitled to all other remedies and available procedures
afforded by it.
e. An owner or lien holder may challenge the inclusion of his or her
property on the abandoned property list by appealing that
determination to the public officer within 30 days of the owner's receipt
of the certified or regular mailed notice or 40 days from the date upon
which the notice was sent. An owner whose identity was not known to
the public officer shall have 40 days from the date upon which notice
was published or posted, whichever is the later to challenge the
inclusion of the property of the abandoned property list. For good cause
shown to the public officer, a late challenge shall be accepted by the
public officer. Within 30 days of receipt of a challenge, the public officer
shall schedule a hearing for a redetermination of the inclusion. Any
property included on the list is presumed to have satisfied the criteria
for inclusion, and the burden is on the property owner to submit the
proper paperwork and/or testimony that can demonstrate that the
property was erroneously included on the list. The affidavit or
certification shall be accompanied by supporting documentation which
may include, but is not be limited to, photographs, repair invoices, bills
and construction contracts. The sole ground for appeal shall be that the
property in question is not abandoned property. The public officer shall
promptly, by certified mail return receipt requested, and by regular
mail notify the property owner of the decision and the reasons therefor.
f. The owner or lien holder may challenge an adverse determination of his
or her appeal by the public officer by instituting a summary proceeding
in the Superior Court, Law Division, in Hudson County. Such action
shall be instituted within 20 days of the date of the notice of decision
mailed by the public officer pursuant to subsection e. The sole ground
for appeal shall be that the property in question is not abandoned
property as the term is defined in N.J.S.A. 55:19-54. The failure to
institute an action of appeal on a timely basis shall constitute a
jurisdictional bar to challenging the adverse determination except that
for good cause shown, the court may extend the time.
§ 17-12.5 KEARNY CODE § 17-12.6
AO:554
§ 17-12.7. Removal of Property from List of Abandoned Properties;
Remediation (from N.J.S.A. 55:19-57). [Ord. No. 2016-53]
a. If an entity other than the Town has purchased or taken assignment of a
tax sale certificate on a property that has not been legally occupied for
a period of six months, that property shall not be placed on the
abandoned property list pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55. If an entity other
than the Town has purchased or taken assignment of a tax sale
certificate on a property that has not been legally occupied for a period
of six months, that property shall not be placed on the abandoned
property list pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55 if (i) the owner of the
certificate has continued to pay all taxes and liens on the property in the
tax year when due; and (ii) the owner of the certificate takes action to
initiate foreclosure proceeding within six months after the property is
eligible for foreclosure pursuant to either subsection a or subsection b
of N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, as appropriate, and diligently pursues foreclosure
proceedings in a timely fashion thereafter.
b. A property which is used on a seasonal basis shall deemed to be
abandoned only if the property meets any two of the additional criteria
set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:19-81.
c. A determination that the property is abandoned property under the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 55:19-78 et al. shall be constitute a finding that
the use of the property has been abandoned for purposed of municipal
zoning or land use regulation.
d. Upon request of a purchaser or assignee of a tax sale certificate seeking
to bar the right of redemption on an abandoned property pursuant to
subsection of N.J.S.A. 54:5-86, the public officer or the tax collector
shall, in a timely fashion, provide the requester with a certification that
the property fulfills the definition of abandoned according to the
criteria set forth in sections 4 and 5 of N.J.S.A. 55:19-81 and 55:19-82.
a. An owner may remove a property from the list of abandoned properties
prior to sale of the tax sale certificate by paying all taxes and Town liens
due, including interest and penalties, and:
1. By posting cash or a bond equal to the cost of remediating all
conditions because of which the property has been determined to
be abandoned pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55 and depositing cash or
a bond to cover the cost of any environmental cleanup required on
the property, evidenced by a certification by a licensed engineer
retained by the owner and reviewed and approved by the public
officer stating that the cash or bond adequately covers the cost of
the cleanup; or
2. By demonstrating to the satisfaction of the public officer that the
conditions rendering the property abandoned have been
remediated in full; provided, however, that where conditions
because of which that property was determined to be abandoned
§ 17-12.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-12.7
AO:555
§ 17-12.8. Severability. [Ord. No. 2016-53]
If any provision of this Section 17-12, or the application of any such
provision to any person or circumstances, shall be held invalid, the
remainder of this Section to the extent it can be given effect, or the
application of such provision to persons or circumstances other than those
to which it is held invalid shall not be affected thereby, and to this extent
the provisions of this Section are severable.
§ 17-12.9. Repealer. [Ord. No. 2016-53]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with any
provisions of this Section are hereby repealed as to the extent of such
inconsistencies.
§ 17-12.10. Statute Governs. [Ord. No. 2016-53]
If any provision of this Section is inconsistent with the provisions of the
statute, the provisions of the statute shall govern.
§ 17-12.11. Report. [Ord. No. 2016-53]
The public officer shall provide a report to the governing body every six
months, with respect to the number and location of properties on the
Abandoned Property List, the status of those properties, and any actions
taken by the municipality or by any qualified rehabilitation entity
designated pursuant to the authority granted the public officer with respect
to any property on the list or any other abandoned property within the
Town.
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-55, as evidenced by significant
rehabilitation activity on the property, the public officer may grant
an extension of time of not more than 120 days for the owner to
complete all work, during which time no further proceeding will be
taken against the owner of the property.
b. If the owner has posted cash or a bond in order to have a property
removed from the abandoned property list and the conditions because
of which the property was determined to be abandoned have not been
fully remediated within one year of the date of posting the cash or bond,
or, in the case of a property which requires a remediation of any known,
suspected or threatened release of contaminants, if the owner has
failed to enter into a memorandum of agreement with the Department
of Environmental Protection or an administrative consent order,
remediation in conformance with the agreement or order, then the cash
or bond shall be forfeited to the Town which shall use the cash or bond
and any interest which has accrued thereon for the purpose of
demolishing or rehabilitating the property or performing the
environmental remediation. Any funds remaining after the property has
been demolished, rehabilitated or cleaned up shall be returned to the
owner.
§ 17-12.7 KEARNY CODE § 17-12.12
AO:556
§ 17-12.12. Effect on Uniform Construction Code. [Ord. No.
2016-53]
No provision hereof shall be construed as restricting or otherwise
abrogating the enforcement and other powers of the Town's Construction
Code Official under the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, including,
without limitation, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-123 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.1 et
seq. (collectively, the "Code"). The provisions hereof shall be construed
as consistent with the enforcement and other powers of the Town's
Construction Code Official under the Code.
§ 17-12.13. Imposition of Liens for Cost Recovery. [Ord. No.
2016-53]
The Chief Financial Officer is authorized to impose liens for costs resulting
from any action taken by the Town pursuant to this article, subject to the
provisions of any law, regulation or ordinance governing the imposition of
such liens.
Chapter 18
(RESERVED)
Chapter 19
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
§ 19-1. UNIFORM FIRE SAFETY ACT ENFORCING AGENCY.
§ 19-1.1. Preamble. [1973 Code § 23-33; Ord. No. 8-14-85]
The Uniform Fire Safety Act, (P.L. 1983, c. 383) was enacted for the purpose
of establishing a system for the enforcement of minimum fire safety
standards throughout the State of New Jersey. The Uniform Fire Safety Act
authorizes municipalities to provide for local enforcement and to establish
local enforcement agencies for that purpose; and it is in the best interest
of the Town of Kearny to have the Uniform Fire Safety Act enforced locally.
All fire departments, fire companies and fire districts have agreed to the
plan, which is set forth herein, for the administration and enforcement of
the Uniform Fire Safety Code.
§ 19-1.2. Local Enforcement. [1973 Code § 23-34; Ord. No. 8-14-85;
Ord. No. 2000-0-48 § 4]
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383)
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Town of
Kearny.
§ 17-12.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-1.3
AO:557
§ 19-1.3. Agency Designation. [1973 Code § 23-35; Ord. No. 8-14-85;
Ord. No. 2000-0-48 § 1]
The Local Enforcing Agency shall be the Bureau of Combustibles in the
Kearny Fire Department.
§ 19-1.4. Duties. [1973 Code § 23-36; Ord. No. 8-14-85]
The Local Enforcement Agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act
and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures
and premises within the established boundaries of the Town of Kearny, other
than owner-occupied buildings of one or two dwelling units used exclusively
for dwelling purposes, and buildings, structures and premises owned or
operated by the Federal Government, Interstate Agencies or the State and
shall faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act
and the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 19-1.5. Inspection of Life Hazard Uses. [1973 Code § 23-37; Ord.
No. 8-14-85]
The Local Enforcing Agency established by subsection 19-1.3 shall carry
out the periodic inspection of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 19-1.6. Organization. [1973 Code § 23-38; Ord. No. 8-14-85]
The Local Enforcing Agency established by subsection 19-1.3 shall be a part
of the Kearny Fire Department and shall be under the direct supervision
and control of the Chief Inspector, Bureau of Combustibles, and who shall
remain under the supervision of the Fire Chief to whom he shall be
responsible for the proper discharge of his duties.
§ 19-1.7. Appointment; Term of Office; Removal. [1973 Code
§ 23-39; Ord. No. 8-14-85]
a. Appointment of Fire Official. The Local Enforcing Agency shall be under
the supervision of the Fire Official who shall be appointed by the Mayor
and Town Council pursuant to Title 11, Civil Service, of the Revised
Statutes.
b. Term of Office. The Fire Official shall serve with tenure as provided for
under the Civil Service Laws of the State of New Jersey and he shall be
removed from office only for good cause shown and only after being
granted a hearing upon charges before the appointing authority.
c. Inspector and Employees. Such inspectors and other employees as may
be necessary for the Local Enforcing Agency to properly carry out its
responsibilities shall be appointed by the Mayor and Town Council
pursuant to Title 11, Civil Service, of the Revised Statutes.
d. Removal from Office. Inspectors and other employees of the enforcing
agency shall be subject to removal by the Chief of the Kearny Fire
§ 19-1.3 KEARNY CODE § 19-1.7
AO:558
§ 19-1.8. Board of Appeals. [1973 Code § 23-40; Ord. No. 8-14-85]
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person
aggrieved by any order of the Local Enforcement Agency (or agencies) shall
have the right to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of the Town
of Kearny.
§ 19-1.9. Non-Life Hazard Uses; Inspections and Fees. [1973 Code
§ 23-41; Ord. No. 8-14-85; Ord. No. 2000-O-48 § 6; Ord. No. 2012-2;
Ord. No. 2015-20]
Department for inefficiency or misconduct. Each inspector or employee
to be so removed shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the
appointing authority or a designated hearing officer.
a. Life hazard use groups are defined in N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.5. et seq. All other
groups, referred to as "non-life hazard use groups", are the subject of
this ordinance and are hereby required to register each year with the
Bureau of Combustibles and pay inspection fees as follows:
Inspection Fee
Assembly
1A Assembly under 4999 $35
2A Assembly 5,000 square feet and over $70
Business Use Group
1B under 2,500 square feet $25
2B 2,500-4,999 square feet $35
3B 5,000x9,999 square feet $70
4B 10,000 square feet and over $120
Factory Use Group
1F under 5,000 square feet $95
2F 5,000-11,999 square feet $120
Mercantile Use Group
1M under 6,000 square feet $35
2M 6,000-11,999 square feet $70
Storage Use Group
1S under 2,500 square feet $35
2S 2,500-11,999 square feet $70
3S 12,000 square feet and over $90
Utilities Use Group
1U under 2,500 sq. $35
§ 19-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-1.9
AO:559
§ 19-1.10. Permits. [1973 Code § 23-42; Ord. No. 8-14-85; Ord. No.
2000-0-48 § 7]
Application fees for permits listed in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.7 shall be as prescribed
by State regulation. The application fee for a certificate of smoke detector
compliance as required by N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.3 shall be $30.
§ 19-1.11. (Reserved)44
§ 19-2. through § 19-5. (RESERVED)
§ 19-6. FIRE PREVENTION SPECIALIST, UFD.
Inspection Fee
2U 2,500 and over square feet $70
Residential Use Group
RA Nonowner occupied 1 & 2 unit mixed use
occupancies
$20
RB 3-4 units $25
RC 5-9 units $40
RD 10-20 units $70
RE over 20 units $100
b. Uses not classified above that are subject to the Uniform Fire Code
shall be classified as business uses.
c. Vacant buildings, which create a fire hazard, shall be charged and
inspected according to the previous use of the building.
d. Each such use group shall be inspected at least once every two years to
determine the extent to which each such use complies with the
provisions of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the New Jersey Uniform
Fire Code.
e. The user shall be invoiced at the time of the inspection for the
inspection fee which shall be due within 30 days thereafter. If the fee is
not paid within the thirty-day period, a penalty equal or twice the
amount of the fee provided for in subsection (d) shall be added
automatically to the fee. If the fee and penalty, or any part thereof, shall
remain unpaid after 60 days of the invoice date, the Chief Inspector,
Bureau of Combustibles shall file a complaint in Municipal Court.
f. This section shall not apply to life hazard uses and uses that are
currently paying a permit fee.
44.Editor's Note: Former subsection 19-1.11, Technical Amendments, previously codified
herein and containing portions of 1973 Code § 23-43 and Ordinance No. 8-14-85 was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2000-0-48.
§ 19-1.9 KEARNY CODE § 19-6.1
AO:560
§ 19-6.1. Creation of Position. [1973 Code § 23-19; Ord. No.
12-14-88]
There is hereby created in the Fire Department of the Town of Kearny,
the position of Fire Prevention Specialist, UFD (Formerly known as Fire
Inspector, UFD).
§ 19-6.2. Duties and Responsibilities. [1973 Code § 23-20; Ord. No.
12-14-88]
a. General Duties. The general duties of the position are as follows:
1. Under direction, inspects premises of buildings to detect and
eliminate fire hazards and to enforce the provisions of relevant fire
safety codes and related regulations;
2. When necessary responds to fire alarms and participates in
extinguishing fires;
3. Does related work as required.
b. Examples of Work. General examples of work are as follows:
1. Inspects various buildings, structures, and premises to detect and
eliminate fire hazards.
2. In accordance with established regulations, guidelines, standards,
and procedures, inspects buildings classified as high-rise and life
hazard use for compliance with the Uniform Fire Safety Code in
accordance with the schedule established by the Code.
3. Inspects fire extinguishing and fire protection equipment to ensure
equipment is operable and prepares reports identifying
deficiencies.
4. Observes tests of fire prevention or protection equipment in plants
where explosive or flammable materials are processed or stored.
5. Observes tests of equipment, and inspects storage conditions to
ensure conformance to fire and safety codes.
6. Notes and investigates unsafe conditions and practices which
might cause or increase fire hazards.
7. May instruct employees of business establishments in fire safety
practices.
8. Inspects buildings of six stories or more that are used for human
occupancy to ensure that such buildings are equipped with
standpipes that have been installed in accordance with applicable
regulations.
9. Reports findings to Fire Official on authorized forms detailing
violations and necessary corrective action.
§ 19-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-6.2
AO:561
10. Inspects areas in which flammable or combustible materials are
stored and reports undesirable conditions or takes steps to correct
such conditions.
11. As required, serves penalty notices, orders, rulings and other legal
process including notices of violation.
12. Ensures that automatic fire alarm systems, when required, are
present, operable, and properly maintained, in accordance with
pertinent regulations.
13. Inspects buildings for proper and adequate means of egress as
determined by use, design, and layout, and ensures that means of
egress are accessible, safe, properly equipped and maintained and
meet the requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code or
other relevant codes or ordinances.
14. Ensures that all exit and information signs are properly displayed
and maintained and meet the requirements of the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code with regard to location, illumination, height,
etc.
15. Reinspects buildings, structures or premises that have been
identified as having violation(s) of applicable fire codes and that
constitute imminent hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the
occupants or intended occupants, firefighters, or the general public
for abatement of the violation(s).
16. Reinspects buildings, structures or premises within a prescribed
time after they have been cited for violations to determine if the
violations have been properly and completely abated.
17. Issues penalty notices for fire hazards not corrected on subsequent
inspection.
18. Examines interiors and exteriors of buildings, structures and
premises to detect hazardous conditions or violations of fire
regulations and laws.
19. Prepares reports of violations and penalty orders.
20. Discusses conditions with owner or agent and recommends safe
methods of storing flammables or other hazardous materials.
21. Informs owner or agent of conditions requiring correction such as
deficient egress facilities, improper fire protection equipment and
faulty wiring and issues violation notices.
22. Explains the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code and regulations to
owners and provides advice on how to abate existing violations.
23. Ensures permit applications are obtained where code requires and
performs inspections on uses related to the permit.
§ 19-6.2 KEARNY CODE § 19-6.2
AO:562
24. Inspects to insure that conditions of permit, issued by the Fire
Official, are being complied with.
25. Works closely with fire officials, fire departments and municipal
officials in interpreting and applying the New Jersey Uniform Fire
Code and ensuring construction permits are obtained where
necessary.
26. Prepares inspection reports which are complete and properly filed.
27. Prepares violation notices and orders to abate the violations and
provides reports on findings, conclusions and recommendations.
28. Investigates fires in order to determine origin, cause and spread.
29. Maintains file of inspection records, prepares reports of activities,
and coordinates activities with other officials responsible for
ensuring fire and life safety.
30. Prepares and maintains accurate inspection records of action
taken, violations found, progress made and other conditions
observed and takes photographs pertinent to assignments.
31. Prepares clear, sound, accurate and comprehensive reports of
inspections and other reports containing findings, conclusions and
recommendations.
32. Maintains essential records and files.
33. As may be required, gives testimony in court and at hearings and
acts as a witness in behalf of the local community.
34. May speak before civic, school, and community organizations and
groups on matters concerning fire prevention methods and
encourage the use of fire prevention methods by community
residents.
35. May give talks and demonstrations before adults and/or children on
the methods for insuring the proper use of fire safety procedures in
the home, school or other buildings.
36. When necessary:
(a) Participates in fire drills and other training courses.
(b) Responds to fire alarms and drives or accompanies fire
apparatus and assists other uniformed personnel in
extinguishing fires.
37. Operates and uses fire hoses and other fire fighting equipment and
apparatus.
38. Performs special duty at theaters, schools, and other public
gatherings to help maintain proper fire precautionary measures.
§ 19-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-6.2
AO:563
§ 19-6.3. Qualifications. [1973 Code § 23-21; Ord. No. 12-14-88]
39. Responds to calls concerning bomb threats and conducts bomb
searches.
40. Inspects the conditions of fire protection apparatus in public and
private buildings.
41. Inspects fire hydrants.
42. Performs rescue work.
43. Pumps out cellars.
44. Receives fire alarms and notifies proper fire company.
45. Keeps needed records.
a. Positions in this class may be filled through promotion examination
procedures only. Candidates must meet those requirements and
qualifications for promotion specified in Civil Service Law, rules and
regulations.
b. Graduation from high school, vocational high school, or possession of
an approved high school equivalent certificate.
c. License and Certification:
1. Possession of a current and valid Fire Inspector Certification issued
by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs will be
required only where the inspection of high-rise and/or life hazard
use structures are involved.
2. Appointees will be required to possess a driver's license valid in
New Jersey only if the operation of a vehicle, rather than employee
mobility, is necessary to perform the essential duties of the
position.
NOTE — Where possession of a certificate issued by the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs is not required, applicants must have
had at least two years of experience in one or more of the areas indicated
below or some combination thereof; (a) as a firefighter in a paid or
volunteer fire company; and/or (b) in the inspection of buildings to detect
fire hazards and to enforce fire safety codes and regulations; and/or (c)
in the investigation of fires to determine their cause; and/or (d) in the
inspection of the construction of buildings and the review of building
construction plans and specifications to insure compliance with fire
protection codes and regulations; and/or (e) in the installation of fire
protection equipment.
d. Age. Not less than 18 years of age.
§ 19-6.2 KEARNY CODE § 19-6.3
AO:564
e. Medical Examination. As a prerequisite for appointment, appointees
may be required to pass a thorough medical and psychiatric
examination to be administered by the appointing authority. Any
psychological, medical or physical condition or defect which would
prevent efficient performance of the duties of the position, cause the
appointee to be a hazard to himself/herself or others, or become
aggravated as a result of performance of these duties will be cause for
rejection.
f. Knowledge.
1. Considerable knowledge of the basic fire prevention measures
required in residential, commercial, industrial and other buildings
and structures.
2. Basic knowledge of the laws, rules and regulations concerning all
types of fire prevention measures.
3. Considerable knowledge of the practices and procedures of fire
code enforcement.
4. Considerable knowledge of the fire safety systems of buildings and
uses including but not limited to means of egress, fire suppression
systems, fire alarm systems and methods for limiting the flame
spread, flammability or combustibility of materials.
5. Considerable knowledge of the safe use and maintenance of
facilities, buildings and the uses of such structures which are
subject to the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code.
6. Considerable knowledge of the safe handling of materials which
pose a fire hazard.
7. Considerable knowledge of modern standards for installation of fire
detection, fire alarm and suppression systems.
8. Wide knowledge of the requirements for means of egress including
exit, access, exit discharge and exit signs.
9. Considerable knowledge of the requirements of the New Jersey
Fire Prevention Code regulating use and occupancy of buildings.
10. Considerable knowledge of the procedures used in the inspection
and evaluation of buildings and structures for fire hazards and fire
safety.
11. Considerable knowledge of code requirements related to fire
ratings of structural components, arrangement, sizing, protection
of means of egress, and flamespread.
12. Considerable knowledge of the operation and maintenance of
smoke detectors and alarms.
§ 19-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-6.3
AO:565
13. Wide knowledge of the laws and ordinances which are significant
from the fire fighting point of view.
14. Wide knowledge of the methods likely to be effective in fighting
various types of fires.
15. Wide knowledge of the varied kinds of fire fighting equipment and
apparatus.
16. Wide knowledge of the location of schools, large buildings, streets
and fire alarm boxes in the municipality.
17. Wide knowledge of the types of fire alarm communications that are
useful and feasible in the Fire Department.
18. Wide knowledge of the procedures likely to be effective in enlisting
the support of citizens and others in taking fire precautionary
measures.
g. Ability.
1. Ability to read, write, speak, understand or communicate in English
sufficiently to perform the duties of the position. Communication
may include such form as American Sign Language or Braille.
2. Ability to comprehend and interpret basic laws and regulations.
3. Ability to make inspections to determine hazardous conditions.
4. Ability to recognize existing and potential fire safety hazards, call
these to the attention of the proper persons and prepare detailed
reports thereon.
5. Ability to act as a witness in hearings and court procedures and
give testimony under oath.
6. Ability to establish cooperative work relationships with local police,
fire officials, owners, agents, tenants and other interested
individuals.
7. Ability to make the required field visits, inspections and
investigations.
8. Ability to prepare inspection reports in accordance with
established procedures and guidelines.
9. Ability to maintain required inspection and other records and files.
10. Ability to prepare correspondence relating to the work of the
agency.
11. Ability to prepare clear, technically sound, accurate, and
informative reports containing findings, conclusions and
recommendations.
§ 19-6.3 KEARNY CODE § 19-6.3
AO:566
§ 19-6.4. Compensation. [1973 Code § 23-21A; Ord. No. 12-14-88]
The salary for the position shall be as set forth in the annual salary
ordinance of the Town of Kearny.
§ 19-7. FIRE ZONES.
§ 19-7.1. Determination; Parking Prohibited; Posting of Signs.
[1973 Code § 23-22; Ord. No. 6-11-80]
It is hereby determined that the operation and parking of motor vehicles
in close proximity to buildings devoted for public uses including shopping
centers, stores, theatres, bowling alleys, hospitals, nursing homes, schools,
public buildings, churches, restaurants, dance halls, multi-family dwellings
and similar uses, constitutes a danger to public health, safety and welfare
in that the approach, operation and departure of fire equipment and other
emergency vehicles is impeded by such operations and parking of motor
vehicles.
The parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing lanes shall be
prohibited at all times, and the fire lanes established pursuant hereto shall
be posted with signs and each lane shall be marked by yellow striped
pavement marking to that effect at the cost and expense of the owner of the
property.
§ 19-7.2. Authorization to Establish Fire Zones. [1973 Code § 23-23;
Ord. No. 6-11-80; Ord. No. 2000-0-48 § 9]
The Chief Inspector/Fire Official is hereby authorized, subject to approval
by resolution, adopted by the Mayor and Town Council, to establish fire
zones on private properties in the Town of Kearny devoted to public uses,
including but not limited to shopping centers, stores, theaters, bowling
12. Ability to perform strenuous physical activities such as lifting heavy
fire fighting equipment, climbing standard and aerial ladders,
lifting and carrying people and equipment for rescue and salvage.
13. Ability to work under conditions of heavy physical exertion in
extreme heat and dust in high and confined areas and smoke filled
spaces, and in all kinds of weather and to maintain physical activity
for prolonged periods of time.
14. Ability to work closely with people, including functioning as a team
member, to exercise tact or diplomacy and display compassion,
understanding and patience.
15. Ability to use and maintain fire fighting equipment and to apply the
theory necessary for effective fire fighting and equipment
operation.
16. Ability to apply the basic techniques of fighting fires and rendering
first aid.
§ 19-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-7.2
AO:567
alleys, hospitals, nursing homes, schools, public buildings, churches,
restaurants, dance halls, multi-family dwellings and similar uses, where the
operation and parking of motor vehicles in close proximity to buildings
located on such properties would prevent adequate ingress, egress and the
operation of fire equipment and other emergency vehicles.
§ 19-7.3. Removal of Snow from Fire Hydrants. [1973 Code § 23-24;
Ord. No. 6-11-80]
All fire hydrants on private property in which a fire zone is established,
which may become covered by snow, shall have such snow removed within
three hours after the snow ceases to fall in order to enable the Fire
Department to locate the fire hydrant.
§ 19-7.4. Criteria for Fire Zone Designation. [1973 Code § 23-25;
Ord. No. 6-11-80]
The fire zones to be established pursuant to subsection 19-7.2 shall be
designated in such areas of such private properties as will insure fire
equipment and other emergency vehicles unobstructed means of ingress
and egress and operation to such properties in the event of fire or other
emergency.
§ 19-7.5. Vehicle Parking Restricted; Posting of Signs. [1973 Code
§ 23-26; Ord. No. 6-11-80]
The parking of motor vehicles on all internal roads providing ingress and
egress to multi-family dwellings shall be limited to no parking on one side of
the road and "No Parking" signs shall be posted at the expense of the owner
in accordance with the direction of the Fire Chief.
§ 19-7.6. Determination and Approval of Location. [1973 Code
§ 23-27; Ord. No. 6-11-80]
The number, location, width, length and marking of such fire zones shall
be determined by the Fire Chief subject to approval by resolution adopted
by the Mayor and Town Council. Such determination and approval shall be
based upon the size, type of construction and location of the building or
buildings involved; the use to which the property, building or buildings is
put; the number of motor vehicles operated or parked upon the property;
the number of persons using and occupying the property, building or
buildings; the existing means of ingress and egress to and from the
property, including the size of the parking lot; and all other factors which
are relevant to the public health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the
Town of Kearny.
§ 19-7.7. Appeal and Hearing. [1973 Code § 23-28; Ord. No.
6-11-80]
If any person shall be aggrieved by the action of the Fire Chief, an appeal
in writing to the Mayor and Town Council may be taken by filing a Notice
§ 19-7.2 KEARNY CODE § 19-7.7
AO:568
of Appeal with the Town Clerk. A hearing shall be had on notice to the
appellant who shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard. After such
hearing the Mayor and Council may affirm, modify or reverse the action of
the Fire Chief.
§ 19-7.8. Authorization of Fire Chief to Regulate Vehicle Operation
and Parking. [1973 Code § 23-29; Ord. No. 6-11-80]
The Fire Chief, subject to the approval by resolution adopted by the Mayor
and Town Council, is further authorized to promulgate regulations limiting,
restricting or prohibiting the operation or parking of motor vehicles within
the fire zones authorized to be established pursuant to subsection 19-7.2.
§ 19-7.9. Enforcement. [1973 Code § 23-30; Ord. No. 6-11-80]
It shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department or his duly
authorized representative, to enforce the provisions of this section.
§ 19-7.10. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 23-31; Ord. No.
6-11-80; New]
Any person violating any of the regulations to be promulgated pursuant to
this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter I, Section 1-5.
§ 19-7.11. Violation of Fire Lane Regulation; Penalty. [1973 Code
§ 23-32; Ord. No. 6-11-80]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any Fire Lane Regulations to be
promulgated pursuant to this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be
subject to a fine of $10 not to exceed $25 fine in the discretion of the
Municipal Judge. These Fire Zones shall also be designated as "Tow Away"
zones.
§ 19-8. BUREAU OF COMBUSTIBLES.
§ 19-8.1. Establishment; Supervision. [1973 Code § 23-1; Ord. No.
2000-0-48 §§ 1, 3]
A Bureau of Combustibles in the Uniformed Fire Department of the Town
of Kearny is hereby established, the Bureau of Combustibles to be operated
under the supervision of the Fire Chief of the Uniformed Fire Department.
§ 19-8.2. Chief Inspector/Fire Official. [1973 Code § 23-2; Ord. No.
2000-0-48 §§ 1, 2]
The position of Chief Inspector/Fire Official of the Bureau of Combustibles
in the Uniformed Fire Department of the Town of Kearny is hereby
established. Appointment to the position shall be made in accordance with
the rules and regulations of the Civil Service Commission of New Jersey.
§ 19-7.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-8.3
AO:569
§ 19-8.3. Qualifications of Chief Inspector/Fire Official. [1973 Code
§ 23-16; Ord. No. 2000-0-48 §§ 1, 2, 10]
Any person appointed to the position of Chief Inspector/Fire Official of the
Bureau of Combustibles must have the following minimum qualifications:
§ 19-8.4. Salary of Chief Inspector/Fire Official. [1973 Code § 23-17;
Ord. No. 2000-0-48, §§ 1, 2, 10]
The Chief Inspector/Fire Official of the Bureau of Combustibles shall be paid
an annual salary.
§ 19-8.5. Duty of Chief Inspector/Fire Official. [1973 Code § 23-4;
Ord. No. 2000-0-48 §§ 1, 2]
It shall be the duty of the Chief Inspector/Fire Official of the Bureau of
Combustibles to enforce all laws and ordinances covering the following:
a. Grade school graduate.
b. Familiarity with fire prevention work and ability to recognize fire
hazards.
c. Knowledge of the laws and ordinances governing the manufacture,
transportation, storage and sale of combustibles and explosives.
d. At least one year of experience at fire prevention work by assignment or
detail.
e. Sound physical condition with no disabling defects.
f. Must be a member of the Fire Prevention Bureau in the Uniformed Fire
Department of the Town of Kearny.
g. Must hold a current New Jersey Fire Official Certificate.
a. The prevention of fires.
b. The storage and use of explosives and flammables.
c. The installation and maintenance of automatic and other private fire
alarm systems and fire extinguishing equipment.
d. The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes.
e. The means and adequacy of exit, in case of fire, from factories, schools,
hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters,
amphitheaters and all other places in which numbers of persons work,
live or congregate from time to time for any purpose.
f. The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires.
§ 19-8.3 KEARNY CODE § 19-8.6
AO:570
§ 19-8.6. Powers and Duties. [1973 Code § 23-5; Ord. No. 2000-0-48
§§ 1, 2]
The Chief Inspector/Fire Official of the Bureau of Combustibles and the
members thereof shall have such other powers and perform such other
duties as are set forth in other subsections of this section and as may be
provided by law.
§ 19-8.7. Members Assigned. [1973 Code § 23-3; Ord. No. 2000-0-48
§§ 1, 3]
The Fire Chief of the Uniformed Fire Department may assign to the Bureau
of Combustibles from time to time such members of the Uniformed Fire
Department as shall be necessary in his judgment.
§ 19-8.8. Promotions. [1973 Code § 23-18; Ord. No. 2000-0-48 § 1]
All promotions within the Bureau of Combustibles shall be limited to
members of the Fire Bureau and no other persons shall be eligible for
promotion in the Bureau of Combustibles.
§ 19-8.9. Annual Report of Bureau. [1973 Code § 23-15; Ord. No.
2000-0-48 §§ 1, 3, 12]
The annual report of the Bureau of Combustibles shall be made on or
before the first day of March of each year and transmitted to the Mayor
and Town Council; it shall contain all proceedings under this section, with
such statistics as the Fire Chief of the Fire Department may wish to include
therein; the Fire Chief of the Fire Department shall also recommend any
amendments to the section which, in his judgment, shall be desirable.
Chapter 20
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
§ 20-1. COLLECTION OF GARBAGE.
§ 20-1.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 83-1; Ord. No. 2013-47]
As used in this section:
ASHES — Shall mean and include the residue of any household fuel after
such fuel has been consumed by fire and used for heating purposes. Fuel
used for steam power plants or similar purposes is classified under "trade
waste."
GARBAGE — Shall mean and include any and all refuse or animal and
vegetable matter which has been used for food by man, and all refuse,
animal and vegetable matter which was intended to be so used, except as
hereinafter provided under "trade waste." "Garbage" shall not include light
soil or manure emanating from chicken markets or from stables.
§ 19-8.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-1.1
AO:571
INCOMBUSTIBLES — Shall mean and include all incombustible rubbish
and other refuse resulting from household operations, such as tin cans,
bottles, crockery, broken dishes and all metal articles of all sizes and
shapes, except as hereinafter provided for under "trade waste."
PROPER RECEPTACLES — Shall mean and include leak-proof receptacles
with tightly fitting lids or securely tied heavy duty opaque plastic bags.
RUBBISH — Shall mean and include paper, wood, rags, leather, rubber,
mattresses, worn-out furniture, old clothes, carpets, old shoes, cut grass
and leaves when tied into bundles, and all other household refuse capable of
being consumed by incineration. It shall not include any material whatever
in the nature of earth, sand, stone, brick, plaster or any other substance
that may accumulate as a result of building operations.
TRADE WASTE — Shall mean and include decayed vegetables, fruits or
condemned food, abandoned or rejected products or by-products and all
other refuse materials from wholesale dealers or manufacturing
establishments. It shall include earth, sand, stone, brick or other substances
that may accumulate as a result of building operations. It shall include
metal, junk and parts of machines and automobiles and all other refuse
of that nature resulting from the prosecution of any business or trade
or industry conducted for profit. It shall include ashes or other residue
resulting from fuel being used for light or power generation.45
§ 20-1.2. Collection by Town; Maximum Quantity Collected at No
Charge. [1973 Code § 83-2]
Only such refuse material that may be classified as garbage, rubbish,
incombustibles and ashes, as hereinabove mentioned and defined, will be
collected and disposed of by the Town at no direct cost to the person or
persons accumulating the same when such refuse material is separated
and placed into proper receptacles or bundles and offered for collection in
the manner prescribed hereinafter. Material classified and designated as
trade waste will only be collected and disposed of at no direct cost to the
person or persons accumulating the same, provided that the quantity does
not exceed four bushels in bulk or 200 pounds in weight in one collection,
and that the person or persons accumulating the same shall separate into
separate receptacles or bundles the different classes of refuse, as specified
in subsection 20-1.3 and 20-1.4 following. The collection and disposal of any
additional amount of trade waste may be done by the Town at a charge to
be fixed by resolution of the Town Council against the person or persons
accumulating the trade waste; or the person or persons may collect and
deliver the trade waste to the point of disposal designated by the Town, and
the trade waste shall be disposed of by the Town at a charge to be fixed
by resolution of the Town Council against the person or persons delivering
same.
45.Editor's Note. For regulations concerning overflowing waste disposal bins, see Chapter 27,
Section 17-2.
§ 20-1.1 KEARNY CODE § 20-1.3
AO:572
§ 20-1.3. Separation of Garbage Required. [1973 Code § 83-3]
Each and every tenant, householder, owner or other person or persons
occupying any dwelling house or other building or portion thereof in the
Town wherein garbage, rubbish, ashes and incombustibles accumulate is
hereby directed and required to collect and separate into receptacles or
bundles, as set forth in subsection 20-1.4 following, the refuse material
accumulating in such dwelling house, building or portion thereof occupied
by such person or persons. Garbage and rubbish may be combined in one
receptacle and ashes and incombustibles in another receptacle, provided
they meet the requirements as set forth in subsection 20-1.4 following, and
also provided that garbage, before being placed in the garbage receptacle,
shall be thoroughly drained and wrapped in paper. Waste material which is
mixed with so much water that it has the consistency of swill shall not be
collected.
§ 20-1.4. Receptacle Requirements; Time for Placement. [1973
Code § 83-4; Ord. No. 6-9-71; Ord. No. 3-14-84; Ord. No. 4-13-88;
Ord. No. 2004-(O)-68; Ord. No. 2008-(O)-47; Ord. No. 2013-47 § 2;
Ord. No. 2017-2]
a. Each and every owner, tenant, householder or other person or persons
occupying any dwelling house or other building or portion thereof in the
Town in which garbage, rubbish, ashes and incombustibles are to be
removed therefrom shall properly provide for such removal by using
proper receptacles for the separation of such refuse material.
Receptacles shall be in sufficient number to contain all the refuse
material emanating from the premises or portion thereof occupied by
the owner, tenant, householder or other person or persons. The
receptacle, when full, shall be of such weight as can be easily handled
by one man, and, for each class of refuse material, shall be as follows:
1. The receptacles in which garbage accumulations are deposited
shall be metallic or plastic watertight vessels of a cylindrical
design, provided with handles, and shall not be less than 10 inches
nor more than 22 inches in diameter and not less than eight inches
nor more than 28 inches in height, and shall not be filled to a
greater height than two inches from the top, and shall have a closefitting
watertight cover which shall at all times be in position so as
to preclude the ingress or escape therefrom of water and flies.
Plastic and paper bags are also accepted but they must be sealed.
2. The receptacles in which rubbish accumulations are deposited shall
be substantial, tight containers, preferably of metal or plastic, and
of a cylindrical design and provided with handles and so
constructed as to prevent spilling of the contents, and shall be not
less than 14 inches nor more than 22 inches in diameter and not
less than 16 inches nor more than 28 inches in height. They shall
not be filled higher than two inches below the top of the receptacle.
If the rubbish material is of such a nature that it cannot be
deposited in a receptacle, it must be securely bundled in such a
§ 20-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-1.4
AO:573
manner as to permit easy handling and to prevent the same from
being scattered. Rubbish and garbage may be combined and put
into the same receptacle designated for garbage, provided that
the rubbish is of such a nature that it can be deposited in the
receptacle in such a manner as to prevent spilling of the contents
and to permit easy handling. Paper must be secured in bundles,
cartons or other packages to permit ease in handling and to
prevent scattering.
3. The receptacles in which ashes are deposited shall be substantial,
tight metal containers of a cylindrical design, provided with
handles on the outside and so constructed as to prevent spilling or
leakage of the contents, and shall not be less than 14 inches nor
more than 18 inches in diameter and not less than 16 inches nor
more than 26 inches in height. They shall not be filled higher than
three inches below the top of the receptacle. Ashes that have been
deposited in a receptacle shall not be wet down so as to cause an
unnecessary weight to the contents.
4. Incombustibles may be combined with ashes and put into the same
receptacle designated for ashes, provided that the incombustibles
are of such a nature that they can be deposited in the receptacle in
such a manner as to permit easy handling and to prevent the
spilling of the contents. Other incombustible material shall be
collected or fastened together in such a manner as to permit ease
of handling and to prevent scattering.
b. The use of barrels, baskets and paper cartons as receptacles for rubbish
will be permitted; however, the same will be collected as rubbish by the
Town and disposed of as such by the Town. The use of barrels, baskets
and paper cartons as receptacles for garbage, ashes and
incombustibles shall not be permitted. Receptacles shall be kept in a
clean and sanitary condition by the person or persons using same. Any
receptacle that is badly broken, dilapidated or in any unsanitary
condition, or otherwise fails to meet the requirements of this section,
shall be classified as refuse material and shall be collected and disposed
of as such by the Town.
c. Each and every owner, tenant, household or other person or persons
shall see that arrangements are made for the placing of such
receptacles in the proper place on the sidewalk near the curb for the
purpose of collection on the collection day specified, and no owner,
tenant, householder or other person or persons shall deposit or cause
or permit to be deposited, or permit to remain on the sidewalk in front
of the property occupied in whole or in part by him, any receptacle or
bundle containing refuse material except on the designated collection
day or six hours prior thereto, nor shall be permit any empty
receptacles to remain upon such sidewalk more than four hours after
the contents have been collected.
§ 20-1.4 KEARNY CODE § 20-1.4
AO:574
§ 20-1.5. Depositing Refuse at Designated Town Dumps. [1973 Code
§ 83-9]
No person or persons shall pile or deposit or cause to be piled or deposited
any refuse material or any accumulation of any offensive or nauseous
substance within the Town except at such places that are designated as
Town dumps, and then only after permission has been granted by the Town
Council.
§ 20-1.6. Disturbing Receptacles or Material Deposited at Dumps.
[1973 Code § 83-5]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons other than an employee of
the Town in the discharge of his duties, or an authorized refuse and waste
material collector or salvager, or the owner, occupant, tenant or person in
charge or in possession of the premises for which the receptacles have been
provided, to deposit any article or thing in the receptacles or pick over, rake
up or in any way disturb the refuse material of whatever nature deposited
in such receptacles or deposited in any dump or other public place. Only a
duly authorized and licensed waste material salvager shall be permitted to
reclaim salvageable portions of the Town refuse.
§ 20-1.7. Fee for Town Truck. [1973 Code § 83-9A; Ord. No.
12-14-83; Ord. No. 4-25-84; Ord. No. 1-27-93; Ord. No. 2002-O-83
§ 13; Ord. No. 2012-22]
Any resident requesting use of a Town owned truck for deposit of refuse or
for cleanouts shall be charged a single fee of $150.
d. For purposes of this section, the following areas shall be deemed to be
commercial streets:
1. Kearny Avenue.
2. Midland Avenue from Kearny Avenue to Davis Avenue.
3. Elm Street from Midland Avenue, north to the existing railroad
tracks.
e. On a commercial street, any owner, tenant, householder or occupant of
premises shall place any refuse or garbage on the street by no later
than 6:00 a.m., but not prior to 5:00 p.m. the night before, for the
morning collection from Monday through Saturdays, holidays excepted.
No refuse or garbage shall be placed or remain on the street after 10:00
a.m. in those areas.
f. On a commercial street, no refuse or garbage shall be on the street
from 10:00 a.m. on Saturday through 5:00 p.m. on Sunday and no
refuse or garbage shall be on the street from 10:00 a.m. on the day
before a holiday through 5:00 p.m. on the holiday.
§ 20-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-1.8
AO:575
§ 20-1.8. Litter Baskets. [Ord. No. 2008-(O)-47]
Litter baskets may not be used for the disposal of household refuse, for
the disposal of sweepings, or for the disposal of commercial refuse by store
keepers.
§ 20-1.9. through 20-1.14. (RESERVED)
§ 20-1.15. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 83-10; New]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 20-2. (RESERVED)
§ 20-3. DUMPSTERS.
§ 20-3.1. Fees. [1973 Code § 83-19; Ord. No. 9-10-80; Ord. No.
1-27-93; Ord. No. 2002-(O)-83 §§ 14, 15; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-17 § 2;
Ord. No. 2004-(O)-52; Ord. No. 2012-22]
There is hereby established the following fee schedule for special services
rendered in connection with disposal of garbage and other solid waste in
the Town of Kearny, to wit:
a. Sidewalk permits $50.
b. Dumpsters:
First 72-hour period $100
Second-72 hour period $50
Additional 7 day periods $200 per week or part
thereof
§ 20-3.2. Certain Dumpsters Prohibited. [1973 Code § 83-19.1; Ord.
No. 9-10-80]
The parking or placing on any street or public property in the Town of
Kearny of a bulk refuse container, commonly known as a dumpster, or any
similar container designed as a portable bulk container for refuse, trash or
demolition debris, with dimensions in excess of five feet wide by 10 feet long
is prohibited.
§ 20-3.3. Permits. [1973 Code § 83-19.1; Ord. No. 9-10-80; Ord. No.
2004-(O)-17 § 2]
Notwithstanding, the Department of Public Works shall validate the
placement of such container through the issuance of a written permit for
such not to exceed 72 hours, but may be renewed from time to time for an
additional seventy-two-hour period for the fee of $25 and, if necessary, for
additional seven-day periods thereafter for the fee of $100 per week.
§ 20-1.8 KEARNY CODE § 20-3.4
AO:576
§ 20-3.4. Placement; Warning Markers. [1973 Code § 83-19.1; Ord.
No. 9-10-80; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-04 § 2]
§ 20-3.5. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 83-19.1; Ord. No.
9-10-80; New]
A person who parks or places, or causes the parking or placing on the
streets of the Town, or other public property, of a dumpster or other
container in violation of this section shall be liable, upon conviction thereof,
of the penalties stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. Each twenty-four-hour
period that a dumpster or container is parked or placed on a street in
violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 20-3.6. Removal by Police Department. [1973 Code § 83-19.1; Ord.
No. 9-10-80]
The Police Department is authorized to provide for the removal of a
dumpster or container parked or placed on any street in violation of this
section, and the owner of the dumpster or container, or the person
responsible for the illegal parking or placement of the dumpster or
container, or both the owner and such other person, shall be responsible for
the cost of removal and, if the dumpster or container is stored on private
property, for the cost of storage.
§ 20-4. CONSTRUCTION SITE DEBRIS.46
a. Each dumpster shall be placed in a position so that it is as close to the
curb as possible. It shall be placed not more than two feet from the curb
and not so close to the intersection so as to obstruct the view of
oncoming traffic. The dumpster shall have placed on it in a conspicuous
place the name of the owner or corporation and a phone number for
same. Any dumpster parked on or along any roadway in the Town of
Kearny shall be equipped with and display markers consisting of all
yellow reflective diamond-shaped panels having a minimum size of 18
inches by 18 inches. These panels shall be mounted at the edge of the
dumpster or container at both ends nearest the path of passing vehicles
and facing the direction of oncoming traffic. These markers shall have a
minimum mounting height of three feet from the bottom of the panels to
the surface of the roadway.
b. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted so as to allow the parking or
placing of vehicles, dumpsters, containers or other objects in the public
right-of-way, at locations otherwise prohibited by Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes.
46.Editor's Note: For additional construction regulations, see Chapter 14, Building and
Housing.
§ 20-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-4.1
AO:577
§ 20-4.1. Responsibility of Owner; Contractor. [1973 Code § 83-28;
Ord. No. 9-10-80]
It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation of litter before,
during or after the completion of any construction or demolition project.
It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or contractor in charge of a
construction site to furnish containers adequate to accommodate flyable or
nonflyable debris or trash at areas convenient to construction areas and
to maintain and empty the receptacles in such a manner and with such a
frequency as to prevent spillage or refuse.
§ 20-5. through § 20-7. (RESERVED)
§ 20-8. RECYCLING.47
§ 20-8.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 114B-1; Ord. No. 9-12-90]
As used in this section:
ALUMINUM BEVERAGE CAN — Shall mean a container entirely of
aluminum and used solely for the packaging of beverages.
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Shall mean any
private establishment including:
COMMINGLED — Shall mean only nonputrescible, recyclable materials
which may be combined only with other non-putrescible recyclable
materials. Examples of materials which may be commingled are: paper,
glass, aluminum, plastic and ferrous or bi-metal containers.
COMPOSTING — Shall mean a process by which organic materials are
turned into humus (similar to topsoil).
CONSUMER BATTERY — Shall mean any battery used in the household
such as mercury, silver oxide, nicad, alkaline, carbon zinc, zinc-air and
lithium batteries.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Shall mean a cardboard container used
primarily for packaging and transporting of products of any type.
DEP — Shall mean the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
a. Manufacturing, retailing and service establishments;
b. Establishments where food is sold for consumption on or off premises;
c. Food distribution and processing establishment; and
d. Professional and nonprofit establishments.
47.Editor's Note: Previous ordinances pertaining to recycling include Ord. No. 8-11-82; Ord.
No. 9-9-87 and Ord. No. 1-11-89]
§ 20-4.1 KEARNY CODE § 20-8.1
AO:578
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean all materials
required to be source separated from the solid waste stream for the purpose
of recycling.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean a one, two or multi-family home, apartment
building, townhouse, condominium or cooperative.
FERROUS CONTAINER — Shall mean cans which are made of tin. The most
common are tin plated steel cans which contain food.
FERROUS SCRAP — Shall mean all metal scrap which contains steel and/
or cast iron. Examples of ferrous scrap are steel railings, steel drums and
automobiles.
FOOD WASTE — Shall mean any edible waste material resulting from the
handling, preparation, processing, cooking or consumption of food.
GLASS CONTAINER — Shall mean bottles and jars made entirely of glass,
commonly used for the storage of food and beverages. Specifically excluded
from this definition are plate glass, windshields, window glass or flat glass,
light bulbs, ceramics, and pyrex glass.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Shall mean all waste defined as hazardous waste
by N.J.S.A. 13:1E-38 and 1E-51 and N.J.A.C. 7:26-8.1 et seq.
HIGH GRADE PAPER — Shall mean white office paper, white copy paper,
white computer printout paper, white bond paper and white typing paper.
LEAD ACID BATTERY — Shall mean any battery used in an automobile.
LEAVES — Shall mean foliage from plants and trees only.
METAL — Shall mean cans, other than aluminum, consisting entirely of
steel, tin or bi-metal.
MIXED PAPER — Shall mean any combination of newspaper, high grade
paper, and non-white paper.
NEWSPAPER — Shall mean paper commonly referred to as newsprint and
distributed at stated intervals usually daily or weekly, having printed
thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and other matter
of public interest. The term "newspaper" does not include magazines and
any other paper products.
NONFERROUS SCRAP — Shall mean all other metals which do not contain
steel and/or cast iron. Aluminum, copper, lead and brass are the most
common nonferrous metals. Bi-metal cans (steel side and bottom with an
aluminum top) are also included.
PALLET — Shall mean a portable wooden platform used for transporting
and storing materials.
PERSON — Shall mean any natural person, corporation, partnership or
organization.
PLASTICS — Shall mean all forms of soft and/or hard plastic used for any
purpose whatsoever.
§ 20-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-8.1
AO:579
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS —
RECYCLING — Shall mean the process by which designated materials,
which would otherwise become solid waste, are separated, collected,
processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw
materials or products.
SCRAP METAL — Shall mean discarded products made of steel, aluminum
or other materials.
SCRAP TIRES — Shall mean used passenger car or truck tires.
SOLID WASTE — Shall mean garbage and rubbish collected for disposal.
SOURCE SEPARATION — Shall mean the separation of designated
recyclables from the solid waste stream by the person generating such
materials.
USED OIL — Shall mean oil that is drained from automobiles, lawn mowers
and motorcycles.
WHITE GOODS (APPLIANCES) — Shall mean household or commercial
appliances made of steel or any other form of metal. All white goods such as
refrigerators, stoves, washing machines, dryers, and air conditioners, other
household or commercial appliances must have all locking doors removed.
WOOD WASTE — Shall mean tree stumps (trunk, limbs and branches from)
and land clearing activities.
YARD WASTE — Shall mean grass clippings, hedge trimmings, twigs, sticks,
branches or shrubbery.
§ 20-8.2. Programs Established; Requirements. [1973 Code
§ 114B-2; Ord. No. 9-12-90]
a. Municipal and State government facilities;
b. Religious, educational and health care facilities; and
Facilities occupied by private civic organization and nonprofit
organizations.
c.
a. The following mandatory recycling programs are established in the
Town of Kearny.
1. A program applicable to dwelling units which shall require the
composting of leaves and the separation of newspapers, aluminum
beverage cans, glass food and beverage containers, metal
household food and beverage containers and plastic milk and soda
containers.
(a) In the case of apartment houses, townhouses, condominiums,
cooperatives and other multi-family dwellings, the owner,
manager or superintendent of the multi-family units shall
insure that a special place is designated for the storage of
newspapers, glass, aluminum cans and plastic soda and milk
§ 20-8.1 KEARNY CODE § 20-8.2
AO:580
§ 20-8.3. Separation Required. [1973 Code § 114B-3; Ord. No.
9-12-90]
containers and other designated recyclables. All lessees of
those dwelling units shall be required to separate such items
and place them in the designated place. The owner or manager
of the multi-family units shall notify the Department of Public
Works Superintendent of the location of the storage area. The
location is to be subject to the approval of the Superintendent
of Public Works, the Recycling Coordinator, the Fire Inspector
and the Kearny Board of Health.
2. A program applicable to commercial and industrial establishments
which shall require the separation of designated recyclable
materials such as clean corrugated cardboard, high grade paper,
mixed paper and glass and aluminum containers for recycling.
3. A program applicable to public and private institutions which shall
require the separation of designated recyclable materials such as
high grade paper, mixed paper and clean corrugated cardboard for
recycling.
4. Any tavern or restaurant having a license for the sale of alcoholic
beverages shall be required to have a private recycler remove
recyclables or must provide that they be brought to the Kearny
Recycling Center and deposited in the appropriately marked
container for each designated recyclable material.
a. All owners, lessees or occupants of dwelling units, commercial and
industrial establishments and public and private institutions shall
dispose of solid waste and separate designated recyclable materials in
accordance with this subsection.
1. Leaves.
(a) Leaves may be recycled by composting on the property of the
owner, lessee or occupant or by placing them at the curb for
collection by the Town of Kearny between September 1st and
December 31st.
2. Newspapers.
(a) Newspaper shall be tied securely in bundles with twine, rope
or cord to facilitate handling and insure that it will not be
windblown or distributed onto the public streets. A bundle
shall not exceed 30 pounds or a height of more than 12 inches
each.
(b) Under no circumstances shall newspapers be placed in plastic
or brown supermarket type bags.
§ 20-8.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-8.3
AO:581
(c) Bundles shall be placed for collection at the curbside on
designated collection days or by transporting them to
designated drop-off sites.
(d) Newspapers discarded by dwelling units may be used to wrap
solid waste and discarded with regular solid waste.
3. Glass Containers.
(a) Glass containers shall be rinsed clean of all residue.
(b) They shall be placed in a 20 to 30 gallon reusable container
with a weight not exceeding 60 pounds. Under no
circumstances shall glass containers be placed at the curb for
collection in plastic or paper bags.
(c) Glass may not be broken for the purpose of filling any
container, but accidentally broken glass will be accepted.
(d) Containers shall be placed at the curbside for collection on
designated days or by transporting them to designated drop-off
sites.
(e) Glass containers discarded by dwelling units only may be used
to dispose of non-hazardous liquid wastes and discarded with
solid waste.
4. Aluminum Beverage Cans.
(a) Aluminum beverage cans shall be placed in reusable 20 to 30
gallon containers at the curbside for collection on designated
days or by transporting them to designated drop-off sites.
Under no circumstances shall aluminum beverage cans be
placed at the curb for collection in plastic or paper bags.
(b) Containers or receptacles containing aluminum cans for
recycling shall not exceed 60 pounds in weight.
(c) Aluminum containers discarded by dwelling units only may be
used to dispose of nonhazardous liquid wastes and discarded
with solid waste.
5. Household Metal Food and Beverage Cans.
(a) Nonaluminum metal cans used for the storage of household
food and beverages shall be placed in reusable 20 to 30 gallon
containers at the curbside for collection on designated days or
by transporting them to designated drop-off sites. Under no
circumstances shall household metal food and beverage cans
be placed at the curb for collection in plastic or paper bags.
(b) Containers or receptacles containing metal household food or
beverage cans for recycling shall not exceed 60 pounds in
weight.
§ 20-8.3 KEARNY CODE § 20-8.3
AO:582
§ 20-8.4. Failure to Separate Recyclables; Refusal to Collect. [1973
Code § 114B-4; Ord. No. 9-12-90]
§ 20-8.5. Collection by Authorized Persons. [1973 Code § 114B-5;
Ord. No. 9-12-90]
§ 20-8.6. Collection by Unauthorized Persons Prohibited; Penalties.
[1973 Code 114B-6; Ord. No. 9-12-90]
(c) Metal household food or beverage containers discarded by
dwelling units only may be used to dispose of nonhazardous
liquid wastes and discarded with solid waste.
6. Oil Reclamation.
(a) Any resident may bring up to five gallons of used oil, as defined
in this section, at a time to the Town of Kearny recycling center.
Oil must be poured into the used oil tank.
(b) Service stations and oil retailers shall dispose of used oil
through a DEP-licensed hazardous waste hauler.
Documentation of any such transactions shall be submitted to
the Recycling Coordinator bi-annually 20 days following July
31st and December 31st of each year.
(c) Service stations and retailers who service motor vehicles shall
accept oil from the general public in accordance with the DEP
regulations regarding acceptance of used motor oil. Any
person may bring up to five gallons at a time to a retailer or
service station.
a. The Town of Kearny or its agents so designated by the General
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or the Recycling
Coordinator who are collecting solid waste generated within the Town
of Kearny may refuse to collect solid waste from any other person who
has clearly failed to source separate recyclables designated under an
applicable section of this section.
a. The Town of Kearny may use municipal personnel to collect the
recyclable materials set forth herein at the curbside and/or collection of
pick-up sites to be determined, and shall sell the recyclable materials if
a market exists therefor, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.
b. The Town of Kearny may elect to enter into an agreement with the
qualified persons, partnerships or corporations for the purpose of
authorizing them to collect all recyclable materials, or portions thereof,
at curbside or collection or pick-up sites, as may be determined to be in
the best interests of the municipality.
a. Recyclable material as defined herein shall be the property of the Town
of Kearny once placed at the curbside or at designated collection or
pick-up sites authorized by the Town of Kearny or its designated agent.
§ 20-8.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-8.6
AO:583
§ 20-8.7. Donation or Sale of Recyclables by Owners. [1973 Code
§ 114B-7; Ord. No. 9-12-90]
§ 20-8.8. Collection Schedule. [1973 Code § 114B-8; Ord. No.
9-12-90]
§ 20-8.9. Verification of Private Recycling Tonnage. [1973 Code
§ 114B-9; Ord. No. 9-12-90]
§ 20-8.10. Enforcement. [1973 Code § 114B-10; Ord. No. 9-12-90]
§ 20-8.11. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 114B-11; Ord. No.
9-12-90; New]
b. Each collection by an unauthorized person shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense and such unauthorized person shall be liable, upon
conviction thereof, to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
a. Anything herein to the contrary, notwithstanding, any owner, lessee or
occupant of a dwelling unit, public or private institution, or commercial
or industrial establishment, may donate or sell the recyclable materials
as defined herein to any person, partnership or corporation, whether or
not operating for profit. However, the person, partnership or
corporation shall not pick up the recyclable materials at curbside or at
any designated collection or pick-up sites authorized by the
municipality or its designated agent.
a. The Recycling Coordinator shall designate the day/days and collection
site/sites shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation and
other such publications as may be deemed necessary by the Recycling
Coordinator at least 15 days before the first scheduled collection date.
Notice may also be given by mailing or delivering "flyers" or
"newsletters" to each dwelling unit, public or private institution and
commercial and industrial establishment within the Town of Kearny.
a. Any person participating in a recycling program within the Town of
Kearny which is not operated by the Town or its authorized agent, shall
submit bi-annual verifications of the tonnage of materials recycled.
b. Such bi-annual documentation of tonnage shall be submitted to the
Recycling Coordinator no later than 20 days following July 31st and
December 31st of each year. Failure to provide this information may
cause the program to be terminated at the option of the Recycling
Coordinator.
a. Members of the Kearny Police Department, sanitation inspectors of the
Kearny Health Department and Recycling Coordinator, the
Superintendent of Public Works and general supervisors and foreman
of the Department of Public Works are authorized to enforce this
section and amendments thereto.
§ 20-8.6 KEARNY CODE § 20-8.11
AO:584
§ 20-9. SANITARY LANDFILLS; INCINERATORS.
§ 20-9.1. Incinerator Method; Sanitary Landfill. [1973 Code § 83-11]
Beginning March 31, 1959, all trash and garbage collected within or
without the Town of Kearny and disposed of within the Town shall be
disposed of by the sanitary landfill or incinerator method in accordance
with the standards for the design, operation and maintenance of sanitary
landfills and incinerators contained in the State Sanitary Code.
§ 20-9.2. Standards to Prevail. [1973 Code § 83-12]
In the event that there is any inconsistency between this section and the
State Sanitary Code as to the time within which such methods of disposal
shall be established, this section shall prevail.
§ 20-9.3. Definitions. [1973 Code § 83-13]
As used in this section:
ASHES — Shall mean the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or
other combustible materials.
GARBAGE — Shall mean animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
processing, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, market wastes
and wastes from the handling, storage and sale of food and produce.
HAZARDOUS WASTES — Shall mean hazardous solids and liquids such
as explosives, radioactive material and materials which are subject to
spontaneous combustion or which if ignited burn with intense heat or create
dense smoke.
a. Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this section shall
first receive a warning before any monetary fine is imposed. The
warning shall be made by the Recycling Coordinator or any other
person given the authority to enforce this section. His or her solid waste
shall be marked as not properly separated and shall be removed from
the street by the person failing to comply. The recyclable materials shall
be removed from the solid waste by the person and placed at the curb
for collection on the next collection day in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
b. Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this section or any
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto shall be liable, upon
conviction thereof, to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5,
except that the maximum fine and penalty for failure to comply with this
chapter and regulations issued pursuant thereto shall not exceed $25
for the first violation and no less than $25 nor more than $500 for the
second violation. The continuation of such violation, and each violation
or the continuation of such violation, shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense, punishable as provided for herein.
§ 20-8.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-9.3
AO:585
REFUSE — Shall mean all solid wastes (except body wastes) rubbish, ashes,
street cleanings and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Shall mean solid wastes (excluding ashes) consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes such as paper, cardboard, tin cans,
yard clippings, wood, grass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
SEWAGE SYSTEM RESIDUE — Shall mean any sludge or solids resulting
from the operation of any sewage treatment plant or individual sewage
disposal system.
§ 20-9.4. Dumping Regulated. [1973 Code § 83-14]
It shall be unlawful in the Town of Kearny for any person, firm or
corporation to throw, cast or place any garbage, waste, papers, ashes,
sewage system residue, refuse, junk, rubbish, circulars, glasses, bottles,
cans, dead animals or any other type of waste matter on any property, public
or private, within the limits of the Town of Kearny, except in such areas as
may be officially designated and permitted for dumping by the Governing
Body of the Town of Kearny.
§ 20-9.5. Dumping Limited to Landfill Areas. [1973 Code § 83-15]
It shall be unlawful in the Town of Kearny for any person, firm or
corporation to throw, cast or place any garbage, waste, papers, ashes,
sewage system residue, hazardous materials, refuse, junk, rubbish,
circulars, glasses, bottles, cans, dead animals or any other type of waste
matter on any property, public or private, within the limits of the Town of
Kearny, except in such areas as may be designated as an officially approved
landfill by the Council of the Town of Kearny.
§ 20-9.6. Use of Landfill by Nonresidents. [1973 Code § 83-16]
It shall be unlawful in the Town of Kearny for any person not residing in
the Town, or for any firm or corporation not having its main office in the
Town of Kearny, to dump any waste matter as defined in this section in, on
or upon an officially approved landfill without first securing permission from
the Town Council.
§ 20-9.7. Wastes Originating Beyond Town Limits. [1973 Code
§ 83-17]
It shall be unlawful in the Town of Kearny for any person to throw, cast
or place any waste matter, as defined in this section, originating from
beyond and outside the limits of the Town of Kearny without first securing
permission from the Town Council provided, however, that the prohibitions
of this subsection shall not apply to prohibit the disposal of that amount
of solid waste on a daily basis within the limits of the Town of Kearny
as determined by a survey of the Hackensack Meadowlands Development
Commission, which survey was mandated by the provisions of N.J.S.A.
§ 20-9.3 KEARNY CODE § 20-9.7
AO:586
12:17-10, and which survey indicated a daily disposal of 2,467.64 tons per
day.
§ 20-9.8. Landfill Operation Hours. [1973 Code § 83-17.1; Ord. No.
3-27-74]
All sanitary landfill operations shall be permitted to be operated in the Town
of Kearny only between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., prevailing
time, daily except Sundays.
§ 20-9.9. Acceptance of Waste During Permitted Hours Only. [1973
Code § 83-17.2; Ord. No. 3-27-74]
No sanitary landfill operator shall accept solid waste for disposal other
than between permitted hours of operation specified herein, except upon
written permission of the Chief Engineer of the Hackensack Meadowlands
Development Commission.
§ 20-9.10. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 83-18; Ord. No.
10-26-93; New]
Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. For a
continuing violation, each day shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 20-10. RECLAMATION SALVAGERS.48
§ 20-10.1. License Required. [1973 Code § 83-6]
Annually, each and every person, firm or corporation desiring to engage in
the business of reclaiming salvageable parts of refuse material deposited
at the Town dumps or Town incinerator shall apply to the Town Council
or other authorized Town official for a permit to do so at a fee fixed by
resolution of the Town Council during the current calendar year. No such
permission shall be granted until and unless the applicant has satisfied the
Town Council or other Town official of the sufficiency of the methods he
intends to use.
§ 20-10.2. Compliance. [1973 Code § 83-7]
Every collector and salvager of refuse material shall conform to the
ordinances of the Town of Kearny and the regulations of the Board of Health
and of the Street Department and the Town Engineer governing collection,
disposal and salvaging of refuse material.
48.Editor's Note: For additional regulations concerning business licenses, see Chapter 5.
§ 20-9.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-10.3
AO:587
§ 20-10.3. Revocation of Collectors' and Salvagers' Licenses. [1973
Code § 83-8]
The Town Council reserves the right to rescind at any time any permit or
license given to refuse collectors and salvagers when in its judgment it will
be to the best interest and welfare of the Town of Kearny. This does not
apply to permits issued by the Board of Health for the collection of scrap
meat.
Chapter 21
SEWERS
§ 21-1. USE REGULATIONS.
§ 21-1.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 119-1; Ord. No. 5-11-77]
As used in this chapter:
FLOATABLE OIL — Shall mean oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that
it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat
if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY — Shall mean a charge to an industrial user
based on its use of PVSC facilities to repay the capital cost outlay of the
Federal share given the PVSC under the provisions of applicable Federal
law allocable to the treatment of the wastes from the industrial user.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Shall mean any nongovernmental user of PVSC
facilities identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual 1972, as
amended and supplemented under Divisions A, B, D, E or I. A user may be
excluded if it is determined that it introduces primarily segregated sanitary
wastes.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE OR WASTES —
MAJOR INDUSTRY — Shall mean an industrial user of PVSC facilities that
has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average workday; has in its waste
a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts; or is found by the USEPA, the NJDEP or
PVSC to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, in the PVSC treatment works or upon the quality of
the effluent from the PVSC treatment works.
NATURAL OUTLET — Shall mean an outlet, including storm sewers and
combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
The wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business, as distinct
from domestic or sanitary wastes.
a.
The liquid waste from an industrial process, as distinct from sanitary
waste; all wastes except stormwater and sanitary wastes.
b.
§ 20-10.3 KEARNY CODE § 21-1.1
AO:588
body of surface or ground water, including the Passaic River or any of its
tributaries.
NJDEP — Shall mean the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
NPDES — Shall mean the national pollution discharge elimination system.
pH — Shall mean the reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion
concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams,
per liter of solution. Neutral water has a pH value of seven (a hydrogen
concentration of 10-7). Lower pH's are acid; higher pH's are alkaline.
PRETREATMENT — Shall mean treatment given by the industry to
industrial waste prior to its discharge, directly or indirectly, to the PVSC
facilities in order to remove illegal and/or undesirable constituents or to
reduce the strength of the waste.
PUBLIC SEWER — Shall mean a common sewer controlled by a
governmental agency, public utility or the municipality.
PVSC — Shall mean the Passaic Valley Sewerage Commissioners.
SANITARY SEWER — Shall mean a sewer that carries liquid and watercarried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, together with minor quantities of ground-, storm- and surface
waters that are not admitted intentionally.
SANITARY WASTE — Shall mean waste derived principally from dwellings,
office buildings and sanitary conveniences; when segregated from industrial
wastes, may come from industrial plants or commercial enterprises.
SEWAGE — Shall mean the spent water of a community. The preferred term
is "wastewater."
SEWER — Shall mean a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage
water.
SLUG — Shall mean any discharge of water or wastewater which, in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds, for
any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the
average twenty-four-hour concentration or flow during normal operation.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes called STORM SEWER) — Shall mean drain or
sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water or unpolluted
water from any source.
STRENGTH OF WASTE — Shall mean a measurement of suspended solids
and/or biochemical oxygen demand and/or chemical oxygen demand and/or
any other parameter determined by PVSC as a fair indicator of the relative
use, other than volumetric, of PVSC facilities by industrial wastes.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Shall mean total suspended matter that either
floats on the surface of or is in suspension in water, wastewater or other
liquids and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in
Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater and
referred to as "nonfilterable residue."
§ 21-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.1
AO:589
TOXIC WASTES IN TOXIC AMOUNTS — Shall mean as defined by the
USEPA in 40 CFR 129 (38 F.R. 24342, 9-7-73) and any superseding
revisions.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Shall mean water of quality equal to or better
than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge
to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
USEPA — Shall mean the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
USER CHARGE — Shall mean a charge to users consisting of two parts, the
first part established by the PVSC based on volume and, where applicable,
on strength and/or flow rate to pay for the use of the PVSC facilities and the
second part established by the municipality to pay for the use of the local
sewer system and to pay for administration of the billing and collection of
the funds.
WASTEWATER — Shall mean the spent water of a community. From the
standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and watercarried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater
that may be present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — Shall mean the structures, equipment and
processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial
wastes and dispose of the effluent.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — Shall mean the PVSC facilities.
§ 21-1.2. Treatment Required Prior to Discharge; Permit. [1973
Code § 119-2; Ord. No. 5-11-77]
It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the
municipality any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided and where a national pollution
discharge elimination system permit has been obtained from the
appropriate governmental authority, where required.
§ 21-1.3. Permit Required. [1973 Code § 119-3; Ord. No. 5-11-77]
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a permit from the appropriate municipal official.
§ 21-1.4. Application for Connection to Sanitary Sewer. [1973 Code
§ 119-4; Ord. No. 5-11-77]
Application for sanitary sewer connections for dwellings, groups of
dwellings or industrial or commercial establishments with only sanitary
waste shall be made directly to the municipality. A fee shall be paid to the
municipality to process the application as otherwise provided by ordinances
of the municipality. The Governing Body of the municipality shall designate
§ 21-1.1 KEARNY CODE § 21-1.4
AO:590
some suitable person to maintain a record of the number of sanitary
applications and connections that are added and removed from the system
and shall make an annual report to the Passaic Valley Sewerage
Commissioners no later than February 1 of each year. When a direct
connection to a PVSC sewer is requested by the applicant, the request
shall first be endorsed with the approval of the Governing Body of the
municipality and then submitted to the PVSC for their action.
§ 21-1.5. Application for Connection to Wastewater Facilities. [1973
Code § 119-5; Ord. No. 5-11-77]
Applications for connections must be made and approved before a
certificate of occupancy may be issued. The application shall be made to
the municipality by the industry that generates the waste. However, the
application must be signed by the owner of the property whereon the
industry is located. After approval of the application by the municipality, the
application shall be forwarded to the PVSC for classification and issuance of
the permit by the PVSC.
§ 21-1.6. Industrial Sewer Waste Revision Application. [1973 Code
§ 119-6; Ord. No. 5-11-77]
Any existing industrial user which proposes to make any change in its
facility or its processing which significantly affects the quality or the
quantity of its discharge into the system shall submit to the municipality
an industrial sewer waste revision application showing the contemplated
changes. Any new tenant or occupant of an existing industrial user shall
submit an industrial sewer waste revision application. The application, if
approved by the municipality, shall be sent to the PVSC, accompanied by
the written approval of the municipality. Existing industrial users that have
applied for permits may continue their discharge until their application has
been processed by the PVSC, except for any discharges which constitute
prohibited waste as otherwise provided in this chapter or unless notified by
the PVSC to cease and desist their discharge. No certificate of occupancy
shall be issued for an industrial use until an industrial permit has been
issued by the PVSC, and no person shall occupy any building or structure
for the purpose of a new industrial use until an industrial permit has been
issued by the PVSC.
§ 21-1.7. Classification of Industrial Users. [1973 Code § 119-7; Ord.
No. 5-11-77]
a. Industrial users shall be classified by the PVSC as follows:
1. Category I:
(a) A Class I-A permit shall not be issued to an industry defined as
a major industry and when issued shall allow the industry to
discharge with no modifications or pretreatment of flow.
§ 21-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.7
AO:591
§ 21-1.8. Appeal of Classification. [1973 Code § 119-8; Ord. No.
5-11-77]
(b) A Class I-B permit is one issued to an industry classified as a
major industry. This permit shall allow the industry to
discharge with no modifications or pretreatment of flow.
However, the PVSC may require the installation of monitoring
equipment.
2. Category II:
(a) A Class II-A permit shall allow an industry to continue to
discharge pretreated wastes in accordance with standards
established in the permit.
(b) A Class II-B permit shall allow an industry to continue to
discharge, subject to change of characteristics of its waste by
pretreatment or other means, in accordance with a schedule as
established by the PVSC in the permit.
3. Category III: The permit is denied and the discharge of prohibited
materials must be halted or modified by a date established by the
PVSC and in accordance with conditions contained in the permit
denial.
b. The PVSC classification of an application is subject to change by the
PVSC, upon written notification from the PVSC to the applicant by
certified mail. Any change shall be accompanied by a detailed
explanation of the reason for the change.
a. Any industry aggrieved by a permit classification by the PVSC shall
have a right to appeal to the PVSC. Such an administrative appeal shall
be taken within 30 days of notification by the PVSC to the industry of its
decision. The notice of appeal shall be delivered personally to the
offices of the PVSC at 600 Wilson Avenue, Newark, New Jersey, or shall
be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested. The taking of an
appeal shall not stay the provisions of a Class III denial. During the time
of appeal, however, the Class II permits shall be stayed. However, the
staying shall not release any industry from meeting any requirements of
any schedule set by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection or the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
b. Upon the filing of an appeal, the PVSC shall set the date and time for a
hearing before the Commissioners. The applicant shall have the right to
present evidence, shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall have the right of cross-examination. Upon the conclusion of the
hearing, the Commissioners shall make findings of fact and conclusions.
§ 21-1.7 KEARNY CODE § 21-1.9
AO:592
§ 21-1.9. Proper Submission of Application. [1973 Code § 119-9;
Ord. No. 5-11-77]
All applications for industrial permits shall be submitted on forms to be
supplied by the PVSC and shall comply with the instructions on the forms.
§ 21-1.10. Costs for Installation and Connection; Compliance. [1973
Code § 119-10; Ord. No. 5-11-77]
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the applicant, and the applicant shall
indemnify the municipality or the PVSC from any loss or damage that
may be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. All sewer
connections shall be in accordance with the requirements of the
municipality as otherwise provided by ordinance. In the case of the
connection into a PVSC sewer, the connection shall be in accordance with
the conditions contained in the approval of the PVSC.
§ 21-1.11. Certain Connections Restricted. [1973 Code § 119-11;
Ord. No. 5-11-77]
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or drain which, in turn, is connected directly or indirectly to
a public sanitary sewer, unless approved by the municipality for the purpose
of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
§ 21-1.12. Industrial Survey Form. [1973 Code § 119-12; Ord. No.
5-11-77]
In addition to the application for the permit as hereinabove provided, each
industrial user must complete an industrial survey form which will be
supplied by the PVSC and, from time to time, shall update the form when
required by the PVSC.
§ 21-1.13. Automatic Monitoring System. [1973 Code § 119-13; Ord.
No. 5-11-77]
Whenever an industry is classified as a major industry, it shall install an
approved, sealed, automatic monitoring system if required by the PVSC.
§ 21-1.14. Discharge of Uncontaminated Water. [1973 Code
§ 119-14; Ord. No. 5-11-77]
No uncontaminated water shall be discharged into the PVSC system except
with the prior written consent of the municipality and the PVSC. There will
be two separate provisions, one for municipalities with separate systems
and one for municipalities with combined systems.
§ 21-1.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.15
AO:593
§ 21-1.15. Adherence to Federal Pretreatment Standards. [1973
Code § 119-15; Ord. No. 5-11-77]
When pretreatment standards are adopted by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency for any given class of industries, then any
industry within that class must conform to the United States Environmental
Protection Agency timetable for adherence to pretreatment requirements,
as well as all other applicable requirements promulgated by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency, in accordance with the provisions
of the law. Additionally, such industries shall comply with such more
stringent standards necessitated by local conditions as determined from
time to time by the PVSC.
§ 21-1.16. Access to Facilities. [1973 Code § 119-6; Ord. No.
5-11-77]
All industrial users shall provide immediate access to its facilities at any
time during normal working hours or at any other time that there is a
discharge into the PVSC system or into any waters under the jurisdiction
of the PVSC. Access shall be for the purpose of checking the quality of
the discharge, taking samples and making tests of the discharge or for
the purpose of permitting enforcement of this section. The access shall be
made available to the employees of the PVSC, the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection, the United States Environmental Protection
Agency and/or the municipality. All users shall provide access to property
and premises for inspection for the purpose of determining if there is any
violation of the terms or provisions of this section.
§ 21-1.17. Prohibited Wastes. [1973 Code § 119-17; Ord. No.
5-11-77]
The following wastes are prohibited and may never by discharged into
wastewater facilities of the municipality and the PVSC:
a. Wastes that may create a fire or explosion hazard in the sewer or
wastewater facility, such as gasoline, fuel oil, cleaning solvents, etc.
b. Wastes that may impair or cause to be impaired the hydraulic capacity
of the sewer system, such as ashes, sand, metal, precipitates, etc.
c. Wastes that may create a hazard to people, the sewer system, the
treatment process or the receiving water, such as dangerous levels of
toxic materials.
d. Wastes at a flow rate which is excessive over a relatively short time
period so that there is a treatment process upset and substantial loss of
treatment efficiency.
e. Wastes below a pH of five, unless the line is designated to accommodate
such waste.
§ 21-1.15 KEARNY CODE § 21-1.17
AO:594
§ 21-1.18. Wastes Allowed by Special Permission. [1973 Code
§ 119-18; Ord. No. 5-11-77]
The following wastes may not be discharged without special permission
from the PVSC, upon a determination by the PVSC that the discharge would
not be detrimental to the system:
§ 21-1.19. Sampling Point. [1973 Code § 119-19; Ord. No. 5-11-77]
Each major industrial user shall construct or otherwise have available a
sampling point for sampling wastewater before it enters the municipal
sewer system. Other industrial users may be required to construct such
sampling point, if ordered so to do by the municipality or the PVSC.
§ 21-1.20. Discharges Causing Damage; Interference with
Treatment Process; Violation of Permit. [1973 Code § 119-20; Ord.
No. 5-11-77]
No discharge into the wastewater facilities of the PVSC shall be permitted
from any source which causes physical damage, interferes with the
treatment process or results in a violation of effluent limitations or other
conditions contained in the national pollution discharge elimination system
permit to discharge issued to the PVSC by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
§ 21-1.21. Observation, Sampling and Measurement of Wastes.
[1973 Code § 119-21; Ord. No. 5-11-77]
When required by the municipality, the USEPA, the NJDEP or the PVSC,
the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial
wastes shall install a suitable structure, together with such necessary
meters and other appurtenances to the building sewer, to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. Such structure, when
f. Any discharge of radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the PVSC in
compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
a. Any discharge in excess of 150° F. [65° C.].
b. Any discharge containing more than 100 milligrams per liter of mineral
oil or grease.
c. Any discharge containing floatable oil or grease.
d. Any discharge of heavy metals or any other toxic materials in toxic
amounts, which amounts are to be established by the PVSC.
e. Any discharge quantities of flow or concentration which shall constitute
a slug.
f. Wastes with a pH outside the limits of 5.0 to 9.0.
§ 21-1.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.21
AO:595
required, shall be accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in
accordance with plans approved by the governmental agency requiring it.
The structure shall be installed by the applicant at his expense and shall be
maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 21-1.22. Compliance Determination. [1973 Code § 119-22; Ord.
No. 5-11-77]
All persons subject to this section shall be required to provide information
to the municipality and the PVSC as needed to determine compliance with
this section. These requirements may include:
§ 21-1.23. Measurements; Tests; Analysis. [1973 Code § 119-23;
Ord. No. 5-11-77]
All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination
of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health
Association, or other method or procedure as may be approved by the
PVSC. Sampling methods, locations, times, durations and frequencies are
to be determined on an individual basis, subject to the approval of the
municipality and/or the PVSC.
§ 21-1.24. Compliance with Cost Regulations. [1973 Code § 119-24;
Ord. No. 5-11-77]
All users shall be required to comply with the requirement of user charge
regulations and industrial cost recovery system regulations to be adopted
by the PVSC in accordance with the requirements of the USEPA. The
effective date for the implementation of user cost regulations and industrial
cost recovery system regulations shall be established by resolution of the
a. Wastewater discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time
period.
b. Chemical analyses of wastewater;
c. Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
d. Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or other
materials important to sewer use control.
e. A plot plan of sewers on the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
f. Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
g. Details of systems to prevent and control the loss of materials through
spills to the municipal sewer.
§ 21-1.21 KEARNY CODE § 21-1.24
AO:596
PVSC. The effective date shall be certified by the PVSC, and the written
certification shall be filed in the office of the Municipal Clerk.
§ 21-1.25. User Charges for Industrial or Tax Exempt Users. [1973
Code § 119-24A; Ord. No. 5-26-83]
All industrial or tax exempt users shall be charged directly for sewage use
in an amount as set forth in PVSC report UBC 640 (Direct Bill User Control
Report) which report shall be open for public inspection at the request of
any such user.
§ 21-1.26. Damage to Wastewater Facilities. [1973 Code § 119-25;
Ord. No. 5-11-77]
No person shall intentionally break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the
wastewater facilities.
§ 21-1.27. Administration. [1973 Code § 119-26; Ord. No. 5-11-11]
The Governing Body shall appoint or designate some suitable person to
administer this section.
§ 21-1.28. Compliance with PVSC Regulations. [1973 Code § 119-27;
Ord. No. 5-11-77]
All users of the wastewater facilities shall comply with the requirements of
the written rules and regulations of the PVSC which have been adopted and
which from time to time shall be adopted, which regulations shall become
effective upon the filing of certified copies in the office of the Municipal
Clerk after the effective date of this section.
§ 21-1.29. Termination of Permit or Authority to Discharge. [1973
Code § 119-28; Ord. No. 5-11-77]
Violations of any of the provisions of this section or any permit issued under
the authority of this section may result in the termination of the permit and/
or the termination of the authority to discharge into the system.
§ 21-1.30. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 119-29; Ord. No.
5-11-77; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
Each and every day in which a violation of any provisions of this section
exists shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 21-2. DISCHARGE REGULATIONS.
§ 21-1.24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.1
AO:597
§ 21-2.1. Purpose. [1973 Code § 118-1]
The following regulations as to the use of the sewer system serving the
Kearny Sewage-Treatment Plant are essential to prevent hazard to human
beings, damage to the sewers, treatment plant structures and equipment,
and other facilities in the system or impairment of the efficiency of the
treatment operation with reflected failure to meet required standards of
agencies having jurisdiction thereof.
§ 21-2.2. Prohibited Discharges. [1973 Code § 118-2; Ord. No.
11-8-78]
a. Stormwater Excluded. No person, firm or corporation shall discharge or
cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water subject
to the other provisions of this section, or unpolluted industrial process
waters into the aforementioned sanitary sewer system.
b. Stormwater Discharged to Other Outlets. Stormwater and all other
unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into such sewers as are
specifically designed as storm sewers, into a natural outlet approved by
the Town Engineer or the Municipal Enforcement Committee as
hereinafter defined. Uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted
industrial process water shall be discharged into a storm sewer or
natural outlet upon the approval of the Town Engineer or the Municipal
Enforcement Committee.
c. Material Excluded. Except as hereinafter provided, no person, firm or
corporation shall discharge or cause to be discharged, or allow to run,
leak or escape into the aforementioned sewer system, or into any
private sewer connected with the aforementioned sewer system, any of
the following described materials, wastes or substances, except such
small quantities as may be presented in normal household wastes:
1. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other explosive liquids,
solids or gases.
2. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or other poisonous
substances or gases in sufficient quantities, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure any sewage-treatment
structure or equipment; or which constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, or create a public nuisance or interfere with the
beneficiary uses of the receiving waters.
3. Any waters or wastes having a corrosive property capable of
causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of
the sewage works.
4. Solid or viscous substance in quantities or of such size and volume
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such
as, but not limited to:
§ 21-2.1 KEARNY CODE § 21-2.2
AO:598
Ashes
Bones
Cinders
Coffee grounds
Construction materials
Containers, etc., either whole or shredded
Dead animals
Entrails
Feathers
Fur
Glass
Hair and fleshings
Leaves
Mud
Paper dishes, cups
Plastic
Rags
Sand
Shavings
Straw
Unshredded vegetables
Vegetables in bulk
Wax
Wood
5. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F. [65°
C.].
6. Any waste or water which may contain petroleum hydrocarbons,
such as grease, oil and oil sludges from garages, repair shops,
machine shops, industrial establishments, in concentrations in
excess of 100 mg per liter. However, fats and greases such as those
derived from cooking and food processing may be discharged to
sewers, provided that the concentration and physical dispersion of
the fats and greases does not result in separation and the
adherence to sewer structures or appurtenances. If there is
evidence of adherence of such materials to structures, or if such
materials cause blockage in the sewer system, then the waste
water carrying such materials must be effectively treated by a
process or device such as a grease trap or interceptor before its
discharge to sewers.
§ 21-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.2
AO:599
7. Any substances which may solidify or become viscous between 32°
and 150° F.
8. Coal, tar, its derivatives and waste.
9. Paints and waste products from paint manufacturing.
10. Water or wastes having a pH lower than 4.5 or higher than 9.5 or
having any other corrosive property apt to cause damage or hazard
to structures, equipment of the sewer system or personnel
employed in its operation.
11. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
12. Any natural drainage, or recycled river, harbor or ocean waters.
d. Grinding, Shredding Garbage.
1. Under no circumstances will the discharge of garbage or refuse,
whether shredded or unshredded, be permitted into the sewer
system, except that, properly shredded garbage from household
grinders will be accepted.
2. When, in the opinion of the Town Engineer, or the Municipal
Enforcement Committee, the solids in any industrial waste require
comminution before discharge to the system, not only must the
necessary comminution facilities be approved for adequacy, but
also the operating results must satisfactorily abate the problem
which such solids may tend to create in the sewer system.
e. Prevention of Accidental Spillage. Any physical connection to a public
sewer, building sewer, or to a private sewer connected to a public
sewer, from vessels, tanks or containers receiving any of the
hereinbefore-mentioned materials and substances from which
quantities of the aforesaid prohibited materials or substances could
accidentally be discharged directly or indirectly into the
aforementioned sewer system is prohibited. Precautions shall be taken
to prevent the accidental spillage of any of the hereinbefore-mentioned
material to floor drains, basins, downspouts, gutters, etc., from any
manufacturing process or storage vessel.
f. Control of Odors. The control of all odors emanating from a building
sewer shall at all times be the responsibility of the owner of the
connection. Such person, firm or corporation shall take all necessary
steps to eliminate undue odors at their source or to install means and
methods, such as traps, draft, stacks, flap valves or other devices to
prevent the discharge or development of offensive odors within the
sewers. The cost of such devices and all attendant expenses shall be
borne solely by the owners of the premises.
§ 21-2.2 KEARNY CODE § 21-2.3
AO:600
§ 21-2.3. Restricted Discharges. [1973 Code § 118-3]
No person, firm or corporation, shall without prior approval of the Town
Engineer, discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes into the aforementioned sewer
system. Such approval shall not be granted if it appears likely, in the
opinion of the Town Engineer, that such wastes can harm either the sewers,
sewage-treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the
receiving waters; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property or
constitute a nuisance. In forming his opinion as to the acceptability of these
wastes, the Town Engineer will give consideration to such factors as the
quantities of subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers,
materials or construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage-treatment
process, capacity of the sewage-treatment plant, and other pertinent factors
including, but not limited to, the following:
a. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and
similar heavy metals or objectionable or toxic substances, or any waters
or wastes containing strong acid, iron-pickling wastes or concentrated
plating solutions or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement.
b. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or odor-producing substances
in such concentration that after treatment of the composite sewage fail
to meet the requirements of the State, Federal or other public agencies
having jurisdiction over the receiving waters.
c. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration,
which, after treatment of the composite sewer, fail to meet the
requirements of the State, Federal or other public agencies having
jurisdiction over the receiving waters.
d. Materials which exert or cause:
1. Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
2. Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
sludge.
e. Typical industries requiring approval before discharge of wastes
include:
Tanning
Metal pickling
Galvanizing
Plating
Pulp
Paper making
Brewing
Glue manufacturing
§ 21-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.3
AO:601
§ 21-2.4. Toxic Substances Prohibited or Accepted Conditionally.
[1973 Code § 118-4; Ord. No. 11-8-78]
Bleaching and dyeing
Munitions manufacturing
Oil refining
Wool washing
Rubber production
Salt works
Manufacture or processing
Chemical
Distilling
Public laundering
Laundromats
Food processing
Meat packing
Wood scouring
Soap making
Slaughterhouses
Dairies
Dairy products
Sugar refining
Fat rendering
Manufacturing of syrups
Cotton textile
Jam or jelly
Pharmaceutical
or any industry producing wastes with strong acid or alkaline reactions
or which will form deposits or cause damage to the sewers or to
appurtenances of sewage-treatment works. The process or processes
employed in the pretreatment of such wastes shall in each case be
satisfactory to and shall have the written approval of the Town
Engineer.
a. The following is a partial list of toxic substances and pathogenic
bacteria, the admission of which into the aforementioned sewer system
is hereby prohibited unless approved by the Town Engineer. Approval
shall not be granted unless their concentration is reduced by treatment
at the source to a point that will meet the general purposes of these
rules and regulations:
§ 21-2.3 KEARNY CODE § 21-2.4
AO:602
§ 21-2.5. Construction of Manhole. [1973 Code § 118-5; Ord. No.
11-8-78]
When required by the Town Engineer or the Municipal Enforcement
Committee, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building
sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of wastes. Such
manhole, when required, shall be accessible and safely located and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Town. The manhole
shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by
him.
1. Alcohols.
2. Antibiotics,
3. Arsenic and arsenicals.
4. Bromine, iodine, chlorine.
5. Copper and copper salts.
6. Creosols or creosotes.
7. Fluorides.
8. Formaldehydes.
9. Mercury and mercurials.
10. Phenols and their derivatives.
11. Silver and silver compounds.
12. Sulfonamides, toxic dyes (organic or mineral).
13. Zinc compounds.
14. All strong oxidizing agents, such as chromates, dichromates,
permanganates, peroxides, etc.
15. Chemical compounds producing flammable or explosive gases,
either upon acidification, alkalization, oxidation or reduction.
16. Strong reducing agents such as nitrites, sulphites and
thiosulphates, etc.
17. Wastes from industrial processes or hospital procedures containing
viable pathogenic organisms.
b. When the volume of a single toxic industrial waste discharge of a group
of industries within a single contributor area is so large as to interfere
with plant operation, the Town Engineer of the Municipal Enforcement
Committee may impose separate or special concentration limits upon
the contributors.
§ 21-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.6
AO:603
§ 21-2.6. Measurements; Tests; Analyses. [1973 Code § 118-6]
All measurements, tests and analyses shall be taken by the Town of the
characteristics of waters and wastes and shall be determined in accordance
with American Public Health Association Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Sewage, and shall be determined upon suitable
samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no special manhole
has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the
nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected.
§ 21-2.7. Authorized Personnel to Make Inspections. [1973 Code
§ 118-7; Ord. No. 11-8-78]
The Town Engineer, members of the Municipal Enforcement Committee
and its duly authorized officers and employees bearing proper credentials
and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the
purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
§ 21-2.8. Municipal Enforcement Committee. [1973 Code § 118-7A]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced where so stated by the
Municipal Enforcement Committee which shall consist of the following
persons:
§ 21-2.9. Hearings; Appeals. [1973 Code § 118-8]
a. Councilman serving as Chairman of Sewage Treatment Plant
Committee.
b. Town Engineer.
c. Health Officer.
d. Superintendent of Sewage Treatment Plant.
e. Water Superintendent.
a. Whenever it is claimed that the zone rates or surcharges are improper
in any respect, or that the provisions of this section do not apply, or that
the true intent and meaning of the section has been misconstrued, or
that a decision of the Town Engineer made hereunder has been an
improper one, or for any other grievance arising hereunder, the
aggrieved claimant may appeal the decision or the grievance in writing
to the Mayor and Town Council, in which event the matter will be set
down for a special hearing, at which time all interested persons shall
present evidence relevant to the subject matter of the hearing. Notice
of the hearing in writing shall be given to the aggrieved claimant at
least 10 days in advance by mailing same to the claimant's last postoffice
address.
§ 21-2.6 KEARNY CODE § 21-2.9
AO:604
§ 21-2.10. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 118-9; New]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
Each violation of any of the provisions of this section, and each day the same
is violated, shall be deemed and taken to be a separate and distinct offense.
§ 21-3. IMPROPER DISPOSAL OF WASTE.
§ 21-3.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 4]
The purpose of this section is to prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal
of materials other than stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) operated by the Town of Kearny, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 21-3.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 4]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a difference meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by The Town of Kearny
or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer
systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to
collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
b. The Mayor and Town Council shall have the authority to modify any of
the provisions of this section where it finds there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the section, or
where the proofs indicate that the chapter is unreasonable, arbitrary,
discriminatory or confiscatory in its application to any user, provided
that the spirit of the section shall be observed, the public health, safety
and welfare secured and substantial justice done. The burden of proof
shall be on the user (aggrieved claimant).
c. Appeals shall be made 45 days after the grievance arises or after the
rendering of a decision by the Town Engineer.
§ 21-2.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-3.2
AO:605
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 21-3.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 4]
The spilling, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by Town of Kearny
is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than
stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the
municipal separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
§ 21-3.4. Exceptions to Prohibition. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 4]
a. Water line flushing and discharging from potable water sources.
b. Uncontaminated ground water (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising ground
water).
c. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact cooling
water).
d. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
e. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
f. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
g. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
h. Flows from firefighting activities.
i. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
1. Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for
their intended purposes; and
2. Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing material
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and deicing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded.
Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation is limited to
exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 21-3.2 KEARNY CODE § 21-3.5
AO:606
§ 21-3.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 4]
This section shall be enforced by the Department of Public Works of the
Town of Kearny and any other department hereinafter designated by the
Town Administrator.
§ 21-3.6. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 4]
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
section, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$500 for each violation committed hereunder. Each day's failure to comply
with any section or subsection shall constitute a separate violation.
Where a person has been convicted of a violation of this section and within
12 months thereafter has been found guilty of a second violation of this
section, the Judge of the Kearny Municipal Court may, if the Judge finds the
second offense was willful, sentence the offender to imprisonment in the
County jail for a period not to exceed 90 days in addition to or in lieu of the
fine set forth above.
§ 21-4. ILLICIT CONNECTION.
§ 21-4.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 7]
The purpose of this section is to illicit connection to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Town of Kearny, so as to protect
public health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure
to comply.
§ 21-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 7]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the text, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Shall mean waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Shall mean any physical or nonphysical
connection that discharges domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Town of Kearny,
unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES Permit other than
the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES Permit Number
§ 21-3.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-4.2
AO:607
NJ0141852). Non-physical connections may include, but are not limited to,
leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall mean nondomestic waste, including, but not
limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b) or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by The Town of Kearny
or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater. MS4s do not include combined sewer systems, which are sewer
systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at all times and to
collect and transport stormwater from streets and other sources.
NJPDES PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER — Shall mean water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other than
heat) or finished product. Non-contract cooling water may however contain
algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat
exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Shall mean any water which, during
manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from
the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, byproduct, or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is
not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling
water.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 21-4.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 7]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm system operated by the Town
of Kearny any domestic sewage, non-contact cooling water, process waste
water, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 21-4.2 KEARNY CODE § 21-4.4
AO:608
§ 21-4.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 7]
This section shall be enforced by the Department of Public Works of the
Town of Kearny and any other department hereinafter designated by the
Town Administrator.
§ 21-4.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-12 § 7]
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
section, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$500 for each violation committed hereunder. Each day's failure to comply
with any section or subsection shall constitute a separate violation.
Where a person has been convicted of a violation of this section and within
12 months thereafter has been found guilty of a second violation of this
section, the Judge of the Kearny Municipal Court may, if the Judge finds the
second offense was willful, sentence the offender to imprisonment in the
County jail for a period not to exceed 90 days in addition to or in lieu of the
fine set forth above.
Chapter 22
WATER
§ 22-1. USE REGULATIONS.
§ 22-1.1. Compliance. [1973 Code § 135-1]
The following rules and requirements shall be deemed to be incorporated in
and form part of the terms and conditions for the supply and use of water
furnished to all parties and consumers whatsoever by the Town of Kearny,
New Jersey, who are deemed to expressly consent hereto as a condition
precedent.
§ 22-1.2. Designation Pursuant to Contract. [Ord. No. 1997-15 § I]
In this chapter, any reference to the Department of Water, Water
Superintendent, the Mayor or the Town Council, or any other Kearny Town
official or officer, shall include their designee pursuant to contract.49
§ 22-1.3. Application for Service. [1973 Code § 135-2]
All applications for the use of water through a service and all applications
for the introduction of services must be made at the office of the Water
Superintendent at the Town Hall by the owner of the premises sought to
be supplied or by his agent duly authorized in writing. Applicants shall
state fully all purposes for which the supply is required, with correct street,
49.Editor's Note: The Town entered into an Interlocal Agreement with the East Orange Water
Commission to take over the management, operation and maintenance of the Kearny
Water Utility.
§ 21-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-1.3
AO:609
lot and block number of the premises. All expense incurred by reason of
incorrect information given in an application shall be charged to and paid
by the property owner.
§ 22-1.4. Installation Requirements. [1973 Code § 135-3]
§ 22-1.5. Cost of Connections Larger than One Inch. [1973 Code
§ 135-4]
For all connections of a larger capacity than one inch, an estimate of each
of such connections will be given by the Water Superintendent.
§ 22-1.6. Authorization to Tap and Make Connections. [1973 Code
§ 135-5]
Excepting employees of the Water Department duly authorized for the
purpose, no person shall tap or connect any water main or insert a stopcock
therein.
§ 22-1.7. Licensed Plumbers Required for Certain Work. [1973 Code
§ 135-6]
No person shall attach, alter or extend any water pipe or make any
alterations in any tap, cock or other fixtures, nor do any work calculated to
increase the facilities for using the water, nor turn on or off the stopcock
on the main or at the curb, unless registered as a licensed plumber by the
Water Department.
§ 22-1.8. Permission to Connect; Duties of Plumbers; Maintenance
Responsibility. [1973 Code § 135-7]
a. The work of installing ordinary services from main to curb shall consist
of tapping the main, inserting corporation cock with proper couplings,
laying of pipe from main to curb and providing a stop with suitable stop
box and cover marked "Water," and shall be done by the Water
Department at the costs and charges of the owner, who must pay all
prescribed charges when making application and before any work is
done.
b. The cost of installation services are provided for in subsection 22-8.1.
The cost does not include charges for permits to open and repair
streets.
c. Every tenement intended for six families or more must have at least a
one inch service connection and a one inch meter.
a. In introducing new services, express permission of the Water
Department must in all cases be obtained before doing any work to
connect water services for use; otherwise an adequate penalty will be
imposed and the license registry of any plumber failing to comply
herewith will be revoked.
§ 22-1.3 KEARNY CODE § 22-1.8
AO:610
§ 22-1.9. Diverting Water Supply. [1973 Code § 135-8]
§ 22-1.10. Inside Connections Prohibited. [1973 Code § 135-9]
All inside connections between houses or other buildings are strictly
prohibited.
§ 22-1.11. Meter Regulations. [1973 Code § 135-10; Ord. No.
4-10-85; Ord. No. 1997-15 § I]
b. Curb stops shall be left closed and in no case shall the water be turned
on except by an employee of the Water Department or by a licensed
plumber upon authority of written permit so to do.
c. Plumbers must not have any curb stops open nor water turned on at the
premises after connecting to the service pipe, without permit therefor,
longer than is required to test their work.
d. Service pipes in buildings must be located in such parts thereof best
protected from frosts.
e. It shall be the duty of the plumber to protect from frost all work done by
him.
f. The owner of property into which water is introduced by a service pipe
shall be required to maintain in perfect order, at his own expense, the
service pipe from the curb to his premises, including all fixtures therein
provided for delivering or supplying water for any purpose, and in case
such service and fixtures are not so kept in repair, the Bureau of Water
may shut off the supply of water.
a. When a service pipe has been laid to the curb, it must not be diverted to
supply other premises even though owned by the same person.
b. The object of this regulation is to secure a separate and independent
service pipe for each separate lot and building.
c. Plumbers must make their plans and estimates to conform hereto
accordingly.
a. Each new service pipe up to and including two inches inside diameter
put in service for supplying water for all purposes must be of lead, extra
heavy brass or Class K copper, suitable for underground use and
equipped with a meter. In no case shall the inside diameter of the
service pipe be less than 3/4 of an inch, and service pipes larger than
two inches inside diameter shall be of cast iron. All charges for the use
of water through such services shall be based upon the meter rates
from time to time prescribed by the Water Department.
b. All meters in excess of two inches in diameter must be set by a
registered licensed plumber in the best workmanlike manner.
§ 22-1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-1.11
AO:611
§ 22-1.12. Interference With or Removal of Meters. [1973 Code
§ 135-11]
§ 22-1.13. Metering Required. [1973 Code § 135-12]
All water supplied through taps shall be metered.
§ 22-1.14. Attachments at Curb Stops Prohibited. [1973 Code
§ 135-13]
No standpipes or other appliances for any purpose will be allowed to be
attached at the curb stops. Where use of water is desired, the service pipe
must be extended across the sidewalk before any attachment is made.
§ 22-1.15. Turning On Water. [1973 Code § 135-14]
Excepting where water has been turned off by a licensed plumber for
immediate repairs, no person may turn it on unless properly authorized by
the Water Department.
c. Meters, except on fire service, must be set entirely above the floor,
horizontally, with dial up in a conspicuous place, easy of access and
located in a place approved by the Water Department.
d. All meters must be set with meter couplings and have a compression
stop-and-waste cock on street side of house.
e. Special care must be exercised to keep the inside of meters free and
clear of white or red lead, dirt, gravel and all other foreign matter. Male
thread only may be leaded.
f. Carelessness in these and other requirements concerning water
distribution, plumbing, metering, appliances and services shall render
the offending plumber liable to discipline and his license registry to
suspension by the Water Department.
a. Plumbers must not interfere with or remove any meter without special
permit first obtained from the Water Department in each and every
case.
b. All meters removed by plumbers must be delivered to the Water
Department within 24 hours from time of removal.
c. Notice to the Water Department of any stoppage or other irregularity at
the meter should be immediately reported so that such defect may be
remedied.
d. The owner of any premises where a meter is installed shall be held
responsible for its care and protection from freezing and from injury or
interference by any person or persons.
§ 22-1.11 KEARNY CODE § 22-1.16
AO:612
§ 22-1.16. Repairs Because of Leakage; Permit to Turn On. [1973
Code § 135-15]
The attention of licensed plumbers is particularly directed to places where
water may be turned off at the curb because of leakage. After making the
necessary repairs, they must leave the water turned off until proper permit
is given to turn it on.
§ 22-1.17. Old Pipe Attachments. [1973 Code § 135-16]
§ 22-1.18. Placement of Hydrants and Fixtures. [1973 Code
§ 135-17]
Hydrants, hose bibs and other fixtures shall be so placed as not to be readily
accessible to persons occupying adjoining or neighboring premises.
§ 22-1.19. Standby Charges. [1973 Code § 135-17; Ord. No. 5-12-82;
Ord. No. 1997-15 § I; Ord. No. 2002-O-69A; Ord. No. 2011-17 § 1]
There shall be a charge to each water customer who is presently connected
to or wishes a connection to the water systems for the purpose of providing
fire protection, based upon the size of the service line, at the following
rates:
§ 22-1.20. Application for Extraordinary Work. [1973 Code
§ 135-18]
In applying for a permit where any part of the work is considered as out
of the ordinary, plumbers must make a full explanation of the same without
waiting to be questioned.
§ 22-1.21. Registration of Licensed Plumbers. [1973 Code § 135-19]
a. Attachments to disused or old pipe fixtures shall not be allowed without
special permit therefor.
b. Any services substituted by another or the use of which has been
permanently discontinued must be turned off at the corporation stop on
the main.
a. For a meter size of two and three inches $52.
b. For a meter size of four inches $63.
c. For a meter size of six inches $140.
d. For a meter size of eight inches $260.
e. For a meter size of 10 and 12 inches $345.
a. Registry in the Water Department of plumbers licensed by the Board of
Health shall in all cases be a requisite for water plumbing, meter
setting and all other work relating to the Water Department.
§ 22-1.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-1.21
AO:613
§ 22-1.22. Qualifications of Plumbers. [1973 Code § 135-20]
§ 22-1.23. Use of Other Plumber's Registry Prohibited. [1973 Code
§ 135-21]
No plumber shall allow his name to be used by any other person or party
either for the purpose of obtaining permits or for doing work under his
license registry.
§ 22-1.24. Master Plumber's Responsibility. [1973 Code § 135-22]
b. Upon presentation of the plumber's license issued to him by the Board
of Health, the Clerk in the Water Department shall record such license
in a book provided for that purpose and make endorsement thereof on
the license in such registry.
a. At least one member of a firm or corporation doing plumbing work shall
be a licensed plumber duly registered. Every plumber applying for a
license registry must be a citizen of the United States and have a
regular and recognized place of business within the water supply
district controlled by this Department.
b. At the time of his application he must be not less than 21 years of age
and furnish satisfactory evidence that he is a practical plumber
educated for the business. Either such license registry or the words
"licensed plumber, registered," together with licensee's full name and
license registry number as therein designated, must be legibly and
conspicuously displayed on the premises outside of the registered place
of business. Failure so to do shall make the registry liable to revocation
by the Water Department.
c. Any unregistered person, firm or corporation making false pretense as
a licensee registered, on conviction, shall be liable to a fine as provided
for in subsection 22-1.42.
d. Upon receipt of an order or engagement to put in new service pipes and
plumbing fixtures connected therewith, or to make extensions or
alterations in existing service pipes or fixtures connected with the
water supply, licensed plumbers shall at once notify the Water
Department on a blank form provided therefor.
e. License registry will be recorded at the same time and expire at the
same time as the license issued to the plumber by the Board of Health.
a. Master plumbers registered will be held responsible for the violation of
any rules of this Department by journeymen plumbers or others in their
employ.
b. All plumbers registered by this Department shall give immediate notice
to the Clerk of the Department of change of address in their place of
business.
§ 22-1.21 KEARNY CODE § 22-1.24
AO:614
§ 22-1.25. Forfeiture or Suspension of License Registry. [1973 Code
§ 135-23]
The forfeiture or suspension of the license registry of any plumber operates
as a forfeiture or suspension of the license of his plumbing business. Only
one license registry shall be recorded for one member of a firm or
corporation, and the registry recorded for the member of a firm or
corporation shall state the name or names of the applicant.
§ 22-1.26. Other Forfeitures; License Registry Transfers. [1973
Code § 135-24]
§ 22-1.27. Employment of Registered Licensed Plumbers Required.
[1973 Code § 135-25]
Only registered licensed plumbers must be employed to make water
connections from the curb to the house and to do all plumbing work and
repairs on the premises.
§ 22-1.28. Stopcock Location and Use; Depth of Service Pipe. [1973
Code § 135-27]
There shall be a compression stop-and-waste cock inside the building as
near the front wall as possible in order to shut off the water in case of
accident to the inside pipe. The pipe shall be carried in at least four feet six
inches deep and protected from frost at all exposed points.
§ 22-1.29. Boilers and Safety Valves. [1973 Code § 135-28]
In all cases where a kitchen boiler is attached, a suitable safety or vacuum
valve shall be applied to prevent damage by collapsing or otherwise when
the water is shut off from the street mains.
§ 22-1.30. Nonliability for Damages Where Water Shut Off. [1973
Code § 135-29]
This Department will not be liable for any damage which may result from
shutting off the water, whether with or without notice. The Bureau always
endeavors to give reasonable notice before water is shut off.
§ 22-1.31. Leaks; Repairs. [1973 Code § 135-30]
c. Any plumber guilty of any violation of the rules and regulations adopted
from time to time or at present established by this Department may be
fined, suspended or deprived of his license registry, at the discretion of
the Department.
a. A license registry becomes forfeited whenever the party or parties for
whom it is recorded has no longer a recognized place of business.
b. A license registry shall not be transferred under any circumstances.
§ 22-1.24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-1.31
AO:615
§ 22-1.32. Waste of Water. [1973 Code § 135-31]
Willful and unnecessary waste of water by fastening open self-closing
valves, or otherwise, shall be furnished by shutting off of the water service,
which will not be restored until all damages have been paid and satisfactory
assurances given that such waste will not again occur.
§ 22-1.33. Water Rates to Be Lien Upon Property. [1973 Code
§ 135-32]
Water charges are a lien upon the real estate, and the owners thereof are
responsible for delinquencies. Information as to water assessments and
charges against any property shall at all times be furnished on application,
and the expressed wish of property owners with regard to the supply to
occupants of their premises will always be considered and, if practicable,
complied with, provided that all water rates are paid.
§ 22-1.34. Service Discontinued Upon Request. [1973 Code
§ 135-33]
Any person wishing to discontinue the water service from his premises must
give notice thereof at the office and order the same turned off; otherwise
charges will be continued until such notice is given and water is shut off by
the Bureau of Water.
§ 22-1.35. Liability for Whole Water Bill. [1973 Code § 135-34]
When more than one occupant of premises is supplied from the same
service pipe, the charges for the whole supply furnished by such pipe will
be made to the owner in one amount, and in case of nonpayment, the water
may be shut off although some of such occupants may have made settlement
therefor with the owner.
§ 22-1.36. Water Supply for Builders. [1973 Code § 135-35; Ord. No.
4-11-79; Ord. No. 1997-15 § I]
a. The Bureau of Water will repair all leaks on ordinary service pipes
between mains and the curb stops, but not leaks in private pipes. The
expense of all repairs to regular services will be borne by the Bureau of
Water whenever the service has been put in within 10 years from the
date of notice or of its discovery of leaks or defects. In the event of
service pipes being more than 10 years old, the expense of repairs will
be charged to and paid by the property owner.
b. Permits to repair leaks in private pipes will be issued to licensed
plumbers upon application made at the office of the Bureau of Water.
c. For leaks inside the curb or on private pipes in streets, the Department
may shut off the water, with or without notice, as long as it may deem
necessary.
§ 22-1.31 KEARNY CODE § 22-1.36
AO:616
§ 22-1.37. Fire and Sprinkler Systems. [1973 Code § 135-36]
§ 22-1.38. Adjustment of Water Bills. [1973 Code § 135-37; Ord. No.
1997-15 § I]
a. Application for supply of water for building purposes must be made at
the office of the Department of Water of the Town of Kearny, and a
permit for the supply of water must be obtained before making use
thereof. Temporary water will be billed at prevailing rates through a
meter installed by the Town in a temporary meter pit constructed by the
builder.
b. On all buildings other than those specified in the above schedule, and in
all construction for street improvements or for any other purpose, the
Water Department shall either estimate the quantity of water to be used
for the construction work or install a water meter on the construction
work, which meter shall be sealed, and all charges will be made and
paid for at regular meter rates, and the charges for water consumption
shall be a lien on the premises whereon the construction is located,
until paid.
c. All fees paid for the consumption of water during construction shall be
paid to the Water Department. All water must be shut off immediately
upon completion of the construction work and shall be shut off
thereafter until a further permit is issued.
a. All street main connections for fire and sprinkler systems or for any
other purpose must be provided with valves inside the building line in
order that same may be shut off in case of a leak or burst of pipe. The
valves must be set in conspicuous places, easily accessible, and left
entirely open for fire purposes. If required by the fire insurance
representatives, the same may be sealed.
b. Rebate charges for water actually consumed for fire extinguishment
may be claimed on metered lines only, provided written notice for that
purpose is filed with this Department within 10 days after the fire,
together with a certification from the Fire Department of such use and
the duration of such fire extinguishment use.
a. Adjustment of charges may be made only upon application by the owner
of the premises, or the owner's agent, to the Water Superintendent and
Town Administrator with approval of the Mayor and Council. Claims of
adjustment must be presented within 30 days from the billing date for
which adjustment is claimed.
b. Adjustments, if made, will be determined on the merits of each
particular case; the Department reserves the right to collect the full
amount called for by the assessment as long as the fixtures and
facilities for using the water remain.
c. Any deduction made shall not establish a precedent for any ensuing bill.
§ 22-1.36 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-1.38
AO:617
§ 22-1.39. Inspections; Compliance with Requirements. [1973 Code
§ 135-38]
§ 22-1.40. Refusal to Supply Water; Inspections of Premises. [1973
Code § 135-39]
d. Premises alleged to have been vacant and unoccupied with no record to
turn off in the Bureau of Water may be refused rebate or adjustment for
leakage or other waste, whether metered or not.
e. If turnoff order does not appear to have been given to the Bureau of
Water by the owner of the premises or his duly authorized agent,
consideration of application for rebate may be refused altogether.
f. To ensure hearing for adjustment of bills for water consumed on
premises alleged to have been vacant and unoccupied, the last turnoff
date, as it appears on the records of the Bureau of Water when so
ordered and turned off, must be taken as conclusive.
g. Alleged ignorance of requirements will not avail.
a. Official inspection, by authorized employees of the Bureau of Water
only, shall be made of all piping, trenches, meters, appliances,
plumbing, services and connections (new and old) relating to the water
system wherever, and the official requirements shall be final and must
be complied with.
b. When trenches are opened and service pipes laid, such trenches and
pipes therein shall be inspected by the Plumbing Inspector of the
Bureau of Water before the same are filled, and the contracting
plumber performing such work shall notify the Bureau of Water that
such trench is opened in order that such inspection may be made. The
penalty for allowing pipes to be covered before inspection by the
Bureau of Water shall be $10 and repetition of the offense shall subject
the plumber to suspension of his registration.
a. The Bureau of Water may refuse to supply water to premises where the
plumbing has not been done in a proper manner or until the plumbing
has been examined and approved by the Plumbing Inspector of the
Bureau of Water.
b. When buildings are being torn down, an inspection must be made of all
waterpipes and connections to ensure that all services are shut off at
the curb. Inspectors must investigate promptly all complaints of poor
water pressure, leaks in service pipes or imperfect working meters.
c. Officers of the Department and all persons authorized by them may
enter the premises of any water consumer at any reasonable time and
examine the pipes and fixtures, the quantities of water used, the
manner of its use, etc., and to verify any claim for rebate. All such
officers and employees are provided by the Department with a badge
and certificate in order to prove their authority. The efficiency of the
§ 22-1.38 KEARNY CODE § 22-1.40
AO:618
§ 22-1.41. Meter Requirements; Approval; Payment. [1973 Code
§ 135-40; Ord. No. 2001-O-34 § III]
§ 22-1.42. Shutting Off Water; Restoration; Charges. [1973 Code
§ 135-41; Ord. No. 1997-15 § I]
water service depends largely on constant supervision and inspection,
and the revenue obtained is a direct benefit to every taxpayer.
d. The Bureau of Water will make inspection of assessed-rate services
where it is believed that an excessive amount of water, through
defective plumbing or otherwise, is consumed, and notify the owner or
consumer when such inspection indicates waste. If the necessary
alterations or repairs to prevent such waste are not made within one
week from the date of such notice, a meter must be placed on the
service or the supply will be shut off.
a. Payment for meters is required in advance, and only those makes of
meters approved by the Department will be allowed to be used.
b. All meters purchased from the Bureau of Water will be tested before
being used. Meters furnished by other parties will not be recognized
unless they have been first tested by this Bureau and a fee paid for such
test and a special permit given to set the same.
c. Meters will be tested on application to the Bureau of Water. A testing
charge of $35 is made for meters up to and including one inch capacity.
For taking out, testing and replacing meters of larger capacity than one
inch, estimates will be given upon request, but the actual cost will be
charged and, in case of nonpayment, will become a lien upon the
property. If the meter is found registering in excess of consumption,
charges for test will be refunded and an allowance made for any
overpayment for water.
d. Bills will be delivered as far as practicable; when not delivered, the
owner or consumer, for his own protection, must call at the office and
obtain the same since notice is not legally required.
a. Where water has been turned off for any reason, it is so recorded and
the charge ceases from that date; but where water which is recorded as
turned off is at any time found on without authority of this Department,
the Department will charge for the use of the water from the recorded
date of turning off, and it may be shut off at the main, and the service
will not again be restored until all charges whatsoever are fully paid
and satisfied.
b. Where water is shut off for nonpayment, it will not be turned on until all
arrearage charges are fully paid.
c. The penalty for any violation of these rules is the liability (in addition to
any fine which may be imposed) of having the water service promptly
discontinued until such rules and requirements are complied with and a
§ 22-1.40 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-1.42
AO:619
§ 22-1.43. Authorization to Promulgate Rules and Regulations.
[1973 Code § 135-43]
The Department expressly reserves the right at any time to alter or amend
these rules, requirements and regulations and to promulgate the same or
new ones, in its discretion.
§ 22-1.44. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 135-42; New]
Each and every person violating any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section
1-5.
§ 22-2. through § 22-5. (RESERVED)
§ 22-6. INTEREST ON CHARGES AND PAYMENTS IN ARREARS.
§ 22-6.1. Rate of Interest. [1973 Code § 135-44; Ord. No. 1997-15
§ II]
Thirty days after the issuance of bills for repairs to water meters or for
water connections, interest shall be charged on the amount due, at the rate
of 8% per year, on the total of arrears up to $1,500, and on arrears in excess
of $1,500, the rate of interest shall be 18% per year.
§ 22-6.2. Liability for Interest Charges. [1973 Code § 135-45]
The owner of any house, building, tenement, lot or premises wherein or
whereon repairs to meters have been made or water connections have been
installed shall be held liable for the payment of the interest charges, which
interest charges, as above provided, shall be a lien upon the house, building,
tenement, lot or premises until the same shall be paid and satisfied.
§ 22-7. WATER RATES AND CHARGES.
§ 22-7.1. Charges. [1973 Code § 135-46; Ord. No. 1997-15 § III; Ord.
No. 1997-O-46; Ord. No. 1999-O-20 § 2; Ord. No. 2001-O-34 § II;
Ord. No. 2002-O-69A; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-49 § 1; Ord. No.
2007-(O)-04 § 1; Ord. No. 2011-17 §§ 2, 3; Ord. No. 2013-6; Ord. No.
2014-46; amended 6-25-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-2250; 3-10-2020 by
Ord. No. 2020-10]
satisfactory guaranty given that no further cause for complaint shall
arise.
a. The following rates shall be charged to all commercial, manufacturing
and residential water users:
50.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided the rates within take effect on 7-15-2019.
§ 22-1.42 KEARNY CODE § 22-7.1
AO:620
1. A rate of $2.55 per 100 cubic feet for use not exceeding 18,000
cubic feet;
2. A rate of $3.45 per 100 cubic feet for use in excess of 18,000 cubic
feet, but not exceeding 75,000 cubic feet;
3. A rate of $4 per 100 cubic feet for use in excess of 75,000 cubic feet
but not exceeding 125,000 cubic feet.
4. A rate of $4.75 per 100 cubic feet for use in excess of 125,000 cubic
feet.
b. The following minimum quarterly and monthly charges shall take effect
immediately:
Quarterly Minimums
Meter Size
(inches) Minimum
5/8 $20
3/4 $20
1 $102
1.5 $255
2 $318.75
3 $786.75
4 $1,218
6 $2,625.50
8 $4,425.50
10 $7,764.75
12 $11,845
Monthly Minimum
Meter Size
(inches) Minimum
5/8 $6.67
3/4 $6.67
1 $34
1.5 $85
2 $106.25
3 $262.25
4 $406
6 $875.17
§ 22-7.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-7.1
AO:621
§ 22-7.2. All Water to Be Metered. [1973 Code § 135-47]
All water supplied to consumers by the Water Department of the Town of
Kearny shall be measured through water meters.
§ 22-8. TAPPING CHARGES; METERS.
§ 22-8.1. Tapping Fees. [1973 Code § 135-50; Ord. No. 11-24-76;
Ord. No. 11-10-81; Ord. No. 1-25-84; Ord. No. 1997-15 § IV]
Monthly Minimum
Meter Size
(inches) Minimum
8 $1,475.17
10 $2,588.25
12 $3,948.33
c. (Reserved)
d. (Reserved)
e. The following water connection fees shall be charged as follows:
1. One and two-family houses: $100 per unit.
2. Structures of more than two-family: $200 per unit.
3. Commercial properties: $300 per unit.
4. Replacement water connections: $50 per unit.
f. Hydrant or stand pipe use shall be charged $78.75 per use.
a. Any person, firm or corporation desiring a tapping of any water main in
the Town of Kearny must make written application for that purpose to
the Water Superintendent of the Town of Kearny and pay with the
application the cost of making the tap, in the amount designated below,
according to the size of the tap set forth in the application:
Size of Tap Charge
3/4 inch $925
1 inch $1,125
b. If the size of the tap applied for exceeds one inch, the Water
Superintendent shall estimate the cost of making the tap and the
applicant shall pay with the application the sum so estimated. If the
actual cost of making the tap exceeds the estimated amount, the
applicant shall pay the excess upon demand and if the actual cost is less
than the estimate, the Town shall remit the difference to the applicant.
§ 22-7.1 KEARNY CODE § 22-8.2
AO:622
§ 22-8.2. Approval of Taps Required. [1973 Code § 135-51]
No taps on water mains in the Town of Kearny shall hereafter be made
without the approval of the Water Superintendent.
§ 22-8.3. Installation of Meters by Department Employees. [1973
Code § 135-52]
All meters, whether placed on new or old services, from 5/8 inch in diameter
to and including one inch in diameter shall be installed by employees of the
Water Department, provided that the owner of the premises has the service
line properly prepared, pursuant to the provisions of all applicable laws,
ordinances and regulations.
§ 22-8.4. Approval of Meters to Be Purchased. [1973 Code § 135-53]
All meters shall be purchased from the Water Department, and only such
meters that have been approved by the Mayor and Town Council will be
furnished or installed on any service pipe supplying municipal water.
§ 22-8.5. Meters; Costs of Installation, Repairs, Replacement. [1973
Code § 135-54; Ord. No. 1997-15 § IV]
All meters supplied by the Town shall remain the property of the Town. All
applicants for municipal water shall pay the tapping charges pursuant to
subsection 22- 8.1. All repairs and replacements of meters from the size
of 5/8 inch up to and including 1 1/2 inches shall be undertaken by the
Department of Water of the Town of Kearny without charge to the owners of
the meters except where the meters have been damaged by hot water, frost
or negligence of the owners.
§ 22-8.6. Setting of Meters. [1973 Code § 135-55]
Meters shall be set with couplings and stopcocks on each side, and waste
close to the outlet shall be placed in a conspicuous place, ease of access
and located so as to control the entire supply. For fire service meters, the
installation shall be approved by the Water Superintendent or the Water
Engineer, or both, before same is made.
§ 22-8.7. Meters Two Inches or Over. [1973 Code § 135-56]
All meters two inches or over in diameter shall, when set up, have bypass
connections with testing corporation valve two inches in diameter and be
set in accordance with installation bypass plan on file in the office of the
Water Department.
§ 22-8.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-8.8
AO:623
§ 22-8.8. Supervision and Expense of Installation. [1973 Code
§ 135-57]
All meters two inches in diameter and over shall be installed under the
supervision of the Water Department and at the expense of the owner of the
property.
§ 22-8.9. Repairs or Removal of Meters Prohibited Without
Approval. [1973 Code § 135-58]
Repair to or removal of meters furnishing municipal water is strictly
prohibited without first receiving the approval of the Water Superintendent.
§ 22-8.10. Removed Meters to Be Delivered to Meter Laboratory.
[1973 Code § 135-59]
All meters so removed shall be delivered to the Meter Laboratory of the
Town of Kearny within 24 hours after such removal.
§ 22-8.11. Defects. [1973 Code § 135-60]
Notice to the Water Department of any stoppage or other irregularity of the
meter must be immediately given to the Water Superintendent, at which
time a closing nipple shall be substituted by the Department until the defect
can be remedied.
§ 22-8.12. Responsibility for Care and Protection. [1973 Code
§ 135-61]
The owner of the premises shall be held responsible for the care and
protection of meters located on the premises.
§ 22-8.13. Testing of Meters. [1973 Code § 135-62]
Meters shall be tested on application to the Water Department. A testing
charge of $3 shall be made for all meters up to and including one inch in
diameter; for testing all meters over one inch in diameter, an estimate will
be given by the Department.
§ 22-8.14. Repairs Where Meters Not Registering. [1973 Code
§ 135-63; amended 3-10-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-10]
When a meter is found not registering, repairs shall be made and meter
put in an accurate condition. To estimate the consumption during the time
of nonregistration, a daily average shall be obtained from the readings
taken at least one month after repairs have been made, and this figure
shall be used as a basis on which to charge for water during the period of
nonregistration.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if there are accurate reads for four
consecutive quarters within the last four years, then the quantity of water
§ 22-8.8 KEARNY CODE § 22-8.14
AO:624
consumed during the period in which the meter has been registering
inaccurately or has ceased to register shall be estimated by taking the
monthly average of the actual metered use over those four quarters.
§ 22-8.15. Inaccurate Registering. [1973 Code § 135-64]
Meters shall be taken as correct if found on test to register within 2% plus
or minus. When an error of more than 2%, plus or minus, is found, the
consumer shall be charged or rebated for same. Where a percentage of
inaccuracy is found to be either plus or minus, same shall be figured from
100%.
§ 22-8.16. Discontinuance of Service. [1973 Code § 135-65]
Water service shall be discontinued or turned off from any premises upon
the written order of the owner.
§ 22-8.17. Frequency of Testing Meters. [1973 Code § 135-66]
§ 22-8.18. Opening Fire Hydrants Restricted. [1973 Code § 135-67]
No person or persons, corporation or corporations shall open any fire
hydrant in the Town of Kearny without the permission of the Water
Superintendent.
§ 22-8.19. Unlawful Supply of Water. [1973 Code § 135-68]
No person shall supply with aqueduct water any person not lawfully entitled
to the same.
§ 22-8.20. Obstructing Access to Fire Hydrants. [1973 Code
§ 135-69]
No persons or corporation shall obstruct access to any fire hydrant or
stopcock connected with the water pipes of the Town of Kearny.
a. All meters from 5/8 inch up to and including one inch in diameter shall
be tested at least once in every four years. Meters from one inch up to
and including two inches in diameter shall be tested at least once in
every three years. Meters from three inches up to and including four
inches in diameter shall be tested at least once every second year.
Meters in excess of four inches in diameter shall be tested every year.
b. Meters from 5/8 inch up to and including 1 1/2 inches in diameter shall
be removed and tested in the Meter Laboratory of the Town of Kearny.
Meters two inches and over in diameter shall be tested in place through
the two-inch corporation plug installed for that purpose. All meters
tested under this subsection shall be tested free of charge.
§ 22-8.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-8.21
AO:625
§ 22-8.21. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 135-70; New]
Each and every person violating any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section
1-5.
§ 22-9. DENIAL OF ACCESS TO PREMISES.
§ 22-9.1. Denial of Access Account Administration Fee. [Ord. No.
2011-4]
a. Whenever the Water Department is unable to access premises either to
install, replace, repair or upgrade a water meter, or for any other
legitimate and reasonable purpose related to the provision of water, it
shall impose a denial of access account administration fee on the
account of that premises upon following the following notice procedure:
1. It shall first send by regular mail to the owner of the premises as
reflected on the tax rolls at the address stated therein a notice that
the Water Department has been unable to gain access to the
premises and requests that the owner communicate with the
Department within two weeks of the date of the letter to set a
reasonable date and time when such access can be achieved;
2. At the same time, the Water Department shall post a copy of the
letter on the premises;
3. If access is not achieved or arranged within 20 days of the
transmittal of the letter by steps 1. and 2., the Water Department
shall send a copy of the letter by certified mail, return receipt
requested; and
4. If access is not achieved within 10 days of the transmittal of the
certified letter, the Water Department shall impose the denial of
access account administration fee on that account on that date and
for each and every quarterly billing cycle thereafter until access is
achieved.
b. There shall be a fee as set forth below for failure to allow access to a
water service for purposes of service or installation of the water meters
or associated appurtenances or inspection of the water service or for
access to the water supply line or water service for inspection or testing
of backflow prevention devices. Failure to allow access includes a
customer not responding within 10 days to a request for access
delivered by regular mail or a customer's refusal to set and honor a date
for access when contacted in person or by phone. [Amended
3-10-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-10]
§ 22-8.21 KEARNY CODE § 22-9.1
AO:626
§ 22-10. TAMPERING, ILLEGAL CONNECTION, THEFT OF SERVICE,
FAILURE TO PROTECT WATER SERVICE. [Added 3-10-2020 by Ord.
No. 2020-10]
Meter Size
(inches) Failure to Allow Access Fee
5/8 $200
3/4 $200
1 $200
1.5 $200
2 $242
3 $498.50
4 $960
6 $1,250
8 $1,250
10 $1,250
12 $1,250
c. In addition to the denial of access account administration fee, during
the nonaccess period, the Water Department shall assess estimated
water charges against the premises.
d. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:31-5h, each denial of access account
administration fee shall be a first lien or charge against the premises
until the same shall be fully paid and satisfied.
e. The foregoing shall not apply if the owner establishes by sufficient
documentary evidence that he or she was either absent from the State
of New Jersey at the time the notices provided for in paragraph a were
sent or was hospitalized at that time or was under a disability which
prevented him or her from responding to the notices.
a. There shall be a fee for unauthorized tampering with a water service,
including without limit, illegal connections, tampering with the meter,
breaking a meter seal or coupling seal, a backwards meter,
unauthorized turning on of service after the Town of Kearny has turned
it off, removal of a meter, bypass of the meter, bypass of any required
reduced pressure zone backflow preventer, failure to protect the water
service from freezing or to protect the water meter from flooding, and
theft of service by any means. The fee shall be $1,000 for each offense.
The assessment of such fee shall be considered in the quantum of
penalty to be assessed and shall not in any way limit the Town of
Kearny's rights to pursue additional enforcement of any kind including
the assessment of additional fees, fines, or penalties, assessment for the
cost of meter installation, and assessment of estimated past unrecorded
§ 22-9.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-10
AO:627
§ 22-11. (RESERVED)
§ 22-12. WATER EMERGENCY.
§ 22-12.1. Declaration of Water Emergency. [1973 Code § 135-73;
Ord. No. 10-11-89]
Whenever the Governing Body shall be satisfied and finds that a water
emergency exists in the municipality, it may adopt a resolution declaring
that a water emergency exists in the municipality. Such resolution shall
be adopted by the Governing Body at any regular, special adjourned or
emergency public meeting of the Governing Body. Such resolution shall
identify that portion of the municipality affected by the water emergency
which may include the entire municipality and shall specify which of the
water use regulations contained in subsection 22-12.2 is being imposed
as well as any exemptions as may be authorized. Such resolution shall be
consumption during the past six years. The Town of Kearny's failure
to enforce a fee or its decision to waive a fee shall not be considered
a waiver of customer's compliance with any term of these rules and
regulations and shall not preclude the Town of Kearny from any future
enforcement rights.
b. Noncompliance Fee. There shall be a fee as set forth below for failure to
comply that is plumbing-related issues and/or repairs that prevent the
Town of Kearny, its operator, contractor or authorized personnel from
performing meter maintenance or replacement work, which include
updates to any metering equipment. Failure to comply includes a
customer not responding within 10 days to a request for access
delivered by regular mail or a customer's refusal to make plumbing
repairs in person or by phone.
Meter Size
(inches) Noncompliance Fee
5/8 $200
3/4 $200
1 $200
1.5 $200
2 $500
3 $900
4 $1,250
6 $1,250
8 $1,250
10 $1,250
12 $1,250
§ 22-10 KEARNY CODE § 22-12.1
AO:628
effective immediately upon publication according to law and shall continue
in effect for 90 days, unless extended or repealed as set forth in subsection
22-12.3. For the purpose of this subsection, a water emergency shall exist
if, for any of the following reasons:
§ 22-12.2. Water Use Restrictions. [1973 Code § 135-74; Ord. No.
10-11-89]
Upon adoption by the Governing Body of a resolution declaring that a
water emergency exists in the municipality in accordance with subsection
22-12.1, all citizens shall be urged to observe voluntary indoor conservation
measures and, any of the following water use restrictions shall be imposed
and shall be applicable to all residents and tenants, except where a bona
fide health emergency exists and to exempt businesses, as specified herein
during the water emergency.
§ 22-12.3. Duration of Restrictions. [1973 Code § 135-75; Ord. No.
10-11-89]
The resolution of the Governing Body required by subsection 22-12.1 shall,
in addition to complying with subsection 22-12.1 provide a period of time
a. The public utility providing water service to all or a portion of the
municipality has adopted water use restrictions, has notified the
municipality, the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities, and the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, as well as any other
State, County or local agency entitled to notice of such restrictions and
such restrictions are not overruled or declared invalid by any State,
County or local agency having the jurisdiction and power to do so; or
b. The governing authority is otherwise satisfied that a water emergency
exists in the municipality.
a. The complete ban and prohibition of outside water usage, including the
watering of lawns and plants, the filling of pools and the washing of
cars; or
b. Outside water usage on alternate days allowing outside water usage by
persons or businesses having even house or box numbers on even days
and those having odd house or box numbers on odd days with outside
water usage being completely banned and prohibited on the 31st day of
any month during the water emergency; or
c. Any other water use restriction specified by the Governing Body in the
resolution required by subsection 22-12.1 which is reasonable under
the circumstances considering the nature and extent of the water
emergency. Any water restriction imposed pursuant to this paragraph
shall be limited in application to that portion of the municipality, which
may include the entire municipality, identified as being affected by the
water emergency in the resolution of the Governing Body adopted in
accordance with subsection 22-12.1.
§ 22-12.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-12.3
AO:629
during which the water use restrictions imposed shall be applicable and
which shall be no longer than reasonably necessary to abate the water
emergency under the circumstances considering the nature and extent of
the water emergency. At the expiration of the time period specified in
the resolution, the water use restriction shall lapse and be inapplicable
and unenforceable. If the Governing Body shall be satisfied that the water
emergency has been abated prior to the expiration of the time period
specified in the resolution, it shall adopt a resolution declaring the water
emergency ended and the water use restrictions inapplicable. If, at the
expiration of the time period specified in the resolution, the Governing Body
shall be satisfied that the water emergency continues to exist, it may adopt
a resolution in accordance with the requirements of this section continuing
the water use restrictions.
§ 22-12.4. Enforcement of Restrictions. [1973 Code § 135-76; Ord.
No. 10-11-89]
The water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this section shall be
enforced during a water emergency by the local authorized official.
Whenever a local authorized official shall find a violation of the water
use restrictions, such authorized official shall give the violator a written
warning and explain the penalties for a second and third offense as provided
by subsection 22-12.5. The local authorized official shall keep such records
as may be reasonable and necessary for the purpose of determining the
persons and businesses who have been warned upon a first offense. The
local authorized official is hereby empowered to write summonses for the
violation of the water use restrictions imposed pursuant to this section.
§ 22-12.5. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 135-77; Ord. No.
10-11-89]
After a first offense in accordance with subsection 22-12.4, any person
or business who thereafter violates the water use restrictions imposed
pursuant to this section shall be fined or imprisoned in accordance with
this subsection. For a second offense, the fine imposed shall be $500 or
imprisonment for 10 days or both. For a third and subsequent offense, the
fine imposed shall be $1,000 or imprisonment for 30 days or both.
§ 22-13. through § 22-16. (RESERVED)
§ 22-17. WANAQUE-SOUTH WATER PROJECT.
§ 22-17.1. Findings. [1973 Code § 135-71; Ord. No. 11-10-81]
a. Pursuant to the Water Transmission Facilities Act concerning the North
Jersey District Water Supply Commission, etc., constituting Chapter
167 and 18, P.L. of 1962 of the State of New Jersey, as heretofore
amended and supplemented (herein called the "Act"), the Commission
was given powers among other things to finance, construct and to place
into operation, operate and use facilities deemed necessary for and
§ 22-12.3 KEARNY CODE § 22-17.1
AO:630
§ 22-17.2. Agreement Authorization. [1973 Code § 135-72; Ord. No.
11-10-81]
The Council of the Town of Kearny resolves that the Town of Kearny does
hereby agree to enter into and execute the Agreement, a copy of which shall
be on file in the Town offices. The Mayor is hereby authorized to execute
the Agreement and the Town Clerk authorized to seal the Contract with the
Town Seal.
incident to the treatment, filtration, transmission and distribution of
potable water made available by the State of New Jersey to
municipalities and persons pursuant to the provisions of the New Jersey
Water Supply Law, 1958.
b. The Commission is ready to design, finance, acquire, construct and put
fully in operation and operate the water supply facility known as
"Wanaque-South" and seeks contracting municipalities having
proprietary allotments aggregating not less than an annual average of
32.0 million gallons per day.
c. By the provisions of N.J.S.A. 58:5-37, any municipality or municipalities
may enter into a contract or contracts with the Commission providing
for or relating to the acquisition, construction and financing of the costs
thereof and of any additions, extensions and improvements of a Project
as defined in the Act and the terms and conditions upon which such
acquisition, construction and financing shall be undertaken; and for the
operation and maintenance of the Project, the treatment, filtration or
transmission of water and the apportionment and distribution of water
among participating municipalities and the payments to be made by the
various participating municipalities for the various costs of the Project.
d. The municipalities are authorized and empowered to appropriate
monies for the purposes of the Commission and to pay such monies to
the Commission in such installments and upon such terms as agreed
upon between the individual municipalities and the Commission.
e. The Town of Kearny is willing to accept and pay for such water and
treatment, filtration, transmission and distribution thereof pursuant to
the terms of the Agreement.
f. In making the covenants, undertakings and agreements herein set
forth, it is the purpose and intent of the Town of Kearny to enable the
Commission to issue its bonds or notes for the purpose of paying or
financing the costs of the Project, making adequate and effective
agreements with the holders of such bonds or notes to secure the
payment thereof by, among other things, covenanting to impose, charge
and collect amounts of money from the Town of Kearny sufficient to pay
when due all operating expenses and the principal or the redemption
price of and interest on such bonds or notes and pledging all monies so
collected for such purposes.
§ 22-17.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-17.2
AO:631
Chapter 23
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Editor's Note: For additional regulations concerning litter and
nuisances on streets and sidewalks, see Chapter 17, Section 17-3.
§ 23-1. STREET OBSTRUCTIONS.
§ 23-1.1. Restricted; Permission Required. [1973 Code § 125-1]
No person shall encumber or obstruct any street or other public place in
the Town of Kearny by placing therein or thereon any building materials or
any article or thing whatsoever without having first obtained the written
permission of the Street Commissioner.
§ 23-1.2. Permit to Occupy Streets. [1973 Code § 125-2; Ord. No.
2002-O-83 § 16; Ord. No. 2012-22]
The DPW Superintendent shall have power to grant permits to builders and
others to occupy a space not to exceed 1/3 of the width of the vehicular lane
of any street with building material if, in his opinion, the public interest or
inconvenience will not suffer thereby. The fee for a permit to occupy streets
shall be $75.
§ 23-1.3. Sidewalks and Gutters to Be Unobstructed. [1973 Code
§ 125-3]
The permit holder shall, at the place where the building is being
constructed, keep the sidewalks and gutters clear and unobstructed.
§ 23-1.4. Warning Lights. [1973 Code § 125-4]
The permit holders shall place danger lights at nighttime at such place so
occupied.
§ 23-1.5. Removal of Dirt, Rubbish Required. [1973 Code § 125-5]
The permit holders shall promptly remove from time to time all dirt and
rubbish and keep the streets occupied in as clean a condition as possible.
§ 23-1.6. Revocation. [1973 Code § 125-6]
Such permits may be revoked at any time at the pleasure of the Street
Commissioner.
§ 23-1.7. Denial of Permit; Condition. [Ord. No. 1999-0-26 § 1]
No permit shall be granted if the obstruction may be fitted or located on
private property without obstructing the street.
§ 22-17.2 KEARNY CODE § 23-1.8
AO:632
§ 23-1.8. Insurance Requirements. [Ord. No. 1999-0-26 § 1]
Any applicant for a permit shall provide to the Town proof of general liability
insurance coverage of at least $1,000,000, without deductibles, naming the
Town as an addition insured.
§ 23-1.9. Indemnification and Hold Harmless Agreement. [Ord. No.
1999-0-26 § 1]
The applicant for a permit shall agree to indemnify the Town and save
it harmless from any and all claims, losses, damages, costs and expenses
which the Town might sustain, or be threatened with liability for, arising out
of the said street obstruction or any activity related to or connected with it.
§ 23-2. ALTERING; CHANGING STREETS RESTRICTED;
PERMISSION REQUIRED. [1973 Code § 125-7]
No person without the permission of the Town Council shall alter, change,
raise or lower the grade of any public street in or of the Town of Kearny, or
dig or carry dirt therefrom or dump or throw ashes, dirt or rubbish thereon.
§ 23-3. through § 23-4. (RESERVED)
§ 23-5. VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
§ 23-5.1. Driving on Prohibited. [1973 Code § 125-9]
§ 23-6. BICYCLES ON STREETS.
§ 23-6.1. Bell Required; Warning Signals. [1973 Code § 125-10]
Any person using a bicycle, tricycle or velocipede on the public streets of
the Town shall carry on such vehicle an alarm bell, and, on approaching and
crossing the intersection of any such street, shall give a signal by sounding
the bell, and carry after sundown and before sunrise a light of sufficient
illuminating power to be visible at a distance of 200 feet. The vehicle shall
not be propelled at a rate of speed greater than 10 miles an hour, nor shall
any greater number than two persons abreast parade the streets of Kearny
at any time on vehicles.
a. No person or persons shall drive any wagon, carriage, cart, bicycle,
tricycle, velocipede, sleigh or any other vehicle on, over, across or along
the sidewalk of any street of the Town of Kearny.
b. Exception. Nothing, however, in this section shall be so construed as to
prevent an owner or owners of property or tenants of same and their
servants or agents from driving over, across or along the sidewalks in
front of their respective lands for the purpose of access to the same or
other legitimate use, or to prevent the clearing of snow from the
sidewalks by the Street Commissioner with plows.
§ 23-1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-7
AO:633
§ 23-7. CURB CUTTING UNLAWFUL. [1973 Code § 125-11; Ord. No.
1997-36; Ord. No. 2012-22]
It shall be unlawful for any person to cut the curb of any street in the
Town or damage same in any way, except in accordance with the following
procedure:
§ 23-8. DISCHARGING EXHAUST STEAM PROHIBITED. [1973 Code
§ 125-12]
No owner or corporation of any manufactory, brewery or any other building
shall discharge or exhaust steam from steam engines directly into any
public street, sewer or drain.
§ 23-9. MOTOR VEHICLES OCCUPYING SIDEWALKS OR STREETS
PROHIBITED. [1973 Code § 125-12.1; Ord. No. 4-11-95]
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of an auto body shop, public
garage, automobile repair shop, automobile service station, gasoline station
or any other business which deals with the repair, maintenance or storage
of motor vehicles to permit any motor vehicles and parts thereof to occupy
any portion of the sidewalk or public street.
§ 23-10. CLEAR VISION AT INTERSECTIONS; HEIGHT OF BRUSH
AND HEDGES.51
a. The owner of any property who desires to have the curb cut down for
the purpose of a driveway shall make written application to the Mayor
and Council of the Town of Kearny, with a copy to the Town Engineer,
describing:
1. The exact location of the proposed curb cut;
2. A plan describing how the curb will be cut and refurbished at a
lower height; and
3. Any other information that the Mayor and Council or Town
Engineer may require upon review of the application.
b. The applicant shall be responsible for all costs associated with the curb
cut, including a $75 fee payable to the municipality for the cost of
inspecting the work in accordance with paragraph c. The fee shall be
submitted with the application.
c. Upon completion of construction of the curb cut, the applicant shall
notify the Town Engineer who shall inspect the curb cut and insure that
it has been completed in accordance with the submitted application.
d. In the event the curb cut has not been completed in accordance with
the application, the Mayor and Council may require the applicant to
remedy any deficiencies.
§ 23-7 KEARNY CODE § 23-10.1
AO:634
§ 23-10.1. Responsibility of Owner or Tenant; Height Restrictions.
[1973 Code § 58-9]
The owner or tenant of lands in the Town of Kearny shall be required to keep
all brush, hedges and other plant life growing within 10 feet of any roadway,
and within 25 feet of the intersection of two roadways, cut to a height
of not more than 2 1/2 feet where it shall be necessary and expedient for
the preservation of the public safety, within 10 days after receiving written
notice from the Police Department to cut the same.
§ 23-10.2. Removal by Town; Cost to Become Lien. [1973 Code
§ 58-10]
In the event that the owner or tenant shall have refused or neglected to
cut the same in the manner and within the time provided above, the Chief
of Police is hereby authorized to direct the Town Forester to cut the same
in a manner as above provided; and in all cases where such brush, hedges
and other plant life are cut from any lands by the Town Forester under
the direction of the Chief of Police, the Town Forester shall certify the cost
thereof to the Governing Body, which shall examine the certificate and, if
found correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against
the lands or in the event that such cost is excessive, to cause the reasonable
cost thereof to be charged against the lands; and the amount so charged
shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to and
become and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon
such lands; the same to bear interest at the same rate as other taxes and
shall be collected and enforced by the same officers and in the same manner
as taxes.
§ 23-11. SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL FROM SIDEWALKS.
§ 23-11.1. Required. [1973 Code § 125-31]
The owner or owners, tenant or tenants, or occupant or occupants of lands
abutting or bordering upon the sidewalks, streets or other public places
of the Town of Kearny, where there is a graded or paved sidewalk, shall
remove or cause to be removed from the sidewalks in front of or bordering
on the lands all snow and ice within 12 hours of daylight after the same
shall have been formed or fall thereon. In the event that the snow or ice
on the sidewalks shall be frozen so hard that it cannot be removed without
injury to the sidewalks, it shall be the duty of the owner or owners, tenant
or tenants, occupant or occupants to cause such sidewalks to be made safe
and convenient by covering the snow or ice with sand, ashes, cinders or
other suitable substance, and as soon thereafter as the weather will permit,
to thoroughly clean the sidewalks. No person shall place, or cause to be
placed, any snow or ice upon the traffic lanes of the roadway of any street.
In the event that it is necessary to clear the roadway of snow and ice in
51.Editor's Note: For additional regulations concerning growth at streets and sidewalks, see
Chapter 17, Subsection 17-1.3.
§ 23-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-11.1
AO:635
front of any property for the purpose of providing parking space, or to give
access to such property, then such snow or ice shall be properly piled in the
roadway in front of such property at no greater distance than five feet from
the curbline and in such a manner that the gutterway shall be unobstructed.
It shall be unlawful, however, for any person to remove snow or ice from any
private property and place the same onto the sidewalk or roadway of any
street.
§ 23-11.2. Removal by Town; Collection of Costs. [1973 Code
§ 125-33]
If the owner or owners, tenant or tenants, or occupant or occupants shall
fail to clean any sidewalk in the manner and within the time prescribed
for in subsection 23- 11.1, the same may be cleaned under the direction
of the Street Commissioner, and the cost thereof shall be assessed against
the lands abutting the sidewalks and shall be levied, certified and collected
by the Tax Collector in the same manner as special assessments for the
construction of sidewalks.
§ 23-11.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2011-3]
a. Any person who or other entity which violates subsections 23-11.1,
23-11.2 or 17-8.9 of the Town Code shall be subject to a fine of up to $75
for each violation. The said fine shall be in addition to any
reimbursement costs that are already provided for in these sections.
b. Whenever the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, a
member of the Police Department, or a member of the Health
Department shall determine that there exists a violation of the
provisions of subsections 23-11.1, 23-11.2 or 17-8.9 of the Town Code,
he or she shall issue a notice of violation signed by him or her which
shall contain at least the following information:
1. The name and address of the owner, the tenant and the occupants,
all of them or any of them, whose identity can be determined;
2. A statement that they bear joint and several responsibility for
bringing about compliance and for payment of any penalty that may
be imposed by the Municipal Court;
3. A reference to this section by number or code section number; and
4. The amount of the penalty that may be assessed.
c. The notice of violation shall be served personally upon any owner,
tenant or occupant and by certified mail upon any owner who is not
present upon the premises at the time the notice of violation is issued.
d. The notice of violation shall be in the form of Special Form of Complaint
and Summons prescribed by Rule 7:2-1 (g) and (h) of the Rules of Court
or such other applicable rule which may be in effect at the time.
§ 23-11.1 KEARNY CODE § 23-12
AO:636
§ 23-12. (RESERVED)
§ 23-13. MIXING CEMENT IN STREETS.
§ 23-13.1. Watertight Receptacles Required. [1973 Code § 125-14]
No cement or concrete shall be mixed or made in or upon the paved streets
of the Town of Kearny unless said cement or concrete is mixed or made in
watertight receptacles approved by the Construction Official.
§ 23-14. UNSAFE PLACES ADJACENT TO STREETS OR
SIDEWALKS.52
§ 23-14.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 125-16]
As used in this section:
OWNER — Shall mean any individual or individuals, copartnership,
association, corporation or joint-stock company, their lessees, trustees or
receivers appointed by any Court whatsoever.
STREET — Shall mean any public street, avenue, highway, boulevard,
parkway, square or any part or side of the same, including the sidewalk
thereof, whether paved or unpaved.
§ 23-14.2. Protection Required. [1973 Code § 125-17]
The owner of any lot or premises or part thereof abutting on any street or
highway upon whose property there exists unsafe places adjacent to or near
such street or highway shall and they are hereby directed to immediately
remove such unsafe places or erect or construct a fence, wall or other
safeguard for the protection of persons lawfully using the paved or unpaved
portion of the sidewalks or street or highway upon which the property abuts
from injury from such unsafe places.
§ 23-14.3. Failure to Comply; Notice of Action by Town. [1973 Code
§ 125-18]
If the owner of any lands or premises upon which such an unsafe place
exists shall neglect, after notice given as herein provided, to remove such
unsafe place or to erect such fence, wall or other safeguard by this section
directed and required, the Street Commissioner shall cause such unsafe
place to be removed or shall cause to be erected or constructed a fence,
wall or other safeguard on such premises for the protection of persons
from injury from such unsafe places. Before proceeding to remove any such
unsafe place or to erect or construct any fence, wall or other safeguard
for such purpose or awarding any contract therefor, it shall be the duty
of the Street Commissioner to cause notice of such contemplated action
to be given to the owner of any lands affected thereby. Such notice shall
52.Editor's Note: For regulations concerning unsafe buildings or structures, see Chapter 14,
Building and Housing, Section 14-5.
§ 23-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-14.3
AO:637
contain a description of the property affected sufficiently definite in terms
to identify the same as well as a description of the required fence, wall or
other safeguard, and a notice that unless the unsafe place shall be removed
or that such a fence, wall or other safeguard be erected or constructed on
the premises within 10 days after the service thereof, it is the intention of
the Town of Kearny to remove such unsafe place or erect such fence, wall or
other safeguard mentioned in the notice, or cause the same to be erected,
at the expense of the owner of the premises, pursuant to Article 22E of an
Act entitled "An Act Concerning Municipalities, Laws 1917," page 319. Such
notice may be served upon the owner resident in Kearny in person, or by
leaving the same at his usual place of residence with a member of his family
above the age of 14 years; in case any such owner shall not reside in Kearny,
such notice may be served upon such owner personally or mailed to his,
her or their last known post-office address, or it may be served upon the
occupant of the property or upon the agent of the owner in charge thereof;
in case the owner of the premises is a corporation, the notice shall be served
by handing same to an officer of the corporation or mailing same to the
registered agent in the State of New Jersey. In case the owner of any such
property is not known or service cannot for any reason be made, as above
directed, a copy of the notice shall be posted upon the premises 10 days
prior to the date for doing the work as stated in the notice.
§ 23-14.4. Costs and Expenses; Recoverability. [1973 Code § 125-19]
Any expense incurred under this section shall become payable to the Town
of Kearny, immediately upon the completion of the work, and in case of
refusal or neglect of the owner to pay such expense, it shall be the duty of
the Town Attorney to collect the same by suit.
§ 23-15. through § 23-16. (RESERVED)
§ 23-17. CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF SIDEWALKS
AND DRIVEWAYS.
§ 23-17.1. Intent. [1973 Code § 125-21]
This section is intended to regulate the construction and maintenance
of sidewalks and driveway entrances hereafter constructed on streets,
avenues or public highways in the Town of Kearny.
§ 23-17.2. Construction Materials. [1973 Code § 125-22]
All sidewalks and driveway entrances hereafter constructed in the Town of
Kearny, as aforesaid, shall be constructed of cement concrete in accordance
with the Standard Specifications of the Town of Kearny regulating such
construction. Under special conditions and when specifically permitted by
the Town Council, sidewalks and driveway entrances may be constructed of
such other suitable materials as shall be approved by the Town Engineer.
The location, width and thickness and the level and grade of sidewalks and
§ 23-14.3 KEARNY CODE § 23-17.2
AO:638
driveway entrances shall be as fixed by the Standard Specifications or as
determined by the Town Engineer.
§ 23-17.3. Permit Required. [1973 Code § 125-23; Ord. No.
2002-O-83 § 11]
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to construct a sidewalk or driveway
entrance in the Town of Kearny hereafter must obtain a written permit from
the Street Commissioner. Applications for such permits shall be made on
the forms provided therefor by the Town of Kearny, and the application fee
for such permit shall be $40 and shall be payable at the time the permit
is issued. The permit must be kept and exhibited at the site for which the
permit is issued.
§ 23-17.4. Supervision of Construction. [1973 Code § 125-24]
All sidewalks and driveway entrances shall be constructed under the
supervision of the Town Engineer and must be approved by the Town
Engineer.
§ 23-17.5. Maintenance; Responsibility of Owner; Repairs by Town.
[1973 Code § 125-25]
All sidewalks and driveway entrances hereafter constructed in accordance
with the provisions of this section shall be maintained in proper and
serviceable condition at all times by the abutting property owner, and the
property owner is liable for the maintenance of the sidewalks and driveway
entrances; and in the event that the whole or any part of the sidewalks and
driveway entrances becomes dangerous or hazardous to pedestrian travel,
the property owner shall immediately repair and restore the sidewalks or
driveway entrances to proper condition, and should the property owner fail
in the performance of the duty aforesaid, the Street Commissioner shall
request the property owner, in writing, to repair or replace the damaged
sidewalk or driveway entrance; and if such repairs or replacements are
not made within 30 days thereafter, the Town of Kearny shall make the
necessary repairs and replacements and the cost thereof shall be charged
against the property owner; and if the cost is not paid by the property owner
within 60 days after confirmation by the Town Council, the cost shall be
assessed as a lien against the land abutting on the sidewalks and driveway
entrances thus repaired.
§ 23-18. CONCRETE SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND
MAINTENANCE.
§ 23-18.1. Compliance Required. [1973 Code § 125-26]
All sidewalks hereafter laid on streets, avenues or public highways in the
Town of Kearny shall be constructed of concrete, in accordance with the
regulations contained in this section.
§ 23-17.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-18.2
AO:639
§ 23-18.2. Specifications Established. [1973 Code § 125-27]
All sidewalks shall be five feet in width and laid not less than three feet
from curbline and to a depth of six inches. Foundation course, five inches,
concrete mixture, one part cement, two parts sand, three parts stone (trap
rock, gravel or dolomite); surface course one inch, concrete mixture, one
part cement, two parts sand.
§ 23-18.3. Grading. [1973 Code § 125-28]
All sidewalks shall be laid on a gradient of 1/2 inch to one foot where total
sidewalk width does not exceed 12 feet; above 12 feet in width, concrete
walk shall be laid on a gradient of 3/8 inch to one foot.
§ 23-18.4. Supervision. [1973 Code § 125-29]
All sidewalks shall be laid under the supervision and to the satisfaction of
the Street Commissioner or inspector provided by the Street Commissioner.
§ 23-18.5. Notice to Repair; Repairs by Town; Costs. [1973 Code
§ 125-30]
§ 23-19. CURBS.
§ 23-19.1. Part of the Sidewalk. [Ord. No. 2011-33]
All curbs shall be deemed to be part of the abutting sidewalk and shall
be subject to all of the maintenance and repair provisions in this Code
pertaining to sidewalks and their maintenance and repair shall be the
responsibility of the abutting property owner except as otherwise provided
for in this section.
a. Should the whole or any part of any concrete sidewalk laid by the
owner, or the agent or contractor of the owner, of the land abutting the
same become unserviceable as a sidewalk through failure to construct
same in accordance with this section, the Street Commissioner shall
notify the owner or owners to repair the unserviceable sidewalk within
30 days after service upon the owner or owners of a notice to make such
repairs in accordance with this section. The owner or owners shall also
be notified that if the repairs are not made within the thirty-day period
that it is the intention of the Town of Kearny to make the repairs or
cause same to be done and to charge the cost of the repairs to the
owner or owners of the lands abutting the sidewalk or part thereof thus
repaired.
b. The owner or owners of the lands abutting upon the unserviceable
sidewalks, the part or whole of which is thus repaired, shall also be
notified that if the cost of such repairs is not paid within 30 days after
confirmation by the Town Council of the costs, then the cost of the
repairs, as confirmed, shall be a lien against the land abutting on the
sidewalks thus repaired.
§ 23-18.2 KEARNY CODE § 23-19.2
AO:640
§ 23-19.2. Part of the Street. [Ord. No. 2011-33]
When all three of the following circumstances exist, however, curbs shall
be deemed to be part of the abutting street and the responsibility for their
repair and maintenance shall be that of the Town.
The excepting circumstances are that:
§ 23-20. STREET OPENINGS AND EXCAVATION.53
§ 23-20.1. Permit Required. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-56 § 2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation in or remove
the surface of any municipally controlled road or street in the Town for the
purpose whatsoever, or to store any material within the right-of-way limits
of any municipally controlled road or street in the Town for any purpose
whatsoever, without a written permit first having been obtained from the
Department of Public Works, Street Division of the Town hereinafter
provided.
The provisions of this section shall apply to any excavation or street opening
pursuant to a franchise or revocable consent.
§ 23-20.2. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-56 § 2]
Any person having executed a construction contract with the Town to
lay and construct pipes, conduits or other structures in the municipally
controlled roads or streets shall be governed by the provisions of the
construction contract and shall be excepted from the provisions of this
section.
§ 23-20.3. Permit Requirements. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-56 § 2]
A permittee shall obtain a separate permit for each 150 linear feet, or part
thereof, of a block segment and for each intersection where work is to be
performed.
a. The vertical slope of the curb is greater than 6% along the gutter line;
b. The horizontal curve of the curb has a radius of less than 500 feet; and
c. Soil erosion has occurred behind the curbline which has reduced the
height of the green belt adjacent to the curb to an elevation lower than
the road's gutter line directly adjacent to the erosion.
A 6% slope shall be defined as a change in the road's elevations at a
rate of six vertical feet per 100 horizontal feet.
The horizontal curve's radius shall be measured from the curve's arc to
the center of the curve.
53.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1973 Code §§ 73-1 — 73-13 and
Ordinance Nos. 2002-(O)-83.
§ 23-19.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-20.4
AO:641
§ 23-20.4. Conditions. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-56 § 2]
§ 23-20.5. Application. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-56 § 2]
a. Proper Notification. Permittee and owners of underground facilities
shall comply with the State of New Jersey's standards relating to
construction, excavation and demolition operations at or near
underground facilities.
Permittees shall take the precautions necessary to project such pipes,
mains, conduits, and other appurtenances at their own expense.
b. All work shall be done in accordance with the specifications and
provisions of the New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT).
c. All debris on the street shall be removed at the expiration of the permit
unless otherwise stipulated.
a. Applications for a permit in a road or street shall be made to the
Department of Public Works, Street Division. Such application must
include:
1. A description of the work to be performed;
2. The reason for the work;
3. The street address including the nearest cross streets where the
excavation or street opening is to be made;
4. A plan or sketch in proper scale indicating the size and location of
the proposed opening(s) which shall include:
(a) The distance in feet from the nearest intersection and from the
nearest curbline;
(b) The dimensions of the opening including length and width; and
(c) The existing parking restrictions;
5. The start and estimated completion dates;
6. The type of pavement or surface to be opened;
7. Whether the proposed work will be within a Streetscape area (if so,
the provisions of subsection 23-20.9 will apply);
8. Whether the proposed work will be on a protected street (if so, the
provisions of the subsection 23-20.10 will apply);
9. The name and address of the compaction testing company or
laboratory, as required on certain designated emergency streets
only;
§ 23-20.4 KEARNY CODE § 23-20.5
AO:642
§ 23-20.6. Application Procedure. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-56 § 2]
10. Photographs of the street or roadway which will be impacted by the
proposed work and the areas immediately adjacent thereto as it
exists at the time of the application for the permit;
11. A utility mark-out within the area affected;
12. A written agreement to completely restore the area affected within
a specified number of calendar days after the first disruption
thereof to the condition it was in at the time it was first completed.
The selected period of time is subject to the approval of a
representative of the Department of Public Works, Street Division;
13. Specifications, matching those used to construct the street or
roadway in the first place, for the complete restoration of any and
all bituminous paving, concrete sidewalks, concrete curbs, brick
pavers, bollards, light poles, benches, trash receptacles, planters,
sign posts and all other aspects of the street or roadway that may
be disrupted or impacted in anyway by such work;
14. An itemized and detailed estimate of the cost of the proposed work,
including the cost of complete restoration of the street or roadway
prepared by the applicant's architect or engineer;
15. A written agreement to submit photographs of the street or
roadway once the Department of Public Works, Street Division
representative has approved the complete restoration of the street
or roadway.
b. No trees within the sidewalk shall be disturbed or removed without the
permission of the Mayor and Council.
a. Parallel to Property Line. Application for a permit for the installation of
a main line of a utility or drainage system running parallel to the
property line of the road or street shall be made to the Department of
Public Works, Street Division. Such application must include a detailed
plan showing the limits of such installation, the depth of the main or
utility and other necessary information, including full compliance with
the requirements and subject to the conditions hereafter provided.
Upon approval of the plan by the Town Council, a permit will be
granted.
b. Not Parallel to Property Line. Applications for a permit for the
installation of a house connection for water, sewer or any other purpose
where the excavation does not run parallel to the property line of the
road or street shall, upon compliance with the requirements, and
subject to the conditions hereafter mentioned, be granted a permit.
Application for a permit for the installation of water connections
require the excavation or removal of the surface pavement shall be
made at the Department of Public Works, Street Division, on a form
§ 23-20.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-20.6
AO:643
§ 23-20.7. Fees, Indemnification, Insurance and Security. [Ord. No.
2004-(O)-56 § 2; Ord. No. 2007-(O)-19 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-22]
prepared by the Water Superintendent. Upon approval of the plan by
the Town Council, a permit will be granted.
c. All Other Applications. Application for all other street openings
requiring the excavation or removal of the surface pavement, and not
provided for hereinbefore, shall be made at the Department of Public
Works, Street Division.
The Department of Public Works, Street Division shall issue a permit to
the applicant when it determines that (i) the necessary documents are
acceptable in form and substance, (ii) the applicant has paid the review
and inspection fee, (iii) the applicant has posted sufficient security,
(iv) the applicant has satisfied all other requirements applicable to the
issuance of permits in the Town of Kearny.
a. The applicant shall pay an application review and site inspection fee of
$200.
b. In addition to the review and inspection fee, the amount of payments
hereafter mentioned shall be deposited, either in cash or certified
check, in the Department of Public Works, Street Division before a
permit will be granted, and the amount thus collected shall be used by
the Town of Kearny in payment for the inspection and proper repairs
and restoration of the surface pavements, and no rebate will be made.
The permittee shall be liable and responsible for the care and
maintenance of any opening under the permit granted until the
pavement has been permanently repaired and restored. In the
determination of the actual square yards of pavement to be removed,
repaired and restored, additional width of eight inches beyond the
limits of the trench shall be included, except under unusual conditions
when a greater width will be used, as determined by the contemplated
construction.
Schedule of Payments for Road Permits
1. Bituminous-concrete surface pavements on concrete base and
reinforced-concrete pavements, $8 per square yard, but not less
than $75.
2. Bituminous pavements on stone base, $7.50 per square yard, but
not less than $50.
3. Earth shoulder opening, $5 per square yard, but not less than $5.
The foregoing schedule of charges may be increased or decreased
from time to time by ordinance of the Town Council to correspond
to the increase or decrease of costs occasioned by fluctuation in the
price of labor or material.
§ 23-20.6 KEARNY CODE § 23-20.7
AO:644
c. Indemnification: Town's Right to Perform.
1. Indemnification. Every permittee, as a condition of accepting any
permit issued hereunder, shall save and hold harmless the Town of
Kearny and indemnify the Town of Kearny, its officials, agents,
servants and employees for and against any and all loss, damage,
claim, expense or demand whatsoever arising out of any matter or
resulting from the opening or excavation of any street and the
issuance of a permit therefor as provided in this section.
2. Notice of Failure to Make Progress. If the permittee, in installing
the permanent pavement shall fail to make progress satisfactory to
the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, the Town
may give written notice of such failure to the permittee. If, within
20 days after the receipt of such notice, the permittee shall fail to
make progress at a rate satisfactory to the Superintendent of the
Department of Public Works, the Town shall have the right to
complete the installation of such pavement, in which event the
permittee shall be charged for the cost thereof at the rate the Town
is billed by the contractor who performs the work, or at the rate it
costs the Town to perform such work itself, which charges shall be
billed after the receipt of the bill therefor.
d. Security. The applicant shall post security to ensure the complete
restoration of the street or roadway in an amount equal to 120% of the
estimated cost of the proposed work, including the complete
restoration of the street or roadway as determined by either the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or his/her
designated representative, which estimate may exceed that submitted
by the applicant's engineer or architect. The applicant shall post this
security by either: i) posting a bond in such amount; or ii) depositing
cash in such amount in the Town's escrow account maintained by the
Chief Financial Officer. There shall be filed with the posted security a
written consent that if the restoration work is not completed by the date
specified the Town may retain a private contractor to perform the
restoration work and draw upon the security to the contractor. Security
shall be provided at the time of the application. Security shall remain in
effect for a period of three years after the acceptance of final
restoration work under any permit that has been completed and
accepted by the Town. [Amended 5-5-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-19]
e. Public Utilities. [Amended 5-5-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-19]
1. Bond in Lieu of Security Deposit. Any public utility subject to
regulations of the Board of Public Utility Commission of this State,
in lieu of security deposit as required above, may execute a bond in
the penal sum of $10,000 to the Town of Kearny and file same with
the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works at the time
of the application. In the event of any emergency, a public utility
may make necessary street openings and repairs prior to obtaining
a permit; provided a permit shall be obtained by it from the
§ 23-20.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-20.7
AO:645
§ 23-20.8. Excavation and Restoration Requirements. [Ord. No.
2004-(O)-56 § 2; Ord. No. 2008-(O)-15 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-22; Ord.
No. 2015-40]
Department of Public Works within the next two working days after
the opening is made; and provided further that the public utility
shall file with the Financial Officer its bond in the sum of $10,000
conditioned upon the payment of all permit fees due from it to the
Town.
2. Form of Bond. Each bond filed pursuant to Subsection e1 shall be in
form satisfactory to the Town Attorney and shall remain in effect for
a period of three years after the acceptance of final restoration
work under any permit that has been completed and accepted by
the Town.
f. Insurance. Applications for permits required to be issued under the
provisions of this section shall be accompanied by evidence of
insurance against "General Liability" with limits of at least $1,000,000
per person and $2,000,000 per accident. The insurance policy shall
include the Town as an additional named insured and the certificate
shall be attached to the application and filed therewith.
In the alternative, a contractor applicant may deposit with the Town
a policy evidencing the issuance of the insurance referred to in the
foregoing paragraph. The policy may be for a stated period of time
and shall name the Town as an additional insured. If the policy is so
deposited it will not be necessary for the contractor applicant to submit
proof of insurance with each application for a permit.
In lieu of evidence of insurance, a public utility applicant for a permit
may file with the Town a copy of a self-insurance certificate issued
by the Security-Responsibility Bureau of the Department of Law and
Public Safety, New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission, of the State of
New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:6-52.
A public utility shall, in addition to filing a self-insurer certificate,
file with the Town its bond in the sum of $100,000 containing the
condition that it shall defend at its own expense any suit brought
against the Town and further to indemnify and save harmless the Town
from and against any and all loss, costs, damages or judgment incurred
by reason of any damage to any property, injury to any person, or any
loss of life resulting from any alleged negligence of the permittee, his
agents, employees or contractors in performing the work covered by
the permit.
a. Proper Notice.
1. Permittees shall notify the Police Department, the Fire
Department, the Construction Code Department, and the
Department of Public Works, Street Division, of the construction,
§ 23-20.7 KEARNY CODE § 23-20.8
AO:646
and street operations that require street closing permits, at least
48 hours in advance of the commencement of nonemergency work.
[Amended 5-5-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-19]
2. All permittees shall comply with the specifications of the New
Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT).
b. Breaking Existing Pavement. Precutting of pavement wearing course
and base shall be required for pavement removal. The use of a "Ram
Hoe" or truck mounted pavement breaker is not permitted, unless
otherwise authorized. Only hand held tools may be used for this
purpose. This applies to all streets at all times. The permittee shall be
responsible for keeping the construction area as clean and neat as
possible during the permit life. No material shall restrict water flow in
gutters. All possible arrangements for the safety of the general public
shall be maintained. Every effort shall be made to keep the pavement
opening dimensions to an absolute minimum.
c. Excavation.
1. Sheeting and Bracing. The sides of every open excavation five feet
or more in depth shall be securely held by adequate timber,
sheeting and bracing where the earth is not sloped to the angle of
repose of the material, and where unsafe conditions are created
due to composition of the soil, climatic conditions, depth of
excavation or construction operations.
2. Tunneling or Jacking. No person shall make any installation or
repair between two or more street openings by means of tunneling
or jacking, without a permit.
Tunneling or jacking may be permitted for the installation or
replacement of a lateral connection provided the opening does not
exceed eight inches in diameter. Full trenching shall be required
for all waste line repair/connections.
Tunneling will not be permitted under any circumstances and shall
be an unlawful exercise of the privileges under any such permit and
a violation hereof, unless special permission has been granted in
writing at the issuance of the permit.
3. Traffic and Maintenance.
(a) No more than one lane of traffic may be obstructed, except as
provided by Kearny Police Department stipulation or as
otherwise authorized by the Mayor and Council.
(b) It shall be the duty of the permittee to properly guard the
excavation by the execution of suitable barriers by day and
lights by night and permittee shall be liable for any neglect to
safeguard the traveling public.
§ 23-20.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-20.8
AO:647
(c) All unattended street openings or excavations in a driving lane,
including intersections, shall be plated. In the case of gas or
steam leak, barricades in accordance with the New Jersey or
Federal Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices shall be
used until the leak is corrected.
(d) Barricades, signs, lights and other approved safety devices
shall be displayed in accordance with the New Jersey or
Federal Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(e) The permit may restrict street operations and construction
within the critical areas to nights, weekends or off-traffic
hours.
(f) Flagpersons. Permittees whose work results in the closing of a
moving traffic lane, which requires traffic to be diverted to
another lane, shall, at all times when actively working at the
site, post a flagperson or utilize an authorized plan for the
maintenance and protection of traffic at the point where traffic
is diverted to assist motorists and pedestrians to proceed
around the obstructed lane.
d. Temporary Closing of Sidewalks. A minimum of four feet sidewalk width
of unobstructed pedestrian passageway shall be maintained at all
times. Where openings and excavations do not allow for four feet of
unobstructed pedestrian passageway, a temporary sidewalk closing
plan should be submitted to the Kearny Police Department.
e. Work Site Maintenance.
1. All excavated material shall be either removed from the site or
stockpiled at a designated curb, properly barricaded in accordance
with the Federal Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and
stored to keep gutters clear and unobstructed.
2. All obstructions on the street shall be protected by barricades,
fencing or railing, with flags, lights or signs in accordance with the
Federal Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices placed at
proper intervals and during the hours prescribed. During twilight
hours the flags shall be replaced with amber lights.
f. Storage of Materials.
1. A street opening permit does not include permission to store
construction materials in a designated area adjacent to the
permitted worksite.
2. No separate permit shall be required for the storage of equipment,
excluding cranes, in a designated area in compliance with any
applicable stipulations on the permit.
3. Application for permits to store construction materials shall be
made at the office of the Superintendent of Public Works and may
§ 23-20.8 KEARNY CODE § 23-20.8
AO:648
be made either in conjunction with the application for permit for
road opening or excavation or separately. Permit for storage of
material shall be granted to the applicant upon furnishing
satisfactory evidence of the necessity for such storage and upon
compliance with the requirements and subject to the conditions in
paragraph 4 below.
4. The permit shall be granted upon condition that:
(a) The applicant shall properly guard the material stored by
erecting suitable barriers, maintain warning signs and lights to
safeguard the traveling public, and at all times leave carriage
way of at least 18 feet between the material, and shall also
make provision so that the flow of water along the street may
be unobstructed; and
(b) The space occupied by the storage of material shall be no more
than is necessary for the applicant's needs, or for a longer time
than is necessary to enable him to complete the purpose for
which the permit is granted, and in no case shall the permit be
considered as giving the applicant any right to store material
upon the street in front of property other than that belonging
to or leased by the applicant; and
(c) The permit shall state the time that the applicant may have,
and any right under the permit shall not extend beyond the
period of such time; and
(d) The applicant shall pay to the Town as an inspection charge
upon receiving such permit $75 for the first 15 days and $200
per month or portion of month thereafter.
5. The designated storage area(s) are subject to review and approval
by the Department of Public Works and Kearny Police Department.
g. Backfill and Compaction.
1. Upon completion of repairs in a street, permittees shall backfill
street openings and excavations in a manner in accordance with
the specifications. All materials used for backfill shall be free from
bricks, blocks, excavated pavement materials and/or organic
material or other debris.
2. Backfill material shall be deposited in horizontal layers not
exceeding 12 inches in thickness prior to compaction. A minimum
of 95% of Standard Proctor Maximum Density will be required after
compaction.
3. When placing fill or backfill around pipes, layers shall be deposited
to progressively bury the pipe to equal depths on both sides.
Backfill immediately adjacent to pipes and conduits shall not
contain particles larger than three inches in diameter.
§ 23-20.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-20.8
AO:649
4. Compaction shall be attained by the use of impact rammers, plate
or small drum vibrators, or pneumatic button head compaction
equipment. Hand tamping shall not be permitted except in the
immediate area of the underground facility, where it shall be lightly
hand tamped with as many strokes as required to achieve
maximum density. The definition of the "immediate area" shall be a
maximum of 18 inches from the facility.
5. Where sheeting has been used for the excavation, it shall be pulled
when the excavation has been filled or backfilled to the maximum
unsupported depth allowed by the New Jersey Department of
Transportation guidelines.
6. As a measure of maximum density achieved for temporary
restoration, the pavement surface shall not sink more than two
inches from the surrounding existing surface during the life of the
temporary restoration. More than two inches of settlement shall be
deemed a failure of the compaction of the backfill and cause the
removal of said backfill to the subsurface facility and new fill
installed and properly compacted.
7. The permittee shall be required to furnish the Department with
copies of in-process compaction reports certified by a professional
engineer as to the compliance with the requirement of the
aforementioned backfill requirements. This certified compaction
report shall be submitted along with the cutform for every tenth
street opening permit issued to the permittee or as directed by the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works.
h. Temporary Asphaltic Pavement.
1. Immediately upon completion of the compaction of the backfill of
any street opening, the permittee shall install a temporary
pavement of an acceptable stabilized asphalt paving mixture,
course size 1.5 to two inches, not less than four inches in thickness
after compaction, flush with the adjacent surfaces.
2. The permittee has the option of installing full depth pavement
using an acceptable asphalt paving mixture immediately upon
completion of the compaction of the backfill excluding
reconstructed protected streets and full-depth concreted
roadways.
3. Upon the expiration of the permit, all equipment, construction
materials and debris shall be removed from the site, unless
otherwise stipulated.
4. When final restoration is to be done the materials are to be
removed with hand tools to a depth necessary to accomplish the
final restoration.
§ 23-20.8 KEARNY CODE § 23-20.8
AO:650
5. In the event that two or more unconnected road openings are
requested and dug only 50 feet or less apart, the restoration
requirements shall include the curb-to-curb milling and paving of a
continuous area including the undisturbed area between the
trenches. [Amended 5-5-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-19]
i. Plating and Decking.
1. All plating and decking installed by the permittee shall be made
safe for vehicles and/or pedestrians and shall be adequate to carry
the load.
2. The size of the plate or decking shall be large enough to span the
opening, be firmly placed to prevent rocking and shall overlap the
edges of trenches and openings and be sufficiently ramped to
provide smooth riding and a safe condition.
3. All plating and decking shall be fastened by splicing,
countersinking or otherwise protected to prevent movement.
4. Where deflections are more than 3/4 inches, heavier sections of
plates or decking or intermediate supports shall be installed.
5. All permittees who install plating and decking during the winter
months shall either post signs at the site indicating "Steel Plates
Ahead Raise Plow" or shall countersink said plates flush to the level
of the roadway. All signs shall be of the size and type specified in
the Federal Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. These
signs shall be placed on the sidewalk, adjacent to the curb, facing
vehicle traffic five feet prior to the plates. On two-way streets, signs
shall be placed on both sides of the street five feet prior to the
plates.
6. All plating and decking shall have a skid-resistant surface equal to
or greater than the adjacent existing street or roadway surface.
j. Base.
1. Concrete and asphalt base material shall conform to specifications.
2. Concrete for base shall be plated in a driving lane and intersections
or barricaded in accordance with the Federal Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices in a parking lane for a minimum of three
days to permit proper cure of concrete, unless otherwise specified.
3. Hot asphalt binder materials may be used in place of concrete for
nonprotected and/or resurfaced streets at a thickness ratio of 1 1/2
inch of asphalt for every inch of concrete.
4. The concrete base shall be restored at the same grade as the
existing base.
§ 23-20.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-20.8
AO:651
5. At no time will asphalt other than binder be permitted as a base
course. Conduit or pipes shall be installed at a minimum depth of
18 inches from the surface of the roadway, or below the base,
whichever is greater. Where conduits and pipes cannot be installed
at the required minimum depth, protective plating shall be
installed over the facilities upon written request from the permittee
and receipt of written approval by the Town Engineer.
k. Wearing Course.
1. Wearing course material shall conform to the New Jersey
Department of Transportation (NJDOT) specifications.
2. The finished grade of the wearing course shall be flush with
surrounding pavement on all sides of the cut; the restored wearing
course shall extend for a distance of six inches beyond the edge of
the base course.
3. The minimum thickness of the wearing course on full depth asphalt
restoration shall be a minimum of two inches.
4. When more than one roadway opening is made against a single
permit and the openings are less than three feet apart the openings
are machine excavated, the existing wearing course between such
openings shall be restored integrally with the opening wearing
course restoration, in accordance with the Town's standard detail.
5. When openings are made by digging with hand tools or hand held
pneumatic tools, the existing wearing course between such
openings need not be replaced.
6. When a street opening is 12 inches or less from the curb, the entire
pavement between the opening and curb shall be excavated and
replaced in kind, in accordance with the current Town's standard
detail. The pavement base shall be inspected and repaired where
necessary and a new wearing course shall be installed from the
curb to the street opening. The areas described above shall be
included in the permittee's guarantee.
7. Whenever any street is excavated, the permittee shall restore such
street in kind as to material type, color, finish or distinctive design.
8. The wearing course shall be properly sealed completely at the
edges of the cut with liquid asphaltic cement ironed in with a
heated smoothing iron or by means of infrared treatment to
prevent water seepage into the pavement.
9. Any roadway pavement markings, including but not limited to
crosswalks and lane lines, and any parking or regulatory signs or
supports shall be replaced in kind in accordance with the Manual
on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
§ 23-20.8 KEARNY CODE § 23-20.8
AO:652
10. Upon completion of temporary restoration measures, a thirty-day
settlement period shall be observed. Upon completion of the
settlement period, final (permanent) restorations shall be
completed within 10 working days, or as directed by the
Department of Public Works should the final restoration period fall
within the winter season. [Amended 5-5-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-19]
l. Quality Control Program Requirement for Roadways.
1. All permittees engaged in street openings, shall complete the work
so as to provide smooth riding surfaces throughout the guarantee
period on their respective restorations.
2. A documented quality history of restoration shall be maintained by
the responsible permittee. This information should show that
inspections are made at some optimum intervals to assure
conformance to the guarantee.
3. Quality Control Program information shall be made available to the
Town upon request.
4. The use of experimental methods or materials may be authorized
under selective conditions, upon application to the town for
approval prior to use on the Town's streets.
5. Any permittee may file a proposed Quality Control Program with
the Town for approval. The Town's Engineer may waive any of the
foregoing specification requirements as part of an approved
program of Quality Control. Any waiver so granted shall remain in
effect as long as the approved program is implemented in a manner
satisfactory to the Town Engineer.
m. Other Requirements.
1. Street Opening Location Form.
(a) Permittees shall maintain a street opening location form
("cutform") at their office and shall provide this form to the
Town upon request. Such cutform shall include the following
information:
(1) A sketch showing the exact dimensions and location of the
restored area, and a description of the opening or trench
defined by distance in feet from the nearest intersection
and from the nearest curbline;
(2) The street opening permit number;
(3) The date of completion of the final restoration;
(4) The name of the final pavement restoration contractor;
and
§ 23-20.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-20.8
AO:653
§ 23-20.9. Excavations and Street Openings in Streetscape
Improvement Areas. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-56 § 2]
No street opening actively shall be allowed, except for emergency work or
as authorized by the Mayor and Council, in an area that will disrupt or
impact in any way Streetscape Improvements, unless permittee, in addition
to satisfying all other requirements of this section shall satisfy the following
requirements before a permit shall issue.
(5) A compaction report certified by a licensed professional
engineer, when applicable.
(b) Failure to submit a cutform upon request may jeopardize
future permit requests and may subject permittees to
summonses.
2. Guarantee Period. Permittees shall be responsible for permanent
restoration and maintenance of street openings and excavations for
a period of three years on unprotected streets, and up to five years
on protected streets commencing on the restoration completion
date. This period shall be the guarantee period.
3. Permittees shall comply with all applicable sections of these rules,
the specifications, and all other applicable laws or rules.
4. The Town Engineer can require the use of infrared technology for
smoothing out the repaired or restored surface.
5. Any street opening in connection with the installation of
telecommunication equipment that is not confined to within eight
feet of the curbline, including the required cut back, on any street,
regardless of status — protected or unprotected — or where
located within the Town, and/or within any sidewalk area within the
Town, shall require full curb-to-curb roadway restoration under all
circumstances.
a. Permit Issuance. Applicants for an excavation and street opening
permit in a Streetscape Improvement area shall submit the following
documents to the Construction Code Enforcement Department;
1. Plans, at proper scale, illustrating the proposed work;
2. Photographs of the Streetscape Improvements which will be
impacted by the proposed work and the areas immediately adjacent
thereto (collectively, the "Streetscape Area") as it exists at the time
of the application for the permit;
3. A utility mark-out within the Streetscape Area;
4. A written agreement to completely restore the Streetscape Area
within a specified number of calendar days after the first disruption
thereof to the condition it was in at the time it was first completed.
§ 23-20.8 KEARNY CODE § 23-20.9
AO:654
§ 23-20.10. Excavations and Street Openings in Protected Streets.
[Ord. No. 2004-(O)-56 § 2; Ord. No. 2007-(O)-19 § 1; Ord. No.
2008-(O)-15 § 2; Ord. No. 2012-38 §§ 1 — 3; Ord. No. 2018-24]
No street opening activity shall be allowed, except for emergency work
or as authorized by the Mayor and Council, in a protected street for a
period of 10 years from the completion of the street improvement. The Town
Engineer shall once a year, or as often as may be appropriate, provide to
public utility providers and the general public notice of planned work on
municipal roads, advising that any work requiring excavation or disruption
of pavement within or about those roads will have to be completed prior
to the Town paving project. Such notice shall state that no road opening
permits shall be issued for openings, cuts or excavations in newly paved
roads for a period of 10 years from the completion of the paving project. The
notice shall also provide that applications for road opening permits for work
to be done prior to the Town paving project shall be submitted promptly in
order that the work covered by the permit may be completed before paving.
Notice to public utility providers shall be by certified mail. Notice to the
public shall be provided by publication in an official newspaper designated
by the Mayor and Council.
The selected period of time is subject to the approval of a
representative of the Construction Code Enforcement Department;
5. Specifications, matching those used to construct the Streetscape
Improvements in the first place, for the complete restoration of any
and all bituminous paving, concrete sidewalks, concrete curbs,
brick pavers, bollards, light poles, benches, trash receptacles,
planters, sign posts and all other aspects of the Streetscape
Improvements that may be disrupted or impacted in any way by
such work;
6. An itemized and detailed estimate of the cost of the proposed work,
including the cost of the complete restoration of the Streetscape
Area, prepared by the applicant's architect or engineer;
7. A written agreement to submit photographs of the Streetscape
Area once the Construction Code Enforcement representative has
approved the complete restoration of the Streetscape Area.
a. Permit Issuance. No permit to use or open any street, except for
emergency work, shall be issued to any person within a ten-year period
after the completion of the construction of a capital project relating to
such street requiring resurfacing or reconstruction unless such person
demonstrates that the need for the work could not have reasonably
been anticipated prior to or during such construction. Notwithstanding
the foregoing provisions, the Mayor and Council may authorize the
issuance of a permit to open a street within such ten-year period upon a
finding of necessity therefor.
§ 23-20.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-20.10
AO:655
b. Conditions. Permittees shall be responsible to contact the Town
Engineer and Department of Public Works to determine whether a
street is scheduled to be rebuilt under a street reconstruction project.
c. Application.
1. Permittees shall include on the application the justification for any
street opening activities on protected streets.
2. The permittee shall attach the "Protected Street Opening Permit
Application attachment" to the Street Opening permit application
prior to obtaining the permit.
d. Restorations.
1. No backfill of any opening or excavation on a protected street shall
be performed unless the permittee notifies the Department of
Public Works at least 48 hours prior to the scheduled start time for
the backfill. In no case shall the permittee commence the backfill
prior to the scheduled start time. For the base and wearing course,
the permittee shall fax its daily paving schedule to the Department
of Public Works prior to commencing work. In addition, during the
backfill and compaction phase of the work, permittees must
provide, on site, a certified compaction tester from an approved
laboratory or a licensed certified tester to test that the compaction
of the backfills is in accordance with the Department of Public
Work's rules and specifications. Upon completion of temporary
restoration measures, a thirty-day settlement period shall be
observed. Upon completion of the settlement period, final
(permanent) restorations shall be completed within 10 working
days, or as directed by the Department of Public Works should the
final restoration period fall within the winter season. [Amended
5-5-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-19]
2. The Department of Public Works may inspect any phase of the
work, including but not limited to initial excavation, backfill and
compaction, performance of required cut backs, and final
restoration.
3. A certification issued by a New Jersey licensed professional
engineer shall be provided to the Town Engineer within 30 days of
completion of work on protected streets. The certification shall
state that the type of work performed was as described in the
permit application, and that all phases of the restoration were
performed in accordance with the Town rules and specifications.
4. Permittees shall be responsible for the proper repair of the street
opening or excavation for a period of three years from the date of
completion or for the duration of the protected street guarantee
period, whichever is longer.
§ 23-20.10 KEARNY CODE § 23-20.10
AO:656
§ 23-20.11. Emergency Street Openings and Excavations. [Ord. No.
2004-(O)-56 § 2]
5. Where street openings cannot be confined to within four feet of the
curbline, including the required cut back, and/or within the
sidewalk area, full curb to curb roadway restoration shall be
required where protected street status has been in effect for 48
months or less, unless otherwise directed by the Mayor and
Council. [Amended 5-5-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-19]
6. In the event a permanent restoration pavement installed in
violation of the provisions of paragraph 1 of this paragraph d
settles more than two inches below the surrounding existing
surface during the life of such permanent restoration, this shall be
deemed a failure of the backfill compaction, in which case, the
permittee shall remove all of the failed backfill, down to the
subsurface facility, and install new, properly compacted backfill and
the final finish should be infrared for a smooth trench.
7. In those circumstances where a nonemergency linear opening or
excavation is performed on a street where protected streets status
has been in effect for a period of four years or less, then the
permittee shall be required to perform full curb to curb roadway
restoration on the protected street, plus curb to curb repaving of
another street in the area, as designated by the Town Engineer
with the consent of the Mayor and Council. The length of the
repaving of the additional street shall be substantially equivalent
(as determined by the Town Engineer) to the length of the
restoration of the protected street that was opened/excavated
within this four-year period. [Amended 5-5-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-19]
a. Permit Requirements. [Amended 5-5-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-19]
1. No person shall perform emergency work without contacting the
Kearny Police Department to declare the emergency and request
traffic control.
2. An emergency road opening permit application shall be filed with
the Department of Public Works within the next two working days
after the opening is made.
b. Conditions.
1. A permittee shall begin emergency work within two hours after
contacting the Kearny Police Department. [Amended 5-5-2020 by
Ord. No. 2020-19]
2. A permittee shall perform emergency work on an around-the-clock
basis until the emergency is eliminated. Once the emergency is
eliminated on a critical roadway, the permittee shall suspend work,
restore the full width of the roadway and resume work, if
§ 23-20.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-20.11
AO:657
necessary, during nights, weekends or off-traffic hours. Such
resumption of work shall only be undertaken within the forty-eighthour
duration of the emergency declaration. A permittee working
under an emergency on a roadway other than a critical roadway
may suspend or resume work at any time within the forty-eighthour
period. [Amended 5-5-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-19]
3. No more than one lane of traffic may be obstructed, however, if an
emergency street opening is larger than eight feet by 10 feet,
permittee may occupy up to a maximum of 12 feet on one side of
the opening and maximum of six feet on the other side.
4. All unattended street openings or excavations in a driving lane,
including intersections, shall be plated, except as otherwise
directed by the Town Engineer. The Town Engineer may require all
street openings and excavations at any location to be plated when
no work is in progress. In the case of gas or steam leaks, barricades
in accordance with the federal Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices shall be used until the leak is corrected.
5. Barricades, signs, lights and other approved safety devices shall be
displayed in accordance with the federal Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
6. A minimum of four feet sidewalk width of unobstructed pedestrian
passageway, pedestrians shall be directed by signs to the opposite
sidewalk.
7. No private vehicles shall be kept within the work area.
8. Any additional information regarding the emergency work that is
requested at the site by a Department inspector shall be provided
by the permittee and/or the persons performing such work.
[Amended 5-5-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-19]
9. Flagpersons. Permittees whose work results in the closing of a
moving traffic lane, which requires traffic to be diverted to another
lane, shall, at all times which actively working at the site, post a
flagperson or utilize an authorized plan for the maintenance and
protection of traffic at the point where traffic is diverted to assist
motorists and pedestrians to proceed around the obstructed lane.
c. Application. When applying for an emergency road opening permit, a
permittee shall submit all information required by the Department of
Public Works, Street Department. This information includes, but is not
limited to, the following: [Amended 5-5-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-19]
1. Name of permittee;
2. A description of the work performed;
3. The street address including the nearest cross streets where the
opening occurred;
§ 23-20.11 KEARNY CODE § 23-20.11
AO:658
§ 23-20.12. Restrictions and Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-56 § 2;
Ord. No. 2012-38 §§ 4, 5]
4. Reason and type of emergency (including interruption of service);
5. A plan or sketch in proper scale indicating the size and location of
the opening which shall include:
(a) The distance in feet from the nearest intersection and from the
nearest curbline;
(b) The dimensions of the opening including length and width; and
(c) The existing parking restrictions.
6. The type of pavement or surface that was opened;
7. Whether the emergency opening is within a streetscape area (if so,
the provisions of Subsection 23-20.9 will apply);
8. Whether the emergency opening is on a protected street (if so, the
provisions of Subsection 23-20.10 will apply);
9. The name and address of the compaction testing company or
laboratory, as required on certain designated emergency streets
only;
10. A written agreement to completely restore the area affected within
a specified number of calendar days after the first disruption
thereof to the condition it was in at the time it was first completed.
The selected period of time is subject to the approval of a
representative of the Department of Public Works, Street Division;
11. Specifications, matching those used to construct the street or
roadway in the first place, for the complete restoration of any and
all bituminous paving, concrete sidewalks, concrete curbs, brick
pavers, bollards, light poles, benches, trash receptacles, planters,
sign posts and all other aspects of the street or roadway that may
be disrupted or impacted in any way by such work;
12. An itemized and detailed estimate of the cost of the work, including
the cost of complete restoration of the street or roadway prepared
by the applicant's architect or engineer; and
13. A written agreement to submit photographs of the street or
roadway once the Department of Public Works, Street Division,
representative has approved the complete restoration of the street
or roadway.
a. No permit shall issue for work on a newly constructed street, which
street shall have been constructed after the passage of this section, for
a period of 10 years from the date of acceptance of such construction,
except in cases of emergency as described in subsection 23-20.11.
§ 23-20.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23-20.12
AO:659
§ 23-20.13. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-56 § 2]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section, or take
part in or assist in any violation, or who shall violate or fail to comply with
any order or regulation made under the provisions of this section, or shall
make any excavation or store any material within the line of any municipally
controlled road or street in the Town of Kearny, except as allowed by permit
under the provisions of this section, shall severally for each and every
such violation or noncompliance, respectively, not otherwise provided for,
be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. Should any person,
firm or corporation in violating any of the provisions of this section, after
notice of such violation, continue such violation, each 24 hours that the
same shall be continued shall be construed to constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
§ 23-20.14. Nonapplicability. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-56 § 2]
The provisions of this section in no way shall affect the provisions of an
ordinance entitled "An ordinance granting permission and consent to New
Jersey Bell Telephone Company, its successors and assigns, to use various
streets, roads, avenues and highways, and parts thereof, in the Town of
Kearny, Hudson County, New Jersey, either above or below the surface
thereof, or both, for the construction, maintenance and operation of its local
and through lines and systems in connection with the transaction of its
business, and prescribing the manner of so doing," adopted April 13, 1932;
and this chapter shall continue hereafter in full force and affect.
§ 23-21. PAY TELEPHONES.
§ 23-21.1. Written Authorization Required. [Ord. No. 2000-O-10 § 1]
No person shall install or maintain or permit the installation or maintenance
of any pay telephone on or over any public street, sidewalk, or right-of-way
without the written authorization of the Mayor and Council.
§ 23-21.2. Time for Compliance. [Ord. No. 2000-O-10 § 2]
All pay telephones in violation of subsection 23-21.1 shall be removed within
30 days of the effective date of this section.
§ 23-21.3. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2000-O-10 §§ 3, 4]
b. No permit shall issue for work within a Streetscape Improvement Area
for a period of five years from date of acceptance of such construction
or improvement made therein, except in cases of emergency as
described in subsection 23-20.9.
c. No permit shall issue for work within a street determined to be a
Protected Street for a period of 10 years from date of acceptance of
such construction or improvement made therein, except in cases of
emergency as described in subsection 23-20.10.
§ 23-20.12 KEARNY CODE § 23-21.3
AO:660
§ 23-21.4. Removal and Impoundment. [Ord. No. 2000-O-10 § 5]
If the Town removes any pay telephone pursuant to this section, then such
pay telephone shall be impounded by the Town and not released to the
owner thereof except upon the payment of any fines imposed pursuant to
this section and a reasonable charge for the removal of said pay telephone.
Any pay telephone not reclaimed by the owner within three months of
impoundment shall be deemed abandoned and subject to disposition as
abandoned property.
§ 23-21.5. Processing Fee. [Ord. No. 2001-O-44 § 1]
All applications submitted to the Mayor and Council shall be in writing and
shall be accompanied by a processing fee of $25 if submitted on or before
December 31, 2001 and of $100 thereafter.
§ 23-21.6. Review of Application. [Ord. No. 2001-O-44 § 1]
In reviewing an application, the Mayor and Council may consider the public
need for a pay telephone at the proposed location, the potential for
increasing and exacerbating loitering or criminal or disorderly activity at
the proposed location by locating a pay telephone there, the potential for
causing or increasing interference with the free passage of pedestrians at
the proposed location by locating a pay telephone there, and any other
factors which may impact on public health, safety or welfare by the
installation of a pay telephone at the proposed location.
Chapter 23A
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS SUPPLEMENTAL
§ 23A-1. PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVE. [6-23-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-23]
a. Any violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of $100 per day,
per pay telephone.
b. In addition to any other penalty or provision provided herein, any
telephone which is in violation of this section shall be subject to removal
by the Town of Kearny.
a. The Mayor and Council of the Town of Kearny recognize the immense
impact that the Covid-19 shut down has had on our local economy and
small businesses and wish to help stimulate the economic recovery by
adopting immediate short-term changes to certain regulations; and
b. The Mayor and Council of the Town of Kearny further recognize that to
maintain the health and safety of the public by continuing safety
protocols such as social distancing, changes must be adopted that help
local businesses remain viable.
§ 23-21.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23A-1
AO:661
§ 23A-2. APPLICABILITY AND EXPIRATION OF PROVISIONS.
[6-23-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-23]
§ 23A-3. RETAIL BUSINESSES AND SERVICES. [6-23-2020 by Ord.
No. 2020-23]
Retail businesses and services may use the area in front of their stores
to display merchandise and conduct business pursuant to the following
provisions:
c. This chapter is intended to implement and supplement the provisions of
Executive Order 150 issued by Governor Murphy on June 3, 2020
("EO-150"), the Executive Directive No. 20-014 issued by the
Department of Health dated June 3, 2020 (the "DOH Directive"), and
the Special Ruling SR 2020-10 of the New Jersey Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control dated June 3, 2020 (the "ABC Special Ruling").
EO-150, the DOH Directive, and the ABC Special Ruling and all future
amendments to any of the foregoing are incorporated herein by
reference.
a. This chapter shall apply only to restaurants and nonprofit operations
(including social clubs and cultural clubs) located anywhere in the
Town, and retail establishments located in any Town Commercial
District or Redevelopment Area, each of which must be associated with
an adjacent "brick and motor" establishment.
b. The provisions in this chapter shall take effect immediately upon
adoption of the chapter as provided by law.
c. This chapter shall expire on December 31, 2020, unless extended by
amending ordinance approved by the Mayor and Council of the Town of
Kearny, provided, however, that the provisions relating to the service of
alcoholic beverages in outdoor dining areas shall expire on November
30, 2020, pursuant to the ABC Special Ruling, unless further extended
by the ABC.
d. This chapter shall supersede, from the time of adoption until the
expiration hereof, all other inconsistent provisions of any section of the
Town Code.
a. Projection into Sidewalk. Where sidewalks are more than 20 feet wide,
retail businesses may use up to 10 feet of sidewalk space adjacent to
their storefront. Where sidewalks are less than 20 feet wide, retail
businesses may use the available space adjacent to their storefront
provided that not less than six feet of safe unobstructed pedestrian
egress is maintained.
b. Sidewalk displays may be set up on the sidewalk during a business's
regular hours, except that no business or merchandise shall remain
outside overnight between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. except
where expressly permitted and/or previously approved.
§ 23A-1 KEARNY CODE § 23A-3
AO:662
§ 23A-4. SIDEWALK CAFES/OUTDOOR DINING. [6-23-2020 by Ord.
No. 2020-23]
c. No flashing or moving lights or additional signage shall be part of the
sidewalk setup.
d. All merchandise shall be removed from the sidewalk and curb side
every evening.
e. The provisions of this § 23A-3 shall not apply to restaurants and other
outdoor dining areas which are covered by other sections of this
chapter.
a. Application; Fees.
1. Applicants for a sidewalk cafe/outdoor dining shall submit to the
Town Clerk a map detailing the location, number of tables and
seating capacity of the outdoor dining space. All other documents
normally required for application or renewal of a sidewalk cafe/
outdoor dining space are waived for the term of this chapter.
2. Fees for the 2020 sidewalk cafe/outdoor dining space license
period, beginning January 1, 2020, and ending December 31, 2020,
are hereby waived. Those applicants who have already obtained
their 2020 sidewalk cafe license will have their fees paid credited
to the 2021 sidewalk cafe license period.
b. Projection into Sidewalk.
1. For all establishments where there is less than 20 feet of width, an
establishment with a sidewalk cafe/outdoor dining space may
utilize as much of the sidewalk as is practicable provided that not
less than six feet of safe unobstructed pedestrian egress is
provided. Where fixed obstruction of the right-of-way exists, such
as bus shelters, trees, bike racks, utility poles and streetlights, the
projection or the sidewalk cafe/outdoor dining space shall be
modified to maintain six feet of pedestrian egress.
2. Where a sidewalk cafe/outdoor dining space is located next to
another commercial establishment that is not open during hours
that it is in operation, the sidewalk cafe/outdoor dining space may
extend laterally into the adjacent sidewalk area provided:
(a) The operator of the sidewalk cafe/outdoor dining space has
written consent from the adjacent business owner and the
property owner to utilize said area; a copy of the written
consent shall be provided to the Town;
(b) Liability insurance is provided by the sidewalk cafe/outdoor
dining space operator indemnifying the property owner and
the Town of Kearny; and
§ 23A-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23A-4
AO:663
(c) All entrances and exits of the buildings remain clear of
sidewalk cafe/outdoor dining space equipment.
3. Establishments may utilize adjacent parking areas (or driveways
wider than 20 feet) which are owned, leased, or otherwise
controlled by them for outdoor dining provided that:
(a) No more than one parking space (or 162 square feet of
driveway area) per eight outside dining seats (not to exceed 10
spaces or 1,620 square feet of driveway area) is used for
outdoor dining; and
(b) If the parking area or driveway is adjacent to a residential
building, the outdoor dining space shall provide a buffer from
the residential building as determined by the Zoning Officer.
4. Businesses holding liquor licenses that expand to outdoor seating
areas shall be subject to the provisions of EO-150 and DOH
Directive and ABC Special Ruling.
5. The number of outside dining chairs or seats shall not exceed the
number of chairs or seats that are legally permitted inside the
establishment.
c. General Provisions.
1. All provisions of EO-150, the DOH Directive and ABC Special
Ruling, as may be further amended, are incorporated herein.
2. Partitions may be spaced differently or modified where needed to
delineate the larger permitted cafe area. Partitions may be
supplemented with or replaced by planters, bollards or other
temporary demarcation. Where cafe demarcation is not fixed, it is
the cafe operator's responsibility to make sure the pedestrian way
remains clear of furniture and other cafe accessories at all times.
Partitions such as jersey barriers, planters or bollards shall be used
to protect dining areas in parking lots or adjacent to the street.
Partition requirements may be waived by the Zoning Officer on a
case-by-case basis.
3. Partitions, planters, tables, chairs and related sidewalk dining
equipment may remain on the sidewalk overnight through
September 30, 2020, provided it is broken down and properly
secured against weather conditions, high winds, vagrancy and
other mischief. From October 1, 2020, through the end of the year
all equipment shall be removed overnight. Sidewalks, curbs,
gutters and streets immediately in front of the establishment shall
be broom swept at the end of every evening.
4. Overhead covering such as awnings or umbrellas are
recommended but will not be required.
§ 23A-4 KEARNY CODE § 23A-4
AO:664
§ 23A-5. StrEATERIES. [6-23-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-23]
5. Bistro lights will be permitted through September 30, 2020,
provided: they are at least seven feet above sidewalk grade, the
amount of lighting does not create significant light intrusion
affecting pedestrian or vehicular traffic or neighborhood
residences, and all lights are turned off when the business is
closed.
6. Customers of the sidewalk cafe/outdoor dining area shall be
permitted to use the restrooms of the brick and mortar
establishment, provided that masks are worn indoors and all CDC
requirements and executive orders are followed.
7. All tables and chairs shall have a minimum six-foot clearance from
other tables and chairs.
8. No pets are permitted in outdoor dining areas except for service
animals.
9. No smoking shall be permitted in outdoor dining areas.
10. All restaurant employees, including service and wait staff, shall
wear a facemask covering their nose and mouth.
d. Hours of Operations. Hours of operation shall be between 7:00 a.m. and
10:30 p.m. Sunday through Saturday, except for dining areas that are
not located in a commercial district or redevelopment area, which shall
close by 8:00 p.m.
a. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PARKLET — A seasonal public seating platform that temporarily
converts curbside parking space into a mini-park built as an extension
of the sidewalk to create more public space and enhance the pedestrian
realm. A semi-public parklet shall be built in partnership between the
Town and a specific local business for their exclusive use. A parklet
shall be considered a form of streatery under this chapter and shall be
subject to all of the requirements set forth in this chapter that govern a
streatery.
StrEATERY — A shared public space temporarily converting curbside
parking space into an area specifically intended for outdoor dining
where take-away food and beverages may be consumed. A streatery
may be sponsored or co-sponsored by more than one business on the
block or by an entity supporting local businesses.
b. General Requirements; Design Standards.
1. No parking space, parking lane or other portion of the public rightof-
way shall be encumbered without prior approval by the Police
Department. No streatery shall be installed without prior approval
§ 23A-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23A-5
AO:665
of the Town Engineer in accordance with the provisions stated
herein. Use of the right-of-way along a county roadway may require
consent, approval or waiver by Hudson County Division of
Planning.
2. Streateries' platform shall be flush with the curb and sidewalk to
prevent tripping hazard.
3. Streateries shall not be located within 25 feet of a crosswalk, 10
feet of hydrants or in handicap spaces or loading zones.
4. The area of the streatery established by the application and
approved by the Town of Kearny shall be delineated from adjacent
parking spaces and the travel lane of the adjacent street using
temporary crowd control barriers, bollards, poles, planters or other
approved means.
5. Temporary ADA curb ramps must be provided; for streateries up to
30 linear feet one ramp shall be required, for streateries over 30
linear feet two ramps shall be required.
6. The road surface shall be covered with synthetic turf, solid-color
indoor-outdoor carpeting, or other approved street covering.
7. Easily removable tables, chairs or other seating shall be provided.
Tables shall be two-top or four-top only, no tables accommodating
more than four persons shall be permitted. Tables and chairs shall
be spaced at least six feet apart measured from the backs of
opposite-facing chairs.
8. Shade coverings such as umbrellas or pop-up canopies may be
included as part of the streatery setup provided: there is no
reduction in vehicular or pedestrian visibility; no part of the shade
canopy extends into the travel lane or over the sidewalk; the shade
covering is anchored securely against wind; and all coverings are
removed overnight. Shade covering shall not contain advertising.
9. One 24-inch-by-36-inch A-frame or similar movable sign shall be
included for a streatery up to 500 square feet in size. Streateries
over 500 square feet shall have two signs to be located at either
end of the streatery. Signs shall be positioned on the covered
surface within the boundaries of the streatery, not on the adjacent
sidewalk.
(a) The sign(s) shall clearly state that the streatery is open to the
public;
(b) The sign(s) may identify the sponsor(s) of the streatery;
(c) The sign(s) shall include guidance regarding social distancing;
and
§ 23A-5 KEARNY CODE § 23A-5
AO:666
(d) The sign shall state that there is a ninety-minute time limit for
occupants of the streatery.
10. Hours of operation shall be between 7:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m.
except that streateries that are not located in a commercial district
or redevelopment area shall close by 8:00 p.m. Daily setup of the
streatery shall follow the street-sweeping schedule and adjust
accordingly.
11. All furniture, street delineation, safety equipment and road
covering shall be removed at the end of each day by the responsible
party.
12. Failure to comply with the guidelines stated herein shall be subject
to a municipal fine of up to $100 per occurrence and revocation of
approval of the streatery.
13. The Town reserves the right to limit the number of streateries per
block based on available space and the need to maintain publicly
accessible curbside space on each block for other uses.
c. Application; Approval; Fees.
1. An application for a streatery shall be made to the Town Clerk.
2. The application shall include, at minimum:
(a) Designation of the responsible party by name, address, a
twenty-four-hour phone number and email;
(b) A detailed description of the proposed location; including the
start and end point of the proposed streatery related to some
fixed or easily identifiable street marker;
(c) The length of the proposed streatery both in feet and number
of parking spaces;
(d) The location of fire hydrants, handicap parking spaces, and
loading zones and the distance from each where the streatery
will be located;
(e) Detailed specifications for all materials to be used to delineate
the streatery from adjacent parking and the travel lane; and
(f) The days of the week that the proposed streatery would
operate.
3. Upon receipt of an application for a streatery, the Town Engineer, in
cooperation with the Kearny Police Department, shall review the
application and proposed setup for consistency with the design
standards established herein and shall approve or deny the
application within 10 business days.
§ 23A-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 23A-5
AO:667
§ 23A-6. RIGHTS; PRIVILEGES; IMMUNITIES. [6-23-2020 by Ord.
No. 2020-23]
§ 23A-7. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [6-23-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-23]
Except as otherwise provided herein, any violations of this chapter shall
be subject to a $100 fee for each offense and/or revocation of any license,
permit or approval. Each day that a violation continues shall be a separate
offense.
Chapter 24
CRANE REGULATIONS
§ 24-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2017-15]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — Means the Crane Operators License Advisory Board established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-3.
4. Upon approval, the sponsor(s) of a streatery shall remit a rental fee
of $0.25 per linear foot per day, payable on a monthly basis.
Monthly fees shall be paid to the Town of Kearny on the first of each
month.
d. The Town of Kearny, by order of the Chief of Police or the Office of
Emergency Management, may require a streatery to be the removed or
restrict the setup of streateries for reasons of public safety.
a. The Town of Kearny reserves all rights, privileges and immunities
concerning its inalienable ownership over all sidewalks, streets, public
lanes, alleys or other public grounds within the Town, whether or not
any projection or encumbrance has been permitted to be erected on the
same, without any waiver of such rights, privileges or immunities,
whether expressed or implied.
b. The Town of Kearny expressly reserves the right to require the removal
of any or all encroachments of the public right-of-way, and other such
encumbrances upon any sidewalk, street, public lane, alley or other
public ground that present a danger to the health, safety and welfare of
the public.
c. As part of the petition process, the grantee of any revocable consent
must agree to defend, protect, indemnify and hold harmless the Town of
Kearny, its officers, agents and employees from and against any and all
claims, causes of action, injuries, losses, damages, expenses, fees and
costs arising out of, or which may arise out of, the grantee's use of the
public right-of-way.
§ 23A-5 KEARNY CODE § 24-1
AO:668
CERTIFICATION — Means certification from the National Commission for
the Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization found by
the Board to offer an equivalent testing and certification program meeting
the requirements of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASME
B30.5 and the accreditation requirements of the National Commission for
Certifying Agencies.
COMMISSIONER — Means the Commissioner of the New Jersey
Department of Labor.
CRANE — As used in this chapter, the term "crane" shall be defined in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 45:26-1 through 45:26-17 (New Jersey Licensure
of Crane Operators Act), hereafter referred to as the Crane Operator
Licensure Act. For avoidance of default, "crane" shall not include any
equipment used by contractors performing tree removal services in the
Town, unless that equipment specifically meets the definition of a crane
under the New Jersey License of Crane Operators Act.
CRANE OPERATOR — Means an individual engaged in the operation of a
crane.
CRANE RELATED EXPERIENCE — Means operating, inspecting, training
and maintenance experience acceptable to the board.
§ 24-2. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No. 2017-15]
a. Five days before any crane operator, contractor or other person or
company initiates the use of a crane within the Town a permit shall be
obtained. In emergent situations the Building Inspector may waive this
requirement in his or her own discretion if the operator meets the
remainder of the requirements of this chapter.
b. The permit will be maintained with the Town as well as with the crane
operator at all times; a copy of the permit shall be produced on the work
site when requested.
c. The following documents must be provided to the Town in order to be
granted a permit:
1. Copy of crane operator certificate from one of the following
organizations:
(a) National Commission for the Certification of Crane Operator
(NCCC)
(b) Operating Engineers Certification Program (OECP)
(c) Crane Institute of American Certification;
2. New Jersey Crane License;
3. Current Medical Examiner's Card;
4. A copy of the most recent and current proof of inspection; (Crane
owner)
§ 24-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-2
AO:669
§ 24-3. REGISTRATION OF CRANES; CRANE INSPECTIONS. [Ord.
No. 2017-15]
5. Insurance required as follows:
(a) Bodily Injury:
(1) For any one person in the amount of $500,000,
(2) For any occurrence in the amount of $1,000,000.
(b) Property Damage:
(1) For any one accident in the amount of $500,000,
(2) For any aggregate of occurrences in the amount of
$2,000,000.
6. Proof that crane operator submits to random drug testing by his/
her employer.
7. Proof of Completion of Signal Person Qualification or Certification
course.
8. Upon receipt of a properly completed application and compliance
with the requirements of this Section, the Building Department
shall issue or deny the requested permit within five business days.
If the application is denied the reasons for the denial shall be
furnished to the application in writing.
a. Licensure of crane operators, pursuant to N.J.S.A 45:26-7. No person
shall engage in the operation of a crane, offer himself for employment
as a crane operator or otherwise act, attempt to act, present or
represent himself as a crane operator unless licensed as such under the
provisions of the New Jersey Licensure of Crane Operator Act.
b. A crane operator's license shall be valid only in conjunction with a
current certification and only in the specialty or specialties for which
the crane operator is certified. The specialties are lattice boom crawler
crane (LBC), lattice boom truck crane (LBT), telescopic boom cranes
with a capacity of more than 17.5 tons and telescopic boom cranes with
a capacity of less than 17.5 tons.
c. To be eligible for a license as a crane operator in the Town, an applicant
shall fulfill the following requirements:
1. Be at least 18 years of age;
2. Receive certification from the National Commission for the
Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization found by
the board to offer an equivalent testing and certification program
meeting the requirements of the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers ASME B30.5 and the accreditation requirements of the
National Commission for Certifying Agencies;
§ 24-2 KEARNY CODE § 24-3
AO:670
§ 24-4. FEE SCHEDULE. [Ord. No. 2017-15]
The permit fee for each crane shall be $100. Each permit is valid for 60
days and may be extended and/or renewed provided that compliance with
the requirements of this chapter continues to be met. Fee for an extended
or renewal permit is $50.
§ 24-5. NOTIFICATION OF ACCIDENT OR SAFETY ISSUEREQUIRED.
[Ord. No. 2017-15]
The owner of the building shall immediately notify the Town of every
accident causing personal injury or damage to property involving a
construction crane covered by this chapter and shall afford the municipal
official every facility for investigating such accident. When an accident
involves the failure, breakage, damage or destruction of any part of the
apparatus, it shall be unlawful to use such device until after an examination
by the appropriate agency is made and approval of the equipment for
continued use is granted.
§ 24-6. SAFETY EQUIPMENT-REQUIRED. [Ord. No. 2017-15]
3. Have at least 1,000 hours of crane-related experience; and
4. Maintain a current medical examiner's certification card.
a. All crane equipment shall be kept in safe working condition at all times
by the owner and licensee.
b. If any safety or operational aid used or required to be used in
connection with the operation of a crane is not working properly, the
person operating such crane shall immediately shut down the crane
until such time that the required safety or operational aid is repaired or
replaced and the crane is restored to proper working order.
c. Any and all safety requirements promulgated by Town must be adhered
to at all times.
d. Every crane shall be thoroughly inspected by a competent designated
employee or authorized agent of the owner or lessee if such mobile
crane, tower crane or derrick at intervals not exceeding one month.
Such inspection shall include but not be limited to all blocks, shackles,
sheaves, wire rope, connectors, and various devices on the master
boom, controls and breaking mechanisms.
e. A written, dated and signed record of each such inspection shall be
completed by the competent designated employee or authorized agent
who made the inspection. The most recent record of such inspection
shall be posted inside the cab of such crane and shall be filed with the
Town. Attached to such record of inspection shall be a written
designation naming the competent employee or authorized agent. Such
attached designation shall be signed by the owner or lessee of such.
§ 24-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-6
AO:671
§ 24-7. ENFORCEMENT/INTERPRETATION. [Ord. No. 2017-15]
§ 24-8. UNSAFE CRANES. [Ord. No. 2017-15]
§ 24-9. VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2017-15]
f. Every crane shall be inspected before being erected or operated for the
first time on any job.
g. Adjustments and repairs to cranes shall be made only by competent
designated persons.
a. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Construction
Code Office.
b. Nothing here shall be deemed to supersede the provisions of the New
Jersey Licensure of Crane Operators Act.
a. Any crane which is or hereafter becomes unsafe or otherwise
dangerous to human life or public safety, or which involves inadequate
maintenance may be deemed in unsafe condition by the Construction
Code Official. All unsafe cranes shall be taken down or removed or
made safe, as the Construction Code Official deems necessary and as
provided for in this section.
b. If an unsafe condition is found, the Construction Official shall serve on
the owner, agent or person in control of the crane, a written notice that
describes the condition being unsafe and specifies the required repairs
or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe condition. Such notice
shall require the person thus notified to declare immediately to the
Construction Code Official exceptions or rejection of the terms of the
order.
c. Such order shall be deemed properly served if a copy is delivered to the
owner personally, or sent by certified or registered mail addressed to
the owner at the last known address with the return receipt requested.
If a certified or registered letter is returned showing that the letter has
not been delivered, a copy shall be posed in a conspicuous place in or on
the structure affected by such notice. Service of such notice in the
foregoing manner upon the owner's agent or upon the person
responsible for the crane shall constitute service of notice upon the
owner.
d. The equipment determined to be unsafe by the Construction Code
Official may be restored to a safe condition. To the extent that repairs,
alterations or additions are made during restoration of such equipment,
such repairs, alterations or additions shall comply with all laws.
e. Any person who refuses or neglects to comply with the requirements of
an order to abate an unsafe condition shall be subject to a fine or
imprisonment in accordance with Section 24-9 below.
§ 24-6 KEARNY CODE § 24-9
AO:672
Chapter 25
(RESERVED)
Editor's Note: Former Chapter 25, Signs and Advertising Devices,
previously codified herein and containing portions of 1973 Code
§§ 122-1 through 122-16 and Ordinance No. 8-13-75 was repealed in
its entirety by Ordinance No. 2000-0-28.
Chapter 26
KEARNY ENTERPRISE ZONE
§ 26-1. KEARNY ENTERPRISE ZONE DEVELOPMENT
CORPORATION.
§ 26-1.1. Created. [1973 Code § 94-1; Ord. No. 12-12-95]
There shall be created a non-profit corporation ("Corporation") pursuant
to the provisions of Title 15A of N.J.S.A. to act as the Zone Development
Corporation for the Town, and the Urban Enterprise Zone Coordinator shall
serve as the incorporator.
§ 26-1.2. Title. [1973 Code § 94-2; Ord. No. 12-12-95]
Corporation shall be named the "Kearny Enterprise Zone Development
Corporation."
§ 26-1.3. Classes of Membership. [1973 Code § 94-3; Ord. No.
12-12-95]
Corporation shall have two classes of membership. Governing members
shall include the Mayor and two members of the Town Council. General
members shall include all others who shall be selected to membership by
the Mayor and Council. Except as otherwise set forth below, the governing
members shall have the power to select members of the Board of Trustees
as described in subsection 26-1.4b. Governing members shall also have
the right of ratification of the original bylaws of corporation and of any
subsequently proposed amendments. For the purposes of this function, the
a. Any person who operates a crane without meeting the requirements of
this ordinance or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder shall
be subject to a fine of not less than $1,000 and no more than $10,000
for each violation. Each day of illegal operation shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
b. Any person or company who employs an unlicensed person as a crane
operator or who permits or directs an unlicensed person to operate a
crane shall be subject to a fine of not less than $2,000 nor more than
$20,000 for each violation. Each day of illegal operation shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense.
§ 24-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 26-1.3
AO:673
Mayor and each Council member shall have one vote and a majority vote
shall prevail.
§ 26-1.4. Board of Trustees. [1973 Code § 94-4; Ord. No. 12-12-95]
§ 26-1.5. Powers and Duties. [1973 Code § 94-5; Ord. No. 12-12-95]
Corporation shall formulate and propose a preliminary zone development
plan for the Mayor and Town Council's approval. Such plan shall set forth
the boundaries of the Enterprise Zone, findings of fact concerning the
economic and social conditions existing in the area of the Enterprise Zone,
and the Town's policy and intentions for addressing those conditions, and
may include proposals respecting: (a) utilizing powers conferred on the
municipality by law for the purpose of stimulating investment in the
economic development of the proposed zone; (b) utilizing State assistance
through the provisions of the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zone Act
relating to exemptions from and credits against, State taxes; (c) securing
the involvement in and commitment to economic development by private
entities, including zone neighborhood associations, voluntary community
organizations supported by residents and business in the zone; (d) utilizing
the powers conferred by law to revise municipal planning and zoning
ordinances and other land use regulations as they pertain to the zone, in
order to enhance the attractiveness of the zone to prospective developers;
(e) increasing availability and efficiency of support services, public and
private, generally used by and necessary to the efficient functioning of
commercial and industrial facilities in the area, and the extent to which the
increase or improvement is to be provided and financed by the municipal
government or by other entities.
§ 26-1.6. Director. [Ord. No. 2002-O-4]
a. Corporation shall be governed by a Board of 13 trustees which shall
include the Mayor, Town Administrator, and two other Town Council
members chosen by that body, and the Director of the Urban Enterprise
Zone, who shall serve as Chairman thereof.
b. In addition to the persons named in paragraph a., the Board shall also
include six members to be named by the Mayor and Town Council.
These members shall represent the business and industrial community,
local community organizations and general residents of the Town so
that the total membership of the Board of Directors shall be broadly
representative of business and residential communities within the
Town. It shall not be required that representatives of the business and
industrial community be residents of the Town of Kearny.
c. The Board shall elect from its private members a Vice-Chairman,
Secretary and Treasurer.
a. There is created hereby the position of Urban Enterprise Zone Director
in the unclassified service.
§ 26-1.3 KEARNY CODE § 26-1.6
AO:674
Chapter 27
GREEN BUILDING DESIGN
§ 27-1. TITLE: GREEN BUILDING DESIGN. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-42
§ 27- 1; Ord. No. 2007-(O)-54 § 27-1]
The "Leadership in Energy & Environmental Design (LEED)" standards
and guidelines are herein incorporated by reference, as amended and
supplemented and may be found at http://www.usgbc.org, or by contacting
the U.S. Green Building Council, 1015 18th Street, NW, Suite 508,
Washington, DC 20036.
§ 27-2. TOWN-FUNDED PROJECTS. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-42 § 27-2;
Ord. No. 2007-(O)-54 § 27-2]
b. The Director shall be appointed by the Mayor and Council and shall be
responsible primarily to them.
c. Duties and Responsibilities. The Director shall serve as Chairman of the
Corporation. His duties and responsibilities shall be to fulfill the
purpose and intent of the New Jersey Statutes that apply to the
Enterprise Zone as well as the ordinances and resolutions of the Town
affecting the Enterprise Zone. Such duties and responsibilities shall
include, but are not limited to, the following: control of the
administration of Enterprise Zone programs and activities; research,
compilation and organization of information for project proposals;
monitoring, and in some cases, managing Enterprise Zone projects
approved by the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zone Authority; working
with vendors to implement and promote approved Enterprise Zone
projects; promoting the corporation and its activities; and generating
interest in Kearny to stimulate business, retain business and attract
new business.
d. Line of Responsibility. The Director shall report to the Mayor, the
Council, the Town Administrator and the Corporation at reasonable
intervals and as requested.
e. Term. The Director shall serve for a term not to exceed two years.
f. Residency. The Director need not be a resident of the Town of Kearny.
g. Compensation. The salary for the position shall be paid as set forth in
the Salary Ordinance of the Town.
a. The Town of Kearny supports the use of green building practices and
adopts the USGBC's Leadership in Energy Design ("LEED") Rating
System for the design and construction of new buildings and major
renovations and additions to Town-funded facility projects.
§ 26-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-2
AO:675
§ 27-3. REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-42 § 27-3;
Ord. No. 2007-(O)-54 § 27-3]
§ 27-4. GREEN BUILDING DENSITY INCENTIVE. [Ord. No.
2007-(O)-42 § 27-4; Ord. No. 2007-(O)-54 § 27-4]
To encourage redevelopment projects to achieve formal LEED certification
from the USGBC, the Town of Kearny has established a Green Building
Density Incentive, which shall be provided to applications for new buildings
and additions within a formally designated Redevelopment Area upon
compliance with the requirements of Section 27-5 below.
In all designated redevelopment areas, unless otherwise specifically
provided, the following incentives shall apply:
§ 27-5. REQUIREMENTS FOR LEED QUALIFICATION. [Ord. No.
2007-(O)-42 § 27-5; Ord. No. 2007-(O)-54 § 27-5]
Redevelopment projects seeking the incentives available for LEED
accreditation must submit the following information to the Town for each
project application:
b. The Town adopts a policy that Town-funded facility projects and Townowned
facilities meet a minimum LEED "Silver" rating.
a. Applicants for projects within a formally designated Redevelopment
Area are encouraged, but not required, to comply with LEED criteria.
b. Only projects proposing to meet a minimum accreditation level of LEED
Certification shall be eligible for the incentives in this section.
a. LEED Platinum - Additional 0.30 floor area ratio (FAR) or additional
three dwelling units per acre, where residential uses are permitted;
b. LEED Gold - Additional 0.25 floor area ratio (FAR) or additional two
dwelling units per acre, where residential uses are permitted;
c. LEED Silver - Additional 0.20 floor area ratio (FAR) or additional one
dwelling unit per acre;
d. LEED Certified - Additional 0.15 floor area ratio (FAR) or additional 0.5
dwelling unit per acre, where residential uses are permitted.
a. USGBC Registration. The applicant shall register the proposed project
with the USGBC, and shall submit written proof of such registration,
prior to any incentive being granted by the Town.
b. Name of LEED Accredited Professional Working on the Project. Each
project must include a LEED accredited professional as part of the
project team. This team member advises the project team on LEED
issues and ensures that the specific LEED credits for the project are
achieved.
§ 27-2 KEARNY CODE § 27-5
AO:676
§ 27-6. INABILITY OR FAILURE TO ACHIEVE APPROVED LEED
CERTIFICATION. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-42 § 27-6; Ord. No.
2007-(O)-54 § 27-6]
c. LEED Scorecard. A LEED scorecard must be submitted as part of its
plan. The scorecard must be accompanied by an explanation of how
each credit will be achieved or why the credit cannot be achieved for
the project. Prior to the issuance of specific permits, reports must be
submitted outlining progress on achieving LEED credits.
d. Plans. All plans submitted for review and approval shall contain the
project components listed on the LEED scorecard.
e. Maintenance Plan. A maintenance plan for each of the proposed LEED
components on the scorecard shall be submitted for review and
approval.
f. Certificate of Zoning. A certificate of zoning or resolution of variance
approval granted pursuant to green building incentives as provided in
this section shall contain conditions that such LEED certification be
achieved and maintained.
g. Performance Guarantee. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of zoning
or resolution of variance approval, a performance guarantee shall be
delivered by the applicant and property owner to assure that the
conditions of the approval are satisfied.
h. Monthly Reports. Progress of the implementation of the green building
components shall be monitored on a monthly basis with report by the
project's LEED accredited professional to the Construction Official.
i. As-built Analysis. An as-built analysis of the project in relation to the
approved project shall be prepared by an independent LEED accredited
professional architect upon completion of the project. The cost of the
independent LEED accredited professional architect shall be borne by
the applicant.
j. Application for LEED. Applicant shall be required to apply for LEED
certification and rating to the USGBC near or at completion of the
project.
k. LEED Certification. Upon delivery by applicant of certification by the
USGBC that the project achieved the approved level of LEED
certification, the Town shall issue a final certificate of occupancy.
a. If the applicant is unable to include the approved LEED components
during the project implementation, any comparable alternate green
building components must be approved in writing by the Town. All such
alternate shall maintain the minimum required rating for the level of
LEED certification sought.
§ 27-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 27-6
AO:677
Chapter 28
REDEVELOPMENT PLANS
§ 28-1. REDEVELOPMENT PLAN I.
§ 28-1.1. Redevelopment Plan I Established. [1973 Code § 115-1;
Ord. No. 11-22-78]
Such lands have been or will be declared blighted by the Planning Board in
that such lands have been vacant land unimproved for a period of 10 years
prior to such determination and which lands were determined by reason
of their location, remoteness from developed sections of the municipality,
topography, nature of the soil, and condition of the title, to be not likely to
be developed through the instrumentality of private capital, and further that
such lands have remained in an unproductive condition.
A redevelopment plan for the proper development of such lands has been
studied and recommended by the Planning Board.
The Mayor and Town Council hereby finds that such plan provides an
outline for the replanning, development and redevelopment of the area
sufficient to indicate:
b. In cases where an application cannot comply with the approved green
building design requirements due solely to the inability to install a
LEED-recognized green building component, the applicant may seek a
waiver from the original approving authority from such requirement.
1. A request for LEED waiver must be made by the applicant in
writing.
2. A request for LEED waiver shall specify the regulation from which
the waiver is requested and a detailed reason(s) for the request.
3. The issuer of the certificate of zoning or variance approval shall
consider the request for waiver and grant such waiver, upon finding
that the LEED waiver is necessary to install the green building
component and that such waiver shall not result in a threat to
public health, safety and/or order.
4. The issuer of the certificate of zoning or variance approval shall
have 10 business days to render a decision on the waiver request.
5. The Town reserves the right to require a waived requirement when
deemed necessary by the issuer of the certificate of zoning or
variance, upon evidence of a substantive change of an application
or unforeseen circumstances.
a. The plan's relationship to definite local objectives as to appropriate land
uses, density of population and improved traffic, public transportation,
§ 27-6 KEARNY CODE § 28-1.1
AO:678
§ 28-1.2. Approval. [1973 Code § 115-2; Ord. No. 11-22-78]
The redevelopment plan set forth verbatim in subsection 28-1.3 hereof and
as recommended by the Kearny Planning Board be and the same is hereby
approved.
§ 28-1.3. Purpose; Goals. [1973 Code § 115-3; Ord. 11-22-78]
public utilities, recreational and community facilities and other public
improvements.
b. Proposed land uses and building requirements in the area.
Such lands declared or to be declared blighted are as indicated on the
tax map of the Town of Kearny as follows:
Block 285 Lot 11 32.13 acres
Block 285 Lot 13 1.32 acres
Block 286 Lot 22 1.60 acres
Block 286 Lot 24 4.00 acres
Block 286 Lot 30 34.70 acres
Block 286 Lot 33 55.30 acres
Block 287 Lot 7 38.40 acres
Block 287 Lot 18 17.13 acres
Block 287 Lot 19 17.00 acres
Block 287 Lot 20 17.00 acres
Block 287 Lot 21 2.92 acres
Block 287 Lot 21 2.92 acres
Block 287 Lot 22 0.66 acres
Block 287 Lot 28 1.60 acres
Block 287 Lot 30 5.50 acres
Block 287 Lot 31 22.00 acres
Block 287 Lot 33 24.40 acres
Block 287 Lot 34 4.77 acres
Total Acres 280.43 acres
a. The essentials of the Redevelopment Plan in its present stage are as
follows:
1. Initially, it is proposed that a tract of approximately 40 acres (the
"First Redevelopment Parcel") be developed by constructing on it
two major industrial buildings having a total of at least 500,000
square feet of floor area.
§ 28-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-1.3
AO:679
§ 28-1.4. Boundaries of Kearny Meadowlands Redevelopment Area.
[1973 Code § 115-4; Ord. No. 11-22-78]
The following tax lots are included:
§ 28-1.5. Redevelopment Plan Objectives. [1973 Code § 115-5; Ord.
No. 11-22-78]
The Town of Kearny acting pursuant to applicable law, proposes to develop
an industrial center in the Meadowlands area of Kearny. The site,
designated as the Kearny Meadowlands Redevelopment Area (hereinafter
"Redevelopment Area") consists of approximately 280 acres and is more
particularly described in subsection 28-1.4.
§ 28-1.6. Disposition of Land; Redeveloper's Obligations;
Restrictions and Controls on Use and Occupancy; Building
Requirements. [1973 Code § 115-6; Ord. No. 11-22-78]
In addition to the above improvements to the First Redevelopment
Parcel, the Redeveloper selected by the Town shall be required
to provide land improvements (including, but not limited to, fill,
roads, utility access lines lights, etc.) having a value of at least
$1,000,000, which land improvements shall be pursuant to
schematic plans approved by the Town, and shall be designed,
installed, and constructed so as to provide access, and public
utilities for the Redevelopment Area.
2. The specific goals of the Kearny Meadowlands Redevelopment Area
Redevelopment Plan (the "Redevelopment Plan") are to develop a
significant portion of the presently unimproved and vacant portion
of the Meadowlands into a viable industrial park, to aid industrial
expansion of local industry and to provide for adequate regional
industrial growth, to increase job opportunities for residents of
Kearny and residents of the region surrounding the Redevelopment
Area, and to provide a design concept that will have a positive
effect on the Redevelopment Area and on the surrounding area.
a. Block 285, Lot 11, 32.13 acres; Block 285, Lot 13, 1.32 acres; Block
286, Lot 22, 1.6 acres; Block 286, Lot 24, 4 acres; Block 286, Lot 30,
34.7 acres; Block 286, Lot 33, 55.30 acres; Block 287 Lot 7, 38.4 acres;
Block 287, Lot 18, 17.13 acres; Block 287, Lot 19, 17 acres; Block 287,
Lot 20, 17 acres; Block 287, Lot 21, 2.92 acres; Block 287, Lot 22, 0.66
acres; Block 287, Lot 28, 1.60 acres; Block 287, Lot 30, 5.5 acres; Block
287, Lot 31, 22 acres; Block 287, Lot 33, 24.40 acres; Block 287, Lot 34,
4.77 acres.
b. See map incorporated herein by reference as Exhibit 1, on file in the
office of the Town Clerk, which is a map prepared from Tax Map
information and does not represent field survey of the Redevelopment
Area.
§ 28-1.3 KEARNY CODE § 28-1.6
AO:680
a. The Town Council will lease for redevelopment, and/or grant options to
lease for redevelopment, to a Redeveloper, subject to the restrictions,
controls and requirements of this Redevelopment Plan, all or any part of
the Redevelopment Area available for disposition as a result of public
action heretofore taken by the Town and under this Plan.
b. The Town will negotiate with a responsible Redeveloper to lease for
redevelopment and/or grant options to lease for redevelopment all or
any portion of the Redevelopment Area. The Redeveloper shall be
obligated by appropriate conditions in any disposition agreement
(including for this purpose, any lease agreement, or option agreement,
which functions in part as a disposition agreement) ("Agreement") to
carry out the objectives of this Plan. The redevelopment of the
Redevelopment Area may be completed in stages; in that event, the
Redeveloper will be obligated to construct the Improvements on the
Redevelopment Area within reasonable time periods in accordance with
this Plan as determined by the Town Council; and, more particularly, in
accordance with a timetable set forth in the Agreement. The selected
Redeveloper will agree for itself, its successors and assigns, and every
successor in interest to the Redevelopment Area, or any part thereof,
that the Redeveloper, and such successors and assigns, shall promptly
begin and diligently prosecute to completion the redevelopment of each
Lot which is a part of the Redevelopment Area through the construction
of the Improvements thereon, and that such construction shall in any
event be begun within the period specified in the Agreement as
applicable to such Lot, and shall be completed within the period
specified in the Agreement, as so applicable. Such agreements and
covenants shall be covenants running with the land and they shall, in
any event, and without regard to technical classification or designation,
legal or otherwise, and except only as otherwise specifically provided in
the Agreement itself, to the fullest extent permitted by law and equity,
be binding for the benefit of the community and the Town and
enforceable by the Town against the selected Redeveloper and its
successors and assigns to or of the Redevelopment Area or any part
thereof or any interest therein.
c. The Agreement shall contain a provision that the Redeveloper and any
successors in interest may not restrict the sale, lease or occupancy of
the Redevelopment Area or any Improvements to be constructed
thereon on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, ancestry, national
origin, sex or marital status, and a provision that the Redeveloper and
any successors in interest will comply with all State and local laws, in
effect from time to time, prohibiting discrimination or segregation by
reason of race, color, creed, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex or
marital status.
d. Redeveloper shall agree to devote the property within the
Redevelopment Area to, and only to and in accordance with, the uses
specified in this Plan.
§ 28-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-1.6
AO:681
e. Redeveloper shall be required to agree to appropriate covenants and
restrictions that will assure that, except only:
1. By way of security for, and only for (a) the purpose of obtaining
financing necessary to enable the Redeveloper, or any successor in
interest to the Redevelopment Area, or any part thereof, to perform
its obligations with respect to making the Improvements under the
Agreement, and (b) any other purpose authorized by the
Agreement; or
2. As to any individual part of the Redevelopment Area as to which the
Improvements to be constructed thereon have been completed, and
which, by the terms of the Agreement, the Redeveloper is
authorized to convey or lease as such Improvements are
completed; or
3. As to any individual part of the Redevelopment Area (a) as to which
the Improvements proposed to be constructed or completed
thereon are to be built or completed by a Redeveloper having a
"substantial identity of interest" with the Redeveloper (that is, at
least 51% of such Redeveloper is owned beneficially by some or all
of the persons who own Redeveloper), and (b) which, by the terms
of the Agreement, the Redeveloper is authorized to convey or lease
in order to effectuate the completion of such Improvements in
accordance with the Agreement, the Redeveloper (except as so
authorized) will not make or create, prior to the proper completion
of the Improvements as certified by the Town, or suffer to be made
or created, any total or partial sale, assignment, conveyance, or
lease, or any trust or power, or transfer in any other mode or form
of or with respect to the Agreement or the Redevelopment Area, or
any part thereof or any interest therein, or any contract or
agreement to do any of the same, without the prior written
approval of the Town; provided, however, that
(1) Prior to the issuance by the Town of the certificate provided for
in the Agreement evidencing completion of construction of the
Improvements, the Redeveloper may enter into an agreement
to sell, lease, assign or otherwise transfer, the Redevelopment
Area, or any part thereof, or interest therein i. at any time, to a
Redeveloper with whom the Redeveloper has a "substantial
identity of interest" (as described above), and ii. after the
issuance by the Town of such certificate, to any person,
provided, however, that, in this latter case, such agreement
shall provide that no payment of or on account of the purchase
price or rent (other than a deposit) for the Redevelopment
Area, or the part thereof or the interest therein to be so
transferred, may be made, prior to the issuance of such
certificate;
(2) After the issuance by the Town of such certificate, the
Redeveloper may enter into an agreement to sell, lease, assign
§ 28-1.6 KEARNY CODE § 28-1.6
AO:682
or otherwise transfer, the portion of the Redevelopment Area
covered by such certificate or any subdivision thereof, to any
person.
f. The Town shall be entitled to require, except as otherwise provided in
the Agreement, as conditions to any approval of any such transfer, that:
1. Any proposed transferee shall have the qualifications and financial
responsibility, as determined by the Town, necessary and adequate
to fulfill the obligations undertaken in the Agreement by the
Redeveloper (or, in the event the transfer is of or relates to part of
the Redevelopment Area, such obligations to the extent that they
relate to such part), provided, however, that, for this purpose, the
Town shall agree that a Redeveloper with whom the Redeveloper
has a "substantial identity of interest" (as described) shall be
deemed to satisfy the requirements of such provision.
2. Any proposed transferee, by instrument in writing satisfactory to
the Town and in recordable form shall, for itself and its successors
and assigns, and expressly for the benefit of the Town, have
expressly assumed all of the obligations of the Redeveloper under
the Agreement and shall have agreed to be subject to all the
conditions and restrictions to which the Redeveloper is then
subject, (or, in the event the transfer is of or relates to part of the
Redevelopment Area, such obligations, conditions, and restrictions
to the extent that they relate to such part).
3. There shall be submitted to the Town for review all instruments and
other legal documents involved in effecting such transfer; and, if
approved by the Town its approval shall be indicated to the
Redeveloper in writing.
4. The consideration payable for the transfer by the transferee or on
its behalf shall not exceed an amount representing the actual cost
(including carrying charges) to the Redeveloper of the
Redevelopment Area (or allocable to the part thereof or interest
therein transferred) and any Improvements (including, for this
purpose, any land improvements made pursuant to the
Agreement), theretofore made by it thereon or allocable thereto, it
being the intent of such provision of the Agreement to preclude
assignment of the Agreement or transfer of any part of the
Redevelopment Area for profit prior to the completion of the
Improvements thereon and to provide that in the event any such
assignment or transfer is made (and is not cancelled), the Town
shall be entitled to increase the rental therefor to the Redeveloper
by the amount that the consideration payable for the assignment or
transfer is in excess of the amount that may be authorized pursuant
to such provision of the Agreement, and such consideration, shall,
to the extent it is in excess of the amount so authorized, belong to
and forthwith be paid to the Town.
§ 28-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-1.6
AO:683
§ 28-1.7. Approval of Schematic Site Plan. [1973 Code § 115-7; Ord.
No. 11-22-78]
Prior to the lease of the First Redevelopment Parcel the Redeveloper shall
submit an initial schematic site plan to the Town Council for its approval.
The Council shall approve such plan prior to the execution of any
Agreement.
§ 28-1.8. Land Use Controls; Building Requirements. [1973 Code
§ 115-8; Ord. No. 11-22-78]
The following land use controls and building requirements are hereby
imposed and shall apply to all land uses within the redevelopment area
designated in subsection 28-1.4.
5. The Redeveloper and its transferee shall comply with such other
conditions as the Town may find desirable in order to achieve and
safeguard the purposes of the Redevelopment Plan.
a. The land uses permitted and the controls concerning height, building,
set-back lines, widths, yards, density and off-street parking spaces, and
all other land use regulations, shall be those established by the zoning
ordinance for the Town of Kearny in effect on September 1, 1978, which
is hereby incorporated herein by this reference.
b. It is recognized that the Hackensack Meadowlands Development
Commission ("HMDC") has jurisdiction and final authority for the land
use controls applicable to the Redevelopment Area, since the lands lie
within the Hackensack Meadowlands District. Accordingly, in the event
of a conflict or difference between any regulation or standard contained
in the Town of Kearny zoning ordinance and the Town of Kearny
Comprehensive Master Plan, and any subdivision regulation, zoning
regulation, or any other land use regulation or standard, established by
the HMDC, the HMDC regulation or standard shall control.
c. It is the intention of this Plan to permit development consistent with
that permitted by the HMDC. Any amendment to any regulation,
standard, or control imposed by the HMDC shall govern all
redevelopment within the Redevelopment Area, unless the applicable
Town zoning ordinance is more restrictive, in which event the Town's
zoning ordinance shall control; provided, however, that nothing herein
shall be deemed to prohibit a Redeveloper from challenging, by
appropriate administrative or judicial proceedings, the validity,
applicability, or reasonableness, of any regulation, standard or control
which may be adopted by the HMDC or any determination of the HMDC
relating to the Redevelopment Area. The Town reserves the right, in any
such proceeding, to intervene on behalf of the position taken by such
Redeveloper.
d. This Plan further recognizes that the HMDC has established elaborate
procedures and regulations for the submission of development plans or
§ 28-1.6 KEARNY CODE § 28-1.8
AO:684
§ 28-1.9. Relationship of Plan to Local Objectives. [1973 Code
§ 115-9; Ord. No. 11-22-78]
projects to be constructed within the Redevelopment Area. Therefore,
Redeveloper shall submit copies of all development plans or projects
to be constructed within the Redevelopment Area, to HMDC, and
Redeveloper shall simultaneously submit copies of all plans submitted
to HMDC to the Town. The Town shall review such plans to determine
whether they meet the criteria established by this Plan and by any
Agreement with the Redeveloper. In all other respects the Town's
review of plans shall be advisory.
e. The Town shall review and approve all redevelopment plans within 30
days after the date of submission thereof to the Town by the
Redeveloper and, if no comment is made within 60 days after the date
of submission thereof, the plan submitted shall be deemed approved.
a. This Plan is in conformity with the approved Comprehensive Master
Plan of the Town of Kearny, provides an outline for the replanning,
redeveloping of the Redevelopment Area, and is sufficiently complete to
indicate its relationship to definite local objectives as to appropriate
land uses, density of population and improved traffic, public utilities,
and other public improvements.
b. In particular, it is hereby determined that the development of the
Redevelopment Area in accordance with this Plan will serve to achieve
Kearny's planning policies which have been enunciated in the
Comprehensive Master Plan as follows:
1. To maintain and enhance areas of stability in the community; also
to protect those areas from adverse environmental conditions.
2. To provide an orderly and planned program for areas which are or
will be subject to change and modification in the future.
3. To beautify areas of the community, wherever possible, recognizing
that aesthetic, environmental and ecological considerations are
equally as important as other development factors.
4. To provide adequate services and facilities to all portions of the
community within the financial capabilities of the Town.
5. To maintain continuous liaison with all of the Town's neighboring
communities, the Hackensack Meadowlands Development
Commission, the Hudson County Planning Board and other
governmental agencies.
6. To continue to maintain and improve community, neighborhood and
citizen participation in the planning process.
7. To maintain and improve the street and circulation system in
Kearny through the reduction of hazardous areas, noise and other
§ 28-1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-1.9
AO:685
§ 28-1.10. Compliance with State and Local Requirements. [1973
Code § 115-10; Ord. No. 11-22-78]
§ 28-1.11. Procedures for Amendment of Redevelopment Plan.
[1973 Code § 115-11; Ord. No. 11-22-78]
This Redevelopment Plan may be amended from time to time upon
compliance with all requirements of applicable law; provided, that, with
respect to any land in the Redevelopment Area under lease and/or option
for ultimate use in accordance with the Redevelopment Plan, the Town
must receive the prior written consent of any lessee and/or optionee whose
interest may be materially adversely affected by such amendment.
§ 28-1.12. Termination of Plan. [1973 Code § 115-12; Ord. No.
11-22-78]
This Plan and any amendments thereof, shall remain in full force and effect
for a period from the date of its adoption to and including December 31,
2008.
§ 28-2. REDEVELOPMENT PLAN II.
§ 28-2.1. Findings. [1973 Code § 115-13; Ord. No. 5-16-79]
The Mayor and Town Council hereby finds that such plan provides an
outline for the replanning development and redevelopment of such area
sufficient to indicate:
environmental deficiencies as well as the improved accessibility
and convenience to all areas of the community.
a. Relocation. The proposed Redevelopment Area consists entirely of
vacant land; therefore, there will be no displacement of existing
businesses, families or individuals. Existing dumping operations
presently being permitted by the Town under lease arrangement will be
relocated, to the extent legally permissible, to other areas as required
by project developments.
b. Other Approvals. The Redevelopment Area is located within the
Hackensack Meadowlands District and thus comes within the
jurisdiction of the Hackensack Meadowlands Development
Commission. This Plan recognizes HMDC's jurisdiction and authority
and incorporates the Master Plan of HMDC and its land use controls
and regulations as set forth in subsection 28-1.8. It is further
recognized that the Redevelopment Area is located in a wetland and
that, therefore, appropriate State and Federal requirements relating to
wetlands must be complied with as a precondition to development by a
Redeveloper.
§ 28-1.9 KEARNY CODE § 28-2.1
AO:686
§ 28-2.2. Approval. [1973 Code § 115-14; Ord. No. 5-16-79]
The Redevelopment Plan set forth verbatim in subsection 28-2.3 hereof and
as recommended by the Kearny Planning Board by and the same is hereby
approved.
§ 28-2.3. Second Redevelopment Plan Established. [1973 Code
§ 115-15; Ord. No. 5-16-79]
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Text.
A. TABLE OF CONTENTS
B. DESCRIPTION.
(1) Boundaries of Redevelopment Area.
Redevelopment Plan Objectives.
Types of Proposed Redevelopment Action.
C. LAND USE PLAN
(1) Land Use and Zoning.
(2) Land Use Provisions and Building Requirements.
D. PROCEDURES FOR MODIFICATION IN APPROVED PLAN
Tables
(1) Building and Yard Requirements
Maps
a. The Plan's relationship to definite local objectives as to appropriate
land uses, density of population and improved traffic, public utilities,
recreational and community facilities and other public improvements.
b. Proposed land uses and building requirements in the area. Such lands
declared or to be declared blighted are as indicated on the tax map of
the Town of Kearny as follows:
Block 205 Lot 19
Block 284 Lot 29
Block 285 Lot 14
Block 285 Lot 17
Block 286 Lot 4
Block 286 Lot 47
§ 28-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-2.3
AO:687
TABLE OF CONTENTS
The following maps dated June 1979 are incorporated herein by
reference, and are on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
Map 1, Project Boundary.
Map 2, Existing Zoning Map.
Map 3, Proposed Zoning Map.
Exhibits
Exhibit A, Lot Designations.
Exhibit B, Design Objectives.
§ 28-2.4. Description of Project. [1973 Code § 115-16; Ord. No.
5-16-79]
a. Boundaries of Redevelopment Project. The South Kearny
Redevelopment Area is located in the City of Kearny, County of Hudson,
State of New Jersey and is bounded as shown on Map 1, Project
Boundary Map and as described in Exhibit A.54
b. Redevelopment Plan Objectives. The basic goal for this area is to
develop a significant portion of the presently unimproved and vacant
portion of the South Kearny area into functional and aesthetically
pleasing complexes which will contain business and industrial
activities. Specifically, renewal activities for the Redevelopment Area
will be undertaken to conform with the following objectives:
1. The development of viable industrial areas to aid industrial
expansion of local industry.
2. The development of new employment centers to improve the
economic activity of the redevelopment area and to create
additional job opportunities.
3. The improvements of the Town's tax base by developing previously
underutilized areas.
c. Type of Redevelopment Action. Proposed redevelopment action in the
project area shall include:
1. Installation and construction of streets, public utilities and services
and site improvements essential to the preparation of sites for uses
in accordance with the Redevelopment Plan.
2. The lease or otherwise transfer of real property or any interest
herein acquired for redevelopment in accordance with the land use
provisions and other controls of this Redevelopment Plan.
54.Exhibit A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 28-2.3 KEARNY CODE § 28-2.5
AO:688
§ 28-2.5. Land Use Plan. [1973 Code § 115-17; Ord. No. 5-16-79]
a. Land Use and Zoning. Permitted land uses are located on the Zoning
Maps, Map 2 and 3 showing existing and proposed Town zoning
requirements respectively.
b. Land Use Provisions and Building Requirements. In order to achieve
the objectives of the Redevelopment Plan, the redevelopment and use of
the land within the project area will be made subject to the regulations
and controls specified in this paragraph b. In the event of a conflict
between the Redevelopment Plan and zoning or other Town ordinances,
the more restrictive control will govern.
1. Uses to Be Permitted. The permitted uses shall be:
(a) Industrial:
(1) Any production, processing, manufacture, fabrication,
cleaning, servicing, testing, repair or storage of goods,
materials or products, and business offices accessory
thereto, but not including the storage of flammable or
explosive materials as a principal use.
(2) Establishments for scientific research and development,
and business offices accessory thereto, where the
manufacturing, fabrication, production, repair, storage,
sale and resale of materials, goods and products is
incidental and accessory to the principal use of scientific
research and development.
(3) Business or commercial establishments which provide
supplies and/or services primarily to industrial and
manufacturing customers, employees and business offices
accessory thereto.
(4) Automobile service stations.
(5) Automobile and truck leasing and sales, exclusive of semitrailers.
(6) Boat sales, rental and repair.
(7) Warehouses, wholesale establishments, and other storage
facilities.
(8) Light public utility uses.
(b) Accessory uses:
(1) Hotels and motels.
(2) Professional offices.
(3) Banking and saving and loan facilities.
§ 28-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-2.5
AO:689
§ 28-2.6. Procedure for Modification of Approved Plan. [1973 Code
§ 115-18; Ord. No. 5-16-79]
§ 28-2.7. Land Use Controls and Building Requirements. [1973
Code § 115-19; Ord. No. 5-16-79]
The following Land Use Controls and Building Requirements are hereby
imposed and shall apply to all Land Uses within the Redevelopment Area
Designated Section 3.
(4) Public and private parking facilities.
2. Additional regulations to be imposed on real property to be
acquired for redevelopment:
(a) Design objectives. In order to develop a functionally and
visually appealing environment in the South Kearny
Redevelopment Area. Design Objectives, attached hereto as
Exhibit B55, shall guide development in the area.
(b) Setback and building regulations. Setback and building
regulations for areas to be acquired for redevelopment shall be
as specified in Table I, attached hereto.56
a. This Redevelopment Plan may be modified at any time, provided that if
modified after the lease of real property in the South Kearny
Redevelopment Area, the modification may be conditioned upon such
approval of the owner, lessee or successor in interest as the Mayor and
Town Council may deem advisable and in any event shall be subject to
such rights at law or in equity as a lessee or his successor or successors
in interest, may be entitled to assert. Where the proposed modifications
will substantially change the Redevelopment Plan, the modification
shall be formally approved by the Mayor and Council as in the case of
an original plan.
b. Upon the approval by the Mayor and Town Council of a redevelopment
plan or of any modification thereof, such plan or modification shall be
deemed to be in full force and effect for the respective redevelopment
area and the Mayor and Council may then cause such plan or
modification to be carried out in accordance with its terms.
a. The land uses permitted and the controls concerning height, building,
setback lines, widths, yards, density and off-street parking spaces, and
all other land use regulations shall be those established by the zoning
ordinance for the Town of Kearny in effect on September 1, 1978, which
is hereby incorporated herein by this reference.
b. It is recognized that the Hackensack Meadowlands Development
Commission (HMDC) has jurisdiction and final authority for the land
55.Exhibit B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
56.Table I is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 28-2.5 KEARNY CODE § 28-2.7
AO:690
§ 28-2.8. Relationship of Plan to Local Objectives. [1973 Code
§ 115-20; Ord. No. 5-16-79]
use controls applicable to the Redevelopment Area, since the lands
lie within the Hackensack Meadowlands District. Accordingly, in the
event of a conflict or difference between any regulations or standard
contained in the Town of Kearny zoning ordinance and the Town of
Kearny Comprehensive Master Plan, and any subdivision regulation,
zoning regulation, and/or any other land use regulation or standard
shall control.
c. It is the intention of this Plan to permit development consistent with
that permitted by the HMDC. Any amendment to any regulation,
standard, or control imposed by the HMDC shall govern all
redevelopment within the Redevelopment Area, unless the applicable
Town zoning ordinance shall control; provided however, that nothing
herein shall be deemed to prohibit a Redeveloper from challenging, by
appropriate administrative or judicial proceedings, the validity,
applicability, or reasonableness, of any regulation, standard or control
which may be adopted by the HMDC or any determination of the HMDC
relating to the Redevelopment Area. The Town reserves the right, in any
such proceeding, to intervene in any such proceedings to protect its
own legal interests.
d. This Plan further recognizes that the HMDC has established elaborate
procedures and regulations for the submission of development plans for
projects to be constructed within the Redevelopment Area. Therefore,
Redeveloper shall submit copies of all development plans for projects to
be constructed within the Redevelopment Area, to HMDC and
Redeveloper shall simultaneously submit copies of all plans submitted
to HMDC to the Town. The Town shall review such plans to determine
whether they meet the criteria established by this Plan and by any
agreement with the Redeveloper. In all other respects the Town's
review of plans shall be advisory.
e. The Town shall review and approve all redevelopment plans within 30
days after the date of submission thereof to the Town by the
Redeveloper and, if no comment is made within 60 days after the date
of submission thereof, the plan submitted shall be deemed approved.
a. This Plan is in conformity with the approved Comprehensive Master
Plan of the Town of Kearny. Provides an outline for the replanning,
redeveloping of the Redevelopment Area, and is sufficiently complete to
indicate its relationship to defined local objectives as to appropriate
land uses, density of population and improved traffic, public utilities,
and other public improvements.
b. In particular, it is hereby determined that the development of the
Redevelopment Area in accordance with this Plan will serve to achieve
Kearny's planning policies which have been enunciated in the
Comprehensive Master Plan as follows:
§ 28-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-2.8
AO:691
§ 28-2.9. Compliance with State and Local Requirements. [1973
Code § 115-21; Ord. No. 5-16-79]
§ 28-2.10. Procedures for Amendment of Redevelopment Plan.
[1973 Code § 115-22; Ord. No. 5-16-79]
This Redevelopment Plan may be amended from time to time upon
compliance with all requirements of applicable law; provided that, with
1. To maintain and enhance areas of stability in the community; also
to protect those areas from adverse environmental conditions.
2. To provide an orderly and planned program for areas which are or
will be subject to change and modification in the future.
3. To beautify areas of the community, wherever possible, recognizing
that aesthetic, environmental and ecological considerations are
equally as important as other development factors.
4. To provide adequate services and facilities to all portions of the
community within the financial capabilities of the Town.
5. To maintain continuous liaison with all of the Town's neighboring
communities. The Hackensack Meadowlands Development
Commission, the Hudson County Planning Board and other
Governmental agencies.
6. To continue to maintain and improve community neighborhood and
citizen participation in the planning process.
7. To maintain and improve the street and circulation system in
Kearny through the reduction of hazardous areas, noise and other
environmental deficiencies as well as the improved accessibility
and convenience to all areas of the community.
a. Relocation. The proposed Redevelopment Area consists entirely of
vacant land; therefore, there will be no displacement of existing
businesses, families or individuals. Existing dumping operations
presently being permitted by the Town under lease arrangement will be
relocated, to the extent legally permissible, to other areas as required
by project developments.
b. Other Approvals. The Redevelopment Area is located within the
Hackensack Meadowlands District and thus comes within the
jurisdiction of the Hackensack Meadowlands Development
Commission. This plan recognizes HMDC's jurisdiction and authority
and incorporates the Master Plan of HMDC and its land use controls
and regulations as set forth in subsection 28-2.7. It is further
recognized that the Redevelopment Area is located in a wetland and
that, therefore, appropriate State and Federal requirements relating to
wetlands must be complied with as a precondition to development by a
Redeveloper.
§ 28-2.8 KEARNY CODE § 28-2.10
AO:692
respect to any land in the Redevelopment Area under lease and/or option
for ultimate use in accordance with the Redevelopment Plan, the Town
must receive the prior written consent of any lessee and/or optionee whose
interest may be materially adversely affected by such amendment.
§ 28-2.11. Termination of Plan. [1973 Code § 115-23; Ord. No.
5-16-79]
This Plan and any amendments thereof, shall remain in full force and effect
for a period from the date of its adoption to and including December 31,
2008.
§ 28-3. SCHUYLER AVENUE REDEVELOPMENT PLAN. [Ord. No.
2002-O-35]
The plan, a copy of which is on file with the Town Clerk, recommended by
the Planning Board in its April 3, 2002 resolution, is hereby approved and
adopted and designated "The Schuyler Avenue Redevelopment Plan."
§ 28-4. INDUSTRIAL PARK REDEVELOPMENT PLAN. [Ord. No.
2013-48]
The plan, a copy of which is attached, for Block 134, Lots 1, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10, 11, 12 and 13 recommended by the Planning Board on December 4,
2013 is hereby approved and adopted and designated "The Industrial Park
Redevelopment Plan." 57
§ 28-5. PASSAIC AVENUE REDEVELOPMENT PLAN. [Ord. No.
2014-17; Ord. No. 2017-45; superseded by Ord. No. 2017-53; Ord.
No. 2018-2]
§ 28-6. KEARNY POINT INDUSTRIAL PARK REDEVELOPMENT
PLAN. [Ord. No. 2014-54; Ord. No. 2018-17]
a. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7, the amended Passaic Avenue
Redevelopment Plan approved and transmitted by the Kearny Planning
Board be and hereby is approved, ratified and adopted.58
b. Plan Amendment to Permit Immediate Care Medical Facilities as a
Principal Permitted Use. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7, the attached
amendments to the Passaic Avenue Redevelopment Plan be and hereby
are approved, ratified and adopted.59
c. Plan Amendment to Permit Coffee Shops with Drive-Through as a
Principal Permitted Use. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7, the Passaic
Avenue Redevelopment Plan be and hereby is amended.60
57.Editor's Note: The plan is on file in the Town offices.
58.Editor's Note: The plan is on file in the Town offices.
59.Editor's Note: The Plan is on file in the Town offices.
60.Editor's Note: The plan and ordinance are on file in the Town offices.
§ 28-2.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 28-6
AO:693
Chapter 29
ENVIRONMENTAL REGULATIONS
§ 29-1. AIR POLLUTION.
§ 29-1.1. Title. [1973 Code § 48-1]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Air Pollution Control
Code of the Town of Kearny."
§ 29-1.2. Findings; Declaration of Policies. [1973 Code § 48-2]
It is hereby declared that pollution of the atmosphere by smoke, cinders,
soot, fly ash, flames, fumes, vapors, odors, dust and other contaminants
is a menace to the health, welfare and comfort of the residents of the
Town of Kearny and a cause of substantial damage to property. For the
purpose of controlling and reducing atmospheric pollution, it is hereby
declared to be the policy of the Town to minimize air pollution, as herein
defined, and prohibit excessive emission of the same; to establish standards
governing the installation, maintenance and operation of equipment and
appurtenances relating to combustion which are a potential source of air
pollution; and in furtherance of this purpose to cooperate and coordinate
these efforts with the State Department of Environmental Protection, Air
Pollution, Air Pollution Control Program.
§ 29-1.3. Definitions. [1973 Code § 48-3]
As used in this section:
AIR POLLUTION — Shall mean the presence in the outdoor atmosphere of
one or more air contaminants in such quantities and duration as are, or
tend to be, injurious to human health or welfare, to animal or plant life, or
to property, or would unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of life or
property throughout the Town of Kearny as shall be affected hereby, and
excludes all aspects of employer-employee relationship as to health and
safety hazards.
ECONOMIC POISONS — Shall mean those chemicals used as insecticides,
rodenticides, fungicides, herbicides, nematocides or defoliants.
FUEL-BURNING EQUIPMENT — Shall mean any furnace, boiler, water
heater, device, mechanism, stoker, burner, stack, oven, stove, kiln, still or
a. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7, the Kearny Point Industrial Park
Redevelopment Plan is approved and adopted.61
b. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7, the Amended Kearny Point Industrial
Park Redevelopment Plan is approved and adopted.62
61.Editor's Note: The plan may be found on file in the Town offices.
62.Editor's Note: The Plan is on file in the Town offices.
§ 28-6 KEARNY CODE § 29-1.3
AO:694
other apparatus or a group or collection of such units in the process of
fuel burning for the generation of heat or power. Refuse-burning equipment
shall be considered incinerators, as herein defined, and not as fuel-burning
equipment under this definition. Ovens, stoves or ranges used exclusively
for domestic cooking purposes are not included herein.
INCINERATOR — Shall mean any device, apparatus, equipment or
structure used for destroying, reducing or salvaging by fire any material or
substance, including, but not limited to, refuse, rubbish, garbage, debris or
scrap, or facilities for cremating human or animal remains.
ODOR — Shall mean a property of a substance which affects the sense of
smell.
OPEN-AIR BURNING — Shall mean any fire wherein the products of
combustion are emitted into the open air and are not directed thereto
through a stack or chimney.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any person who has care, custody or control
of a building or premises, or a portion thereof, whether with or without
knowledge of the owner thereof.
OWNER — Shall mean any person who, alone or jointly, or severally with
others, shall have legal or equitable title to any premises with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or who shall have charge, care
or control of any premises or part thereof including, but not limited to, a
dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the administrator, trustee,
receiver, guardian, or as a mortgagee in possession, regardless of how such
possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee or sublessee of all
or any part of any premises, including, but not limited to, a dwelling or
dwelling unit, shall be deemed to be a co-owner with the lessor and shall
have joint responsibility with the owner over the premises or portion thereof
so leased or subleased.
PERSON — Shall mean and include corporations, companies, associations,
societies, firms, partnerships and joint-stock companies, as well as
individuals.
REFUSE — Shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible wastes (except
body wastes), and shall include, but not be limited to, garbage, rubbish,
yard trimmings, leaves, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART — Shall mean Ringelmann's Scale for
Grading the Density of Smoke, published by the United States Bureau of
Mines, or any chart, recorder, indicator or device for the measurement of
smoke density which is approved by the State Department of Environmental
Protection of the State of New Jersey as the equivalent of the Ringelmann's
Scale.
RUBBISH — Shall mean solids not considered to be highly flammable
or explosive, and shall include, but not be limited to, rags, old clothes,
leather, rubber, carpets, wood, excelsior, paper, ashes, tree branches, yard
§ 29-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-1.3
AO:695
trimmings, furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery, masonry and other similar
materials.
SALVAGE OPERATIONS — Shall mean any business, trade or industry
engaged in whole or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or
material, including, but not limited to, metals, chemicals, shipping
containers or drums.
SMOKE — Shall mean small gasborne and airborne particles arising from a
process of combustion in sufficient number to be observable.
TRADE WASTE — Shall mean all solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting
from construction, building operations, or the prosecution of any business,
trade or industry, and shall include, but not be limited to, plastic products,
cartons, paint, grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders,
and other forms of solid or liquid waste materials.
§ 29-1.4. Open-Air Burning Prohibited; Exceptions. [1973 Code
§ 48-4]
§ 29-1.5. Smoke Emission From Fuel-Burning Equipment
Restricted. [1973 Code § 48-5]
§ 29-1.6. Incinerator Emissions Restricted; Hours of Operation.
[1973 Code § 48-6]
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open-air burning of refuse
or plant life, nor conduct a salvage operation by open-air burning,
except as provided in paragraph b below.
b. The open burning of trade waste is not prohibited where no other
known method of disposal can be used without hazard to health or
property and the required affidavit has been filed with and approved by
the Commissioner of the New Jersey State Department of
Environmental Protection in accordance with Chapter 11, Section 1.4,
of the New Jersey Air Pollution Control Code.
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke from any fuelburning
equipment the shade or appearance of which is darker than No.
1 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart to be emitted into the open air.
b. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to: Smoke emitted
during the clearing of a firebox or the building of a new fire, the shade
or appearance of which is not darker than No. 2 of the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart, for a period or periods aggregating no more than three
minutes in any 15 consecutive minutes.
a. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit smoke from any
incinerator, the shade or appearance of which is darker than No. 1 of
the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, to be emitted into the open air; or
emissions of such capacity, within a stack or chimney, or, exclusive of
water vapor, of such capacity leaving a stack or chimney to a degree
§ 29-1.3 KEARNY CODE § 29-1.6
AO:696
§ 29-1.7. Air Pollution Prohibited. [1973 Code § 48-7]
No person or owner of property and no person having possession or control
of property shall cause, suffer, allow or permit to be emitted into the
open air substances in such quantities as shall result in air pollution. The
provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the use of economic poisons.
§ 29-1.8. Inspections and Right of Entry. [1973 Code § 48-8]
greater than the emission designated as No. 1 of the Ringelmann
Smoke Chart.
b. The provisions of paragraph a above shall not apply to smoke emitted
during the building of a new fire, the shade or appearance of which is
not darker than No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart, for a period of
no longer than three consecutive minutes; or to emissions of such
capacity within a stack or chimney, or exclusive of water vapor, of such
capacity leaving a stack or chimney to a degree which is not greater
than the emissions designated as No. 2 of the Ringelmann Smoke Chart,
for a period no longer than three consecutive minutes.
c. No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit the emission of particles
of unburned waste or ash from any incinerator which are individually
large enough to be visible while suspended in the atmosphere.
d. No person shall construct, install, use or cause to be used any
incinerator which will result in odors being detectable by sense of smell
in any area of human use or occupancy.
e. No person shall operate, and no owner or operator of any building in
the Town of Kearny shall permit the operation of, any incinerator prior
to 7:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m., of any day, and all operations shall be
completely terminated by 5:00 p.m., including complete extinction of
the fire and removal of material in a safe manner from the firebox to a
noncombustible container; provided, however, that by special permit,
the Health Officer may, because of exceptional circumstances, permit
different hours of operation under such conditions as he shall deem
necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the public or of persons
in the vicinity.
a. Availability for Inspections. All buildings and premises subject to this
chapter are subject to inspection from time to time by the Health
Officer or his duly authorized representatives. All rooms and areas in
the building shall be available and accessible for such inspection which
shall be made during usual business hours if the premises are used for
nonresidential purposes; provided, however, that inspections may be
made at other times if:
1. The premises are not available during the foregoing hours for
inspections; or
§ 29-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-1.8
AO:697
§ 29-1.9. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 48-9; New]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
2. There is a reason to believe that violations are occurring on the
premises which can only be apprehended and provided by
inspection during other than the prescribed hours; or
3. There is reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is
an immediate threat to health or safety, requiring inspection and
abatement without delay.
b. Emergency Inspections. Emergency inspections may be authorized
without warrant if the Health Officer has reason to believe that a
condition exists which poses an immediate threat to life, health or
safety. Such procedure shall take place only where the time required to
apply for and secure the issuance of a warrant would render ineffective
the immediate action necessary to abate the condition. Emergency
inspections may also be authorized by the Governor in time of air
pollution emergencies, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 26:20-32. Where the
Health Officer or his duly authorized representatives are refused entry
or access, or are otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner,
occupant or operator from conducting an inspection of the premises,
such person shall be in violation of this chapter and subject to the
penalties hereunder.
c. Search Warrants. The Town of Kearny may, upon affidavit, apply to the
Judge of the Municipal Court of the Town of Kearny for a search
warrant, setting forth factually the actual conditions and circumstances
that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation
of this chapter may exist on the premises, including one or more of the
following:
1. The premises require inspection according to the cycle established
by the Health Officer for periodic inspections of premises of the
type involved.
2. Observation of external conditions (for example, smoke, ash, soot,
odors) of the premises and its public areas has resulted in the belief
that violations of this chapter exist.
3. Circumstances such as age and design of fuel-burning equipment
and/or system, types of incinerators, particular use of premises or
other factors which render systematic inspections of such buildings
necessary in the interest of public health and safety.
If the Judge of the Municipal Court is satisfied as to the matters
set forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a search
warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of the
premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist.
§ 29-1.8 KEARNY CODE § 29-2
AO:698
§ 29-2. CLEANUP OF HAZARDOUS WASTE DEPOSITS.
§ 29-2.1. Purpose and Intent. [1973 Code § 87-1; Ord. No. 10-26-88]
The purpose and intent of this section is to establish regulations and
guidelines for the abatement and/or clean-up of hazardous waste deposits
upon or into property or facilities within the Town of Kearny.
§ 29-2.2. Definitions. [1973 Code § 87-2; Ord. No. 10-26-88]
As used in this section:
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Shall mean any solid waste or combinations of
solid waste, including toxic, corrosive, irritating, sensitizing, radioactive,
biologically infectious, explosive or flammable solid waste, which poses
present or potential threat to human health, living organisms or the
environment, provided that the solid waste is hazardous in accordance with
the standards and procedures set forth at N.J.A.C. 7:26-8, and shall also
include hazardous substances as defined in N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11b(k).
PERSON — Shall mean any natural person or persons, corporation,
partnership, association, or any other organization.
§ 29-2.3. Liability; Recoupment of Costs. [1973 Code § 87-3; Ord.
No. 10-26-88]
Any person who intentionally, negligently or in any way causes any deposits
of hazardous waste upon or into any property or facility within the Town
of Kearny shall be liable for the payment of all costs incurred by the
Kearny Fire Department, Kearny Health Department, or Kearny Department
of Public Works in abating and/or cleaning up the hazardous wastes as
expressly authorized and directed by the Town of Kearny. Such costs as
herein provided shall include but not be limited to the following: labor
costs for Town personnel, or any other outside agency, public or private;
administrative costs; costs of materials used, and any other costs incidental
thereto for the purpose of meeting the intent and purpose of this section.
Such payment shall be remitted to the Town within 10 days of such notice of
payment; such notice shall be sent certified mail, return receipt requested,
or hand delivered.
§ 29-2.4. Other Laws; Lien on Property. [1973 Code § 87-4; Ord. No.
10-26-88]
a. This section is not intended to preempt or be inconsistent with any
other law or regulation, but is intended solely for the recoupment of
costs heretofor provided; this section shall be in addition to any other
penalties or remedies as provided for by law.
b. In the event that such hazardous waste is deposited on property as
aforesaid by any person who owns such property, the Town may place a
municipal lien against such property for the costs incurred pursuant to
§ 29-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-2.4
AO:699
§ 29-2.5. Administration and Enforcement. [1973 Code § 87-5; Ord.
No. 10-26-88]
This section shall be enforced by the Kearny Health Office, who shall be
deemed the "Enforcement Officer."
§ 29-2.6. Notice of Violation. [1973 Code § 87-6; Ord. No. 10-26-88]
Whenever the Enforcement Officer or his designee determines that there
has been a deposit of hazardous waste, he shall order the property owner
to abate and/or clean-up same, or act to abate and/or clean up same and
thereafter notify such person of the costs incurred by the Town.
§ 29-2.7. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 87-7; Ord. No.
10-26-88; New]
Any person violating or failing to comply with provisions of this section,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5.
§ 29-3. WATERFRONT CLEANUP.
§ 29-3.1. Short Title. [1973 Code § 136-01; Ord. No. 2-23-83]
This section shall be known as the "Waterfront Cleanup Regulations."
§ 29-3.2. Definitions. [1973 Code § 136-02; Ord. No. 2-23-83]
As used in this section:
DEBRIS — Shall mean any loose material not attached to the land or to
any structure and which is capable of becoming drift, and any unmanned
watercraft not under safe control.
DIRECTOR — Shall mean the Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works who may appoint, with the approval of the Mayor and Town Council,
an authorized agent to act in his behalf.
DRIFT — Shall mean any floatable material which may cause damage to
vessels or crafts.
FINAL ORDER — Shall mean either the order of the Mayor after the time to
request a review thereof has lapsed, or the order of the Mayor issued as a
result of a review requested in subsection 29-3.7.
NAVIGABLE WATERS — Shall mean the waterways which are capable
of carrying interstate commerce, and the tributaries thereto, within the
geographical limits of the Town.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
this section, provided the Town acts in accordance with State law
including N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.13.
§ 29-2.4 KEARNY CODE § 29-3.2
AO:700
PREMISES — Shall mean the land, building, wharf, pier, dolphin, boom,
weir, breakdown, bulkhead, jetty, or other structure and shall include all or
any as may be necessary.
WATERFRONT, SHORE OR BANK — Shall mean that portion of the land
which borders navigable waters and which lies shoreward of the established
harbor lines or low water mark within the corporate limits of the Town.
§ 29-3.3. Purpose. [1973 Code § 136-03; Ord. No. 2-23-83]
The general purpose of this section is the elimination of sources of drift and
debris which constitute possible obstacles or hazards to existing navigation
on the navigable waters of this Town by the removal and disposal of debris
and deteriorated structures on the shores of such waters, and liable to be
washed into such waters.
§ 29-3.4. Sources of Drift; Prevention. [1973 Code § 136-04; Ord.
No. 2-23-83]
Whenever the Superintendent has reasonable grounds to believe that:
§ 29-3.5. Order of Mayor. [1973 Code § 136-05; Ord. No. 2-23-83]
The order of the Mayor issued pursuant to subsection 29-3.4 shall be in
writing, directed to the occupant, and last known owner of record, if not
such occupant, of the premises which are the subject of the complaint, and
shall specify whether the condition complained of shall be removed, abated,
altered or repaired.
§ 29-3.6. Service of Order. [1973 Code § 136-06; Ord. No. 2-23-83]
The order of the Mayor issued pursuant to subsection 29-3.5 shall be served
upon the occupant and the last known owner of record, if not such occupant,
of the premises which are the subject of the complaint either by personally
delivering a copy of such order to such occupant and last known owner of
record or by registered mail addressed to such persons at their last known
address.
a. Debris placed or deposited on the banks of any navigable water is liable
to be washed into such navigable water by any cause whatsoever and
thereby be or become a source of drift likely to hinder, impede or
otherwise obstruct navigation; or any watercraft not under safe control;
or
b. The condition of any wharf, pier, dolphin, boom, weir, breakdown,
bulkhead, jetty, or other structure on or bordering on the shores of any
navigable water is so dilapidated and deteriorated as to be or become a
source of drift or debris liable to be washed into such navigable waters
by any cause whatsoever and thereby likely to hinder, impede, or
otherwise obstruct navigation, the Superintendent may find the same to
be a public nuisance and thereupon order that the same be removed,
abated, altered or repaired as such order may specify.
§ 29-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-3.7
AO:701
§ 29-3.7. Review of Order. [1973 Code § 136-07; Ord. No. 2-23-83]
Within 15 days after service of the order of the Mayor issued pursuant
to subsection 29-3.5 or, under emergency, within such shorter time as the
Mayor may prescribe, the person to whom such order is directed, or any
person aggrieved thereby, may appeal to the Mayor to review the same. The
Mayor or his agent after such review, at which all interested parties shall
be afforded the opportunity to be heard, may affirm, modify or reverse the
order of the Mayor as the facts may warrant. Unless the same is declared by
a court of competent jurisdiction to be arbitrary, capricious or not supported
by substantial evidence, the order of the Mayor after review thereof, shall
be final and conclusive.
§ 29-3.8. Compliance with Order. [1973 Code § 136-08; Ord. No.
2-23-83]
In the event that the persons to whom the order of the Mayor is directed
fail or refuse to comply with the terms of such order within 30 days after
such order has become final, the Director shall without further notice to
any person, take or cause to be taken the necessary action to remove,
abate, alter, or repair, the nuisance as specified in the order. The costs and
expenses incident thereto shall be a personal charge against the occupant,
and last owner of record, if not such occupant, of the premises affected and
all appurtenances thereto.
§ 29-3.9. Abandonment Prohibited; Drift or Debris Prohibited.
[1973 Code § 136-9; Ord. No. 2-23-83]
No person shall abandon any flat-bottomed boat, barge, scow, raft or vessel
upon any public land or waterway to or upon private property within the
Town without the prior written permission of the Director of Public Works,
who is hereby designated by the Town Council to perform this function.
Subject to review and final decision by the Mayor. No drift or debris shall
be caused or continued by any person.
§ 29-3.10. Barges Anchoring for Over 10 Days. [1973 Code § 136-10;
Ord. No. 2-23-83]
The owner of any occupied or unoccupied barge, which is to be docked in or
on the banks of any river or navigable waterway within the Town for more
than 10 consecutive days, shall post a surety bond in the amount of $25,000
with the Town Clerk and in favor of the Town the bond being issued by an
insurance company authorized to do business in the State of New Jersey.
§ 29-3.11. Forfeiture of Bond; Reimbursement. [1973 Code
§ 136-11; Ord. No. 20-23-83]
In the event that a barge bonded in accordance with the preceding section
sinks or otherwise becomes unable to navigate under its own power, the
bond so posted shall be forfeited to the Town to aid in the removal of such
barge from any river, riverbank or navigable waterway within the Town.
§ 29-3.7 KEARNY CODE § 29-3.12
AO:702
§ 29-3.12. Bond Cancellation Upon Removal of Vessel. [1973 Code
§ 136-12; Ord. No. 2-23-83]
The surety on a bond issued pursuant to the above shall have the right to
immediately cancel such bond upon the removal of the barge from the rivers
and riverbanks of the Town.
§ 29-3.13. Vessels Not Affected. [1973 Code § 136-13; Ord. No.
2-23-83]
This section shall not apply to barges, ships or boats owned or operated by
common carriers engaged in interstate or foreign commerce, nor shall it
apply to pleasure craft used on a seasonal basis.
§ 29-3.14. Violation Subject to Penalties. [1973 Code § 136-14; Ord.
No. 2-23-83; New]
Any person who willfully violates this section by abandoning any flatbottomed
boat, barge, scow or raft without permission shall be subject to
the penalties prescribed by Chapter 264 of Public Laws 1969 (R.S. 12:7C-1
et seq.), as amended and supplemented. All other violations shall be liable
to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5. Each day shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 29-4. PROHIBITION OF RETAIL USE OF PLASTIC SINGLE-USE
CARRYOUT BAGS. [Added 2-18-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-0763]
§ 29-4.1. Definitions.
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CARRYOUT BAG — A bag provided by a retail establishment to a customer
at the point of sale for customers, but shall not include:
Bags, whether plastic or not, in which loose produce or products are
placed by a customer to deliver such items to the point of sale or check
out of a retail establishment, such as fruit, vegetables, nuts, grains,
candy, cookies or small hardware items;
a.
b. Laundry or dry-cleaning bags;
c. Newspaper bags;
Bags used to contain or wrap frozen food, meat, fish or other items,
whether prepackaged or not, to prevent or contain moisture and cross
contamination with other food products;
d.
e. Bags provided by pharmacists to contain prescription drugs;
63.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided it shall be effective 4-22-2021.
§ 29-3.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-4.1
AO:703
PLASTIC SINGLE-USE CARRYOUT BAG — A bag made of plastic which is
not a reusable bag.
RECYCLABLE PAPER BAG — A paper bag that is 100% recyclable and
contains at least 40% postconsumer recycled content and displays the
words "recyclable" and "made from 40% postconsumer recycled content" in
a visible manner on the outside of the bag.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Any commercial enterprise, whether or not
operated for profit, including but not limited to mercantile establishments,
department stores, food service establishments, restaurants, pharmacies,
convenience and grocery stores, liquor stores, supermarkets, clothing
stores, seasonal and/or temporary businesses, jewelry stores, and stores
which sell household goods or any other commercial establishment not
specifically identified herein utilizing plastic single-use plastic carryout
bags for the convenience of merchandise, but excluding bazaars, fairs,
carnivals or other special events operated by a nonprofit or religious
institution. Flea markets (as defined in Town Code § 4-26) are included in
this definition of a retail establishment and are subject to this section.
REUSABLE CARRYOUT BAG — A bag with handles specifically designed
and manufactured for multiple reuse and is either made from polyester,
polypropylene, cotton or other durable material or plastic which is at least
2.25 mils in thickness and meets the following criteria:
§ 29-4.2. Use of Reusable Carryout Bags Is Mandatory.
§ 29-4.3. Carryout Bag Charge.
Bags sold in packages containing multiple bags intended for use as
garbage, pet waste or yard waste bags;
f.
g. To contain or wrap flowers and potted plants; and
Contain items where damage to a good or contamination of other goods
placed together in the same bag would result.
h.
Has a minimum lifetime capability of 125 or more uses carrying 22 or
more pounds over a distance of at least 175 feet; and
a.
Is capable of being washed so as to be cleaned and disinfected multiple
times.
b.
a. All retail establishments shall provide customers with only reusable
carryout bags and/or recyclable paper bags. No retail establishment
shall provide any plastic single-use carryout bag to a customer at the
checkout stand, cash register, point of sale, or other point of departure
for the purpose of transporting products or goods out of the business or
store, except as otherwise stated in this section.
b. Nothing in this section shall be read to preclude retail establishments
from making reusable carryout bags available for sale to customers or
from customers using their own reusable carryout bags.
§ 29-4.1 KEARNY CODE § 29-4.3
AO:704
§ 29-4.4. Exceptions for Carryout Bag Charge.
A retail establishment shall not charge the carryout bag charge required
under Subsection 29-4.3 when providing a reusable carryout bag to a
customer who participates in, or is a beneficiary of, any United States
government federal welfare program, or any local or Hudson County
welfare assistance program, or any New Jersey State welfare program,
including but not limited to the New Jersey Supplemental Nutritional
Assistance Program (SNAP) or the New Jersey State Supplemental Security
Income Program (SSI).
§ 29-4.5. Exemptions.
The Mayor and Council may approve a request for an exemption or deferral
from the requirements of this section by any operator of a retail
establishment, with or without conditions, upon a showing of substantial
hardship or other good cause. Exemptions or deferrals should be granted
only for the minimum time necessary to accommodate the reason for the
request.
§ 29-4.6. Enforcement.
Any notice of violation issued pursuant to this section shall be returnable to
the Kearny Municipal Court, which shall have the power to impose penalties
as provided herein. The Kearny Health Department shall be designated as
the appropriate department and/or staff to enforce this section.
§ 29-4.7. Violations and Penalties.
Any operator of a retail establishment convicted of a violation of this
section, upon conviction, shall be liable for the following penalties:
a. No retail establishment shall provide a reusable carryout bag to a
customer at the point of sale, unless the store charges the customer a
reusable carryout bag charge of at least $0.10 per bag. The carryout
bag charge shall not apply to recyclable paper bags as defined herein.
b. No retail establishment shall be required to charge its customers a
carryout bag charge for bags that fall outside the definition of a
reusable carryout bag.
a. First incursion: written warning by Health Department.
b. Second incursion: $100 penalty per instance.
c. Third incursion: $250 penalty per instance.
d. Fourth incursion: $500 penalty per instance.
§ 29-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-4.8
AO:705
§ 29-4.8. Outreach and Implementation.
The Town of Kearny's Advisory Committee on the Environmental and
Sustainability (ACES) established by § 2-48 of the Town Code shall
coordinate outreach with the Town of Kearny [in conjunction with Kearny
Urban Enterprise Zone (UEZ) officials] to retail establishments by providing
information to educate retail establishment employees, customers and the
general public as to the requirements of this § 29-4.
§ 29-4.9. Effective Date.
This section shall not become effective until April 22, 2021, to allow retail
establishments sufficient time to plan and implement the transition to
reusable carryout bags and/or recyclable paper bags.
§ 29-4.10. Severability.
The provisions of this section are declared severable and if any section,
subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof for any reason shall be held
to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of law, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining sections, subsections, clauses and
phrases of this section, but shall remain in effect; it being the legislative
intent that this section shall stand notwithstanding the validity of any part
thereof.
Chapter 30
FIBER OPTIC CABLE
§ 30-1. FINDINGS; PURPOSE. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-70]
The accelerated technological advancements in the fiber optic industries
have dramatically increased the number of requests for approvals for use of
the Town's roadways, other Town-owned property and, in some instances,
for access to easements previously granted to public utilities for the
purpose of installing overhead and/or underground connections, cables,
conduits, wires and similar apparatus.
Review and implementation of such applications of necessity involve
multiple departments of the Town in such typical functions as the
supervision of street openings, the provision of additional police services to
control traffic disruptions, and myriad inspections and also expose the Town
to potential liability.
The Town desires to be supportive of the emerging technology that fiber
optics offers to its users, but is also obligated to protect its taxpayers from
additional expense.
The establishment of a standardized protocol for the processing of such
applications and the imposition of reasonable fees will balance the needs of
§ 29-4.8 KEARNY CODE § 30-1
AO:706
the fiber optic industry and of the Town and its taxpayers and will promote
the public safety and welfare.
§ 30-2. APPLICATIONS; STANDARDS; FEES.64 [Ord. No.
2007-(O)-70; Ord. No. 2012-22]
a. All applications for the installation of conduits or fiber optic cables or
for the connection to a public utility easement for such installations
shall be submitted to the Town Clerk.
b. The applications shall be made on a standardized form, a copy of which
is attached hereto as Exhibit A65, and shall contain at least the following
minimal information and exhibits:
1. A plat showing the proposed location of the conduit or fiber optic
installation or connection.
2. A depiction showing whether the proposed installation is overhead
or underground.
3. Copies of all third-party easements previously granted to a public
utility which are proposed to be used or connected to.
4. Written consents for the use of such easements by the holder or
owner of such easement.
c. The applicant shall submit with its application the following fees and
documents:
1. A check in the amount of $500 payable to the Town of Kearny to
cover the cost of review.
2. A certificate of insurance naming the Town as an additional insured
for general liability coverage in the amount of at least $2,000,000
without a deductible.
3. An indemnification agreement in the form attached hereto as
Schedule B66, properly executed by the applicant which shall hold
the Town, its officers, agents and employees harmless from any
loss, claim, or damage arising out of the installation, connection,
maintenance or use of the conduit or fiber optic cable to be
installed by the applicant.
4. In those cases where an easement for underground installation is
approved by the Town, an agreement that the easement holder will
permit the Town to use the holder's easement without
consideration for the installation of fiber optic cable for Town
64.Editor’s Note: Section 2 of Ord. No. 2020-25 stated that applications for any right-of-way
permit governed by Ch. 39 shall no longer be required to apply for approval under Ch. 30,
Fiber Optic Cable, of the Town Code.
65.Exhibit A, referred to herein, is included as an attachment to this chapter.
66.Schedule B, referred to herein, is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 30-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-2
AO:707
Chapter 31
CABLE TELEVISION
Prior ordinance history: 1997 Code §§ 31-1-31-22 and Ordinance No.
2003-(O)-38.
§ 31-1. PURPOSE OF THE ORDINANCE. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
The municipality hereby grants to Comcast renewal of its non-exclusive
Municipal Consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public
places in the municipality, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and
operations, provided that such installation will not interfere with
any fiber optic cable the easement holders may have previously
installed in the easement area.
5. In any instance in which the holder of an existing easement
requires that an applicant hereunder obtain Town approval or
consent by ordinance, the applicant shall pay to the Town Clerk, in
addition to the fee established by paragraph c,1 hereof, an
ordinance fee of $200 which shall cover the cost of advertising the
notice of adoption subsequent to adoption. (In the absence of any
such requirement for an approval by ordinance, said approval shall
be by resolution.)
d. The application shall be docketed by the Town Clerk and forwarded to
the Town Engineer for review as to whether the proposed installation or
connection is in conformity with accepted engineering practices, poses
no threat to the health or safety of the residents of the Town and meets
all of the requirements of the Town ordinances and codes and statutory
enactments.
e. The Town Engineer in timely fashion shall transmit the application with
any comments and recommendations to the Mayor and Council for its
approval or disapproval.
f. No grant of approval authorized by this chapter shall be deemed to
authorize the holder of such approval to use its telecommunications
system within the Town to provide video programming services to
customers.
g. Every grant of approval authorized by this chapter shall require the
holder of said approval to comply with the Underground Facility
Protection Act, P.L. 1994, c118 in the installation of its system and in
providing notification of the location of its system when installed.
h. All applicants shall be responsible for compliance with any and all
applicable Federal, State or local regulations, including the
requirements of the Town's road opening permit requirements.
§ 30-2 KEARNY CODE § 31-1
AO:708
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the Municipality of a cable television and communications
system.
§ 31-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning
or definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 C.F.R.
Subsection 76.1 et seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C.
Section 521 et seq., as amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A.
48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in no way be construed to broaden, alter or
conflict with the Federal and State definitions:
ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Shall mean Chapter 186 of the General
Laws of New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1,
et seq.
APPLICATION — Shall mean the Company's Application for Renewal of
Municipal Consent.
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Shall mean any service tier, which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the FCC.
BOARD OR BPU — Shall mean the Board of Public Utilities, State of New
Jersey.
COMPANY — Shall mean the grantee of rights under this Ordinance and is
known as Comcast of The Meadowlands, LLC.
FCC — Shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.
OFFICE OR OCTV — Shall mean the Office of Cable Television of the Board.
PRIMARY SERVICE AREA OR PSA — Shall mean consists of the area of the
Municipality currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map
annexed to the Company's Application for Municipal Consent.
TOWN OR MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean the Town of Kearny, County of
Hudson, State of New Jersey.
§ 31-3. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
Public hearings conducted by the municipality, concerning the renewal of
Municipal Consent herein granted to the Company were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, having
been fully open to the public, and the Municipality, having received at said
public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the Company
to receive this renewal of Municipal Consent, the Municipality hereby finds
that the Company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character,
financial and other qualifications and that the Company's operating and
construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ 31-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-4
AO:709
§ 31-4. DURATION OF FRANCHISE. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
The non-exclusive Municipal Consent granted herein shall expire 15 years
from the date of expiration of the previous Certificate of Approval issued by
the Board.
In the event that the Municipality shall find that the Company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
Ordinance, the Municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including modification
and/or termination of the Certificate of Approval; provided however, that the
Municipality shall first have given the Company written notice of all alleged
instances of non-compliance and an opportunity to cure same within 90 days
of that notification.
§ 31-5. FRANCHISE FEE. [Ord. No. 2013- 18]
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the Company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
Municipality an annual payment equal to 3.5% of gross revenues pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-3(x) and N.J.S.A. 48:5A-30(d), or such lesser or greater
amount as may be required by any subsequent amendment to these
statutory provisions.
§ 31-6. FRANCHISE TERRITORY. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
The consent granted under this Ordinance to the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the Municipality and any property
subsequently annexed hereto.
§ 31-7. EXTENSION OF SERVICE. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
The Company shall be required to proffer service to any residence or
business along any public right-of-way in the Primary Service Area, as set
forth in the Company's Application. The Company's Line Extension Policy, as
set forth in the Company's Application, shall govern any extension of plant
beyond the Primary Service Area.
§ 31-8. SYSTEM UPGRADES. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
The Company shall make every effort to deploy new or advanced technology
and or services in the Town that are commercially available, economically
practicable, and technically feasible. That technology shall include but not
be limited to: video-on-demand; digital video compression; advanced or
high-definition television, digital audio services; digital television, highspeed
Internet service via cable modem; and interactive program guides.
§ 31-9. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
a. Restoration. In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb
any pavement, street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface
§ 31-4 KEARNY CODE § 31-9
AO:710
§ 31-10. CUSTOMER SERVICE. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
In providing services to its customers, the Company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1, et seq. and all applicable State and Federal statutes and
regulations. The Company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the municipality upon written request of
the Municipality Administrator or Clerk.
The Company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable State and
Federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the reporting
of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to customers.
The Company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable State and
Federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of devices for the
hearing impaired and the notification of same to customers.
The Company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed voluntary
standards for telephone accessibility developed by the National Cable
Television Association (NCTA). Those standards shall include, but not be
limited to, the goal of answering 80% of incoming telephone calls within 30
seconds.
Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the Municipality
to express any comment with respect to telephone accessibility to the
in the natural topography, the Company shall, at its sole expense,
restore and replace such places or things so disturbed in as good a
condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
b. Relocation. If at any time during the period of this consent, the
Municipality shall alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other
way or place the Company, upon reasonable notice by the Municipality,
shall remove, re-lay or relocate its equipment, at the expense of the
Company.
c. Temporary Removal of Cables. The Company shall temporarily move or
remove appropriate parts of its facilities to allow for the moving of
buildings, and machinery, or in other similar circumstances. The
expense shall be borne by the party requesting such action, except
when requested by the Municipality, in which case the Company shall
bear the cost.
d. Trimming of Trees. During the exercise of its rights and privileges
under this franchise, the Company shall have the authority to trim trees
upon and over hanging streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places
of the municipality so as to prevent the branches of such trees from
coming in contact with the wires and cable of the Company. Such
trimming shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper
clearance of the Company's wire and cables and shall not be
undertaken until the Town is notified of, and grants its permission for,
such tree trimming.
§ 31-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-10
AO:711
Complaint Officer, or impair the right of the Complaint Officer to take any
action that is permitted under law.
§ 31-11. MUNICIPAL COMPLAINT OFFICER. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designed as the Complaint Officer
for the Municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
Municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by Municipality customers from the OCTV.
§ 31-12. LOCAL OFFICE. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Company
shall maintain a local business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:18-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters. Such a business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during standard business hours, and in no
event (excepting emergent circumstances) less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
§ 31-13. PERFORMANCE BONDS. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
During the life of the franchise the Company shall give to the Municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the Company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ 31-14. SUBSCRIBER RATES. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
The rates of the Company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
Federal and State law.
§ 31-15. PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS.
[Ord. No. 2013-18]
The Company shall continue to provide residents with a system-wide public
access channel maintained by the Company. Qualified individuals and
organizations may utilize public access for the purpose of cablecasting
noncommercial access programming in conformance with the Company's
published public access rules.
The Company shall continue to provide a system-wide leased access channel
maintained by the Company for the purpose of cablecasting commercial
access programming in conformance with the Company's guideline and
applicable State and Federal statutes and regulations.
The Company shall take any steps that are necessary to ensure that the
signals originated on the access channels are carried without material
§ 31-10 KEARNY CODE § 31-15
AO:712
degradation, and with a signal whose quality is equal to that of the other
standard channels that the Company transmits.
The Communications Act of 1934, as amended (47 U.S.C. § 543(b)(4)),
allows the Company to itemize and/or identify the amount on the monthly
bill assessed to satisfy any requirements imposed on the Company by the
cable franchise to support public, educational, and governmental channels,
or the use of such channels or any other services required under the
franchise. The Company reserves its external cost, pass-through rights to
the extent permitted by law.
§ 31-16. COMMITMENTS BY THE COMPANY. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
The Company shall provide standard installation and basic cable television
service on one outlet at no cost to each school in the Municipality, public
and private, elementary, intermediate and secondary, provided the school
is within 200 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet
installed, if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the
school requesting service. Monthly service charges shall be waived on all
additional outlets except for equipment.
The Company shall provide standard installation and basic cable television
service at no cost on one outlet to Town Hall and Annex Building and
each police, fire, emergency management facility, public library (and branch
library) and the following municipal facilities: Recreation Center at 925
Passaic Avenue; Board of Health Facility at 645 Kearny Avenue, and Senior
Citizens Center, 60 Columbia Avenue, provided the facility is located within
200 feet of active cable distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed,
if any, shall be paid for on a materials plus labor basis by the Municipality.
Monthly service charges shall be waived on all additional outlets except for
equipment.
The Company shall provide, free of charge, one non-networked Internet
connection via high speed cable modem and monthly Internet service to
each school in the Municipality, public and private, elementary,
intermediate and secondary and to the public library. The Internet service
provided herein must be available to student and patron use and cannot be
limited to administrative uses. All facilities must be located with 200 feet of
active cable distribution plant.
Company representatives shall appear at least once annually, upon
reasonable written request of the Town, at a public hearing of the Governing
Body or before the Town's Cable Television Advisory Committee, to discuss
matters pertaining to the provision of cable service to residents of the Town
and other related issues as the Town and Company may see fit.
Within six months of the issuance of a renewal Certificate of Approval from
the Board the Company shall provide to the Town a one-time grant in the
amount of $45,000 for technology and access related needs. The Town shall
allocate the grant in such manner as the Town determines is in the public's
best interest.
§ 31-15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-17
AO:713
§ 31-17. EMERGENCY USES. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
The Company will comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS") rules in
accordance with applicable State and Federal statutes and regulations.
The Company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
Municipality or any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason
the Municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system as
contemplated herein.
§ 31-18. LIABILITY INSURANCE. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
The Company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and an
excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
§ 31-19. INCORPORATION OF THE APPLICATION. [Ord. No.
2013-18]
All of the statements and commitments contained in the Application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendment thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the Company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The Application and other relevant writings
submitted by the Company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference provided same do not conflict with applicable State or Federal
law.
§ 31-20. COMPETITIVE EQUITY. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
Should the Municipality grant a franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system to any other person, corporation or
entity on terms materially less burdensome or more favorable than the
terms contained herein, the Company may substitute such language that
is more favorable or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this
Ordinance subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ 31-21. SEPARABILITY. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
or Federal or State agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the Ordinance.
§ 31-17 KEARNY CODE § 31-22
AO:714
§ 31-22. THIRD PARTY BENEFICIARIES. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or franchise.
§ 31-23. EFFECTIVE DATE. [Ord. No. 2013-18]
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a Renewal
Certificate of Approval from the BPU.
Chapter 32
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1973
Code §§ 17A-1 — 17A-17 and Ordinance Nos. 12-14-77, 12-10-86 and
4-13-88.
§ 32-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT,
STATEMENT OF PURPOSE, METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD
LOSSES.
§ 32-1.1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-42 § 32-1]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety, and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the Town of Kearny,
County of Hudson, State of New Jersey does ordain as follows.
§ 32-1.2. Findings of Fact. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-42 § 32-1.2]
§ 32-1.3. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-42 § 32-1.3]
It is the purpose of this section to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
a. The flood hazard areas of Kearny are subject to periodic inundation
which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards,
disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of
the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and
general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
§ 31-22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-1.3
AO:715
§ 32-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-42
§ 32-1.4]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 32-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-42 § 32-2]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
a. To protect human life and health;
b. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
c. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazard;
f. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
g. To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
h. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
c. Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and,
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 32-1.3 KEARNY CODE § 32-2
AO:716
APPEAL — Shall mean a request for a review of the Construction/Zoning
Official's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance or a request for a
variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — Shall mean a designated AO or AH
zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map with a 1% or greater
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Shall mean the land in the flood
plain within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in
any given year.
BASE FLOOD — Shall mean the flood having a 1% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Shall mean any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — Shall mean a wall that is not part of the structural
support of the building and is intended through its design and construction
to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within an area of
special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — Shall mean a non-basement building (i) built in
the case of a building in an area of special flood hazard to have the top
of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling,
columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water,
and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area
of special flood hazard "elevated building" also includes a building elevated
by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient
to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — Shall mean the official map
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — Shall mean the official report provided
in which the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles,
as well as the Flood Insurance Rate Map and the water surface elevation of
the base flood.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — Shall mean a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
§ 32-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-2
AO:717
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Shall mean zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as a flood plain ordinance, grading
ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — Shall mean the highest natural elevation
of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Shall mean any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — Shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement is not considered a buildings lowest floor provided that
such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Shall mean a structure, transportable in one
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreation
vehicle."
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
b.
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
a.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
b.
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
c.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
2.
d.
§ 32-2 KEARNY CODE § 32-2
AO:718
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION
— Shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or
more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean
a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of the flood plain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which is [i] built on a
single chassis; [ii] 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections; [iii] designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and [iv] designed primarily not for use as
a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION (for other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources act (P.L. NO. 97-348))
— Shall mean and include substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms, nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a walled and roofed building, a manufactured
home, or a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
§ 32-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-2
AO:719
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — Shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
§ 32-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 32-3.1. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. [Ord. No.
2006-(O)-42 § 32-3.1]
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Kearny, County of Hudson, State of New Jersey.
§ 32-3.2. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
[Ord. No. 2006-(O)-42 § 32-3.2]
The areas of special flood hazard for the Town of Kearny, Community No.
340224, are identified and defined on the following documents prepared by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
§ 32-3.3. Penalties for Noncompliance. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-42
§ 32-3.3]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local Code Enforcement Officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
a.
Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
b.
a. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Hudson
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" dated August 16, 2006.
b. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Hudson County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions) as shown on Index and panel numbers 0017, 0018, 0019,
0038, 0039, 0082, 0101, 0102, 0103; whose effective date is August 16,
2006.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at Town
Hall, 402 Kearny Avenue, Kearny, NJ 07032.
§ 32-2 KEARNY CODE § 32-3.3
AO:720
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be
fined not more than $2,000 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Town of Kearny from
taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.
§ 32-3.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. No.
2006-(O)-42 § 32-3.4]
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
casements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 32-3.5. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-42 § 32-3.5]
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 32-3.6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-42
§ 32-3.6]
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Town of Kearny, the
Kearny Planning Board, the Kearny Zoning Board, any officer or employee
thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
§ 32-4. ADMINISTRATION.
a. Considered as minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the Governing Body; and,
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
§ 32-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-4.1
AO:721
§ 32-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit. [Ord. No.
2006-(O)-42 § 32-4.1]
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in subsection
32-3.2. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Construction/Zoning Official and may include, but not be
limited to; plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of
the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
§ 32-4.2. Designation of the Local Administrator. [Ord. No.
2006-(O)-42 § 32-4.2]
The Construction/Zoning Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 32-4.3. Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator. [Ord. No.
2006-(O)-42 § 32-4.3]
Duties of the Construction/Zoning Official shall include, but not be limited
to:
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed;
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in subsection 32.5-2b; and,
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
a. Permit Review.
1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
2. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
3. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway.
§ 32-4.1 KEARNY CODE § 32-4.3
AO:722
§ 32-4.4. Variance Procedure. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-42 § 32-4.4]
b. Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with subsection
32-3.2, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the
Construction/Zoning Official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal,
State or other source, in order to administer subsections 32-5.2a,
Specific Standards, Residential Construction, and 32-5.2b, Specific
Standards, Nonresidential Construction.
c. Information to be Obtained and Maintained.
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
2. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
subsection 32-4.1c.
3. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
d. Alteration of Watercourses.
1. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Land Use Regulation Program and Dam
Safety and Flood Control prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.
e. Interpretation of FIRM Boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual filed conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection
32-4.4.
a. Appeal Board.
§ 32-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-4.4
AO:723
1. The Construction Board of Appeals as established by the Town of
Kearny shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
2. The Construction Board of Appeals shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Construction/Zoning Official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
3. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Construction Board of
Appeals, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior
Court of New Jersey, as provided in N.J. ADC 5:23A-2.3.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Construction Board of
Appeals, shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant
factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and flood plain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and,
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
§ 32-4.4 KEARNY CODE § 32-4.4
AO:724
5. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 32-4.4a,4 and the
purposes of this chapter, the Construction Board of Appeals may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
6. The Construction/Zoning Official shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
b. Conditions for Variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
((a)-(k)) in subsection 32-4.4a,4 have been fully considered. As the
lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and,
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in subsection
32-4.4a,4 or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
§ 32-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-5
AO:725
§ 32-5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 32-5.1. General Standards. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-42 § 32-5.1]
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
a. Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
2. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b. Construction Materials and Methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
c. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into flood waters;
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
4. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
d. Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
§ 32-5 KEARNY CODE § 32-5.1
AO:726
§ 32-5.2. Specific Standards. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-42 § 32-5.2]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in subsection 32-3.2, Basis for Establishing the
Areas of Special Flood Hazard or in subsection 32-4.3b, Use of Other Base
Flood Data, the following standards are required:
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and,
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
e. Enclosure Openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
a. Residential Construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above base flood elevation;
2. Require within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified). And, require adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
b. Nonresidential Construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base
flood elevation or together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, shall;
§ 32-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-5.2
AO:727
Chapter 33
ELECTRICAL
§ 33-1. REGISTRATION; BOARD OF ELECTRICAL EXAMINERS.
§ 33-1.1. Definitions. [1973 Code § 71-1]
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
ELECTRIC WORK AND ELECTRICAL WORK — Shall mean any work having
to do with the installation of electrical wiring, fixtures, motors, electrical
appurtenances and currents for the furnishing of light, heat or power.
MASTER ELECTRICIAN — Shall mean any person to whom a registration
certificate is issued as hereinafter provided.
(a) Be required within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall
either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified). And, require adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures; or
(b) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure
is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the
passage of water;
(c) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and,
(d) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in subsection 32-4.3c,2.
c. Manufactured Homes.
1. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
subsection 32-5.1a,2.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
§ 32-5.2 KEARNY CODE § 33-1.2
AO:728
§ 33-1.2. Registration Certificate Required. [1973 Code § 71-2]
In order to safeguard life, health and property and promote the public
welfare, any person engaging in or who shall hereafter engage in the
business of doing electrical work for hire in the Town of Kearny shall apply
for a written examination to the Board of Electrical Examiners, hereinafter
created, and after satisfying the Board, as hereinafter provided, as to the
applicant's qualifications, the applicant shall be registered by the Board
and receive from it a registration certificate valid for one year, signed
by the President or Vice-President and attested by the Secretary of the
Board of Electrical Examiners, which certificate shall not be assignable or
transferable.
§ 33-1.3. Eligibility for Examination; Applications. [1973 Code
§ 71-3]
§ 33-1.4. Registration Fees; Renewal. [1973 Code § 71-4]
a. No person shall be eligible for examination unless he is a citizen of the
United States, at least 21 years of age and have at least five years'
experience in electrical wiring and installations.
b. Applications must be made on forms prescribed and furnished for that
purpose by the Board of Electrical Examiners and shall contain
statements under oath showing the applicant's name, age, education,
experience, place of business, place of residence, citizenship and at
least three references of persons having personal knowledge of the
applicant's electrical experience.
c. Applications must be filed at least two weeks prior to the meeting of the
Board and must be accompanied by an examination fee of $10.
Examination shall be in writing and shall relate to the National
Electrical Code, the rules and regulations of the Town of Kearny
pertaining to electrical installations and the utility supplying the
current in the Town.
d. An applicant who shall fail in his first examination shall not be eligible
for another examination for three months, and a period of six months
shall elapse after each subsequent examination.
a. The initial registration fee shall be $50, and each renewal thereof shall
be $10. One examination fee of $10 shall be applied on account of the
initial registration fee.
b. No examination shall be necessary for the renewal of a registration
certificate, provided application for the renewal is made not later than
30 days after the expiration date of the previously issued registration
certificate.
§ 33-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 33-1.5
AO:729
§ 33-1.5. Bond Required. [1973 Code § 71-5]
Any master electrician registered under the provisions of this section shall
not undertake to do any electrical work in the Town unless and until he
shall have entered into a bond in favor of the Town of Kearny in the sum
of $1,000, executed by a surety company authorized to transact business in
the State of New Jersey, and conditioned on the faithful performance of the
provisions of this section, and of all work in connection with the restoration
of sidewalk and street areas to normal conditions previously excavated or
disturbed by reason of the installation of wires, wiring or cable, the laying
of conduits, and the construction of manholes and appurtenances thereto.
The aforesaid bond shall be for the term of 12 months and must be renewed
upon expiration for a similar period of time for each renewal of the master
electrician's registration certificate.
§ 33-1.6. Board of Electrical Examiners Created; Appointments.
[1973 Code § 71-6]
a. To carry out the provisions of this section, there is hereby created a
Board of Electrical Examiners, which Board shall consist of three
members who shall serve without compensation and who shall be
appointed by the Mayor of the Town of Kearny with the approval of the
Town Council within 30 days after the passage of this section. The first
members of the Board shall be appointed to serve for terms of one, two
and three years, respectively, so that one term shall expire each year.
Upon expiration of each of the terms; all succeeding appointments shall
be for a period of three years. Each member shall hold office after
expiration of his term until his successor shall be duly appointed and
qualified. Vacancies in the membership of the Board, however created,
shall be filled by appointment by the Mayor of Kearny, with the approval
of the Town Council, for the unexpired term and until a successor is
duly appointed and qualified.
b. All persons appointed to the Board of Electrical Examiners shall be
citizens of the United States and residents of the Town of Kearny. At
least two of the persons appointed shall have 15 or more years'
experience in electrical work and shall be, at the time of appointment,
actively engaged in electrical work, and at least one of the aforesaid
two persons shall be an electrical contractor.
c. Each person appointed to the Board of Electrical Examiners actively
engaged and experienced in electrical work, as above stated, shall, by
virtue of the appointment, be entitled to a registration certificate
without examination, but must pay the required registration fee and
comply with all other provisions of this section.
d. The Mayor of the Town of Kearny may remove any member of the Board
of Electrical Examiners, after a hearing, for misconduct, incompetency,
neglect of duty or for any other sufficient cause.
§ 33-1.5 KEARNY CODE § 33-1.6
AO:730
§ 33-1.7. Organization Meeting of Board; Officers; Powers and
Duties. [1973 Code § 71-7]
§ 33-1.8. Registration Required; Compliance. [1973 Code § 71-8]
No corporation, firm, partnership or association shall engage in or offer
to engage in the business of doing electrical work for hire in the Town of
e. The term of office of the members of the Board of Electrical Examiners
shall commence on the first day of September. All fees received by the
Board for examinations and registrations shall be paid to the Treasurer
of the Town of Kearny.
a. The Board of Electrical Examiners shall, at its annual meeting to be
held on the first Monday in September, organize by electing a
President, Vice-President and Secretary, all of whom shall be members
of the Board. The Board shall meet at least every two months, and
special meetings may be held at such times as called by the President.
The Board shall keep a record of its proceedings and a record of all
applicants for registration, and the action taken thereon, and shall keep
a record of all persons to whom registration certificates are issued,
showing their names and addresses of business and residence.
b. The Board of Electrical Examiners shall have the power to revoke the
registration certificate of any master electrician registered hereunder
who is found guilty by the Board of violating the provisions of this
section or of any fraud or deceit in obtaining a registration certificate,
or of gross negligence, incompetency or misconduct in doing electrical
work.
c. Any person may prefer charges of such violation, fraud, deceit,
negligence, incompetence or misconduct against any master
electrician. Such charges shall be in writing and sworn to by the
complainant and submitted to the Board. Such charges, unless
dismissed without hearing by the Board as unfounded or trivial, shall be
heard and determined by the Board within three months after the date
on which they are preferred.
d. The time and place for such hearing shall be fixed by the Board. A copy
of the charges, together with a notice of the time and place of hearing
shall be served on the accused personally, or by registered mail, at least
15 days before the day fixed for the hearing. At the hearing the accused
shall have the right to appear personally and by counsel and to crossexamine
witnesses against him and to produce evidence and witnesses
in his defense. If after the hearing two or more members of the Board
vote in favor of finding the accused guilty of any violation of the
provisions of this section, or of any fraud or deceit in obtaining a
registration certificate, or of gross negligence, incompetence or
misconduct in doing electrical work, the Board shall revoke the
registration certificate of the accused for such period of time as the
Board shall deem proper.
§ 33-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 33-1.8
AO:731
Kearny, unless the person or persons in responsible charge of the electrical
work shall be duly registered pursuant to this section and shall comply with
all other provisions thereof.
§ 33-1.9. Issuance of Registration. [1973 Code § 71-9]
The Board of Electrical Examiners may issue a registration certificate
without examination to any person registered or licensed to do electrical
work in any other municipality of the State of New Jersey provided that a.
the qualifications in the other municipality for the registration or licensing
are at least comparable to the qualifications specified in this chapter; b.
the other municipality's ordinance, rules or regulations provide a similar
privilege of registration or licensing without examination for persons
registered by the Town of Kearny under the provisions herein contained,
and c. the person shall pay the registration fee provided herein and comply
with all other provisions of this section.
§ 33-1.10. Nonapplicability. [1973 Code § 71-10]
Nothing in this section shall apply to:
a. Any railroad company or to any employee of any railroad company while
engaged upon the work for such railroad company.
b. Any public utility as defined in Section 48:2-13 of the Revised Statutes
of New Jersey, or to any employee of such public utility while engaged
upon work for such public utility.
c. Any person, firm or corporation while engaged or employed by any
telephone or telegraph company in the installation, operation,
maintenance or repair of telephone or telegraph apparatus or the
equipment appurtenant thereto.
d. Any person or persons regularly employed by any person, firm or
corporation not engaged in doing electrical work for hire, and any
person, firm or corporation engaged in the manufacture of electrical
products, appliances or apparatus, or the employees of any such
persons, firms or corporation; provided, however, that such person or
persons shall be limited to maintenance and repair work within the
plant in which they are employed, or on the appliances which they or
their employers have manufactured or sold.
e. Any person regularly employed by a theater as a moving-picture
machine operator or as a stage electrician; provided, however, that
such person shall not engage in the permanent installation of electrical
wiring.
f. Any employee of a master electrician registered under this section
while the employee is engaged upon work for and under the supervision
of such master electrician.
§ 33-1.8 KEARNY CODE § 33-1.10
AO:732
§ 33-1.11. Grace Period for Registration. [1973 Code § 71-11]
In order to permit the Board of Electrical Examiners to organize, prepare
application forms, receive applications, hold examinations, issue
registration certificates, etc., registration pursuant to the provisions of this
section shall not be required for a grace period of two months, commencing
on the effective date of this section. From and after the expiration of the
grace period, it shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business
of doing electrical work for hire in the Town of Kearny unless such person
is duly registered pursuant to this section and complies with all other
provisions thereof, and it shall be unlawful from and after the date for any
corporation, firm, partnership or association to engage in such a business in
the Town of Kearny unless the corporation, firm, partnership or association
complies with subsection 33-1.8 of this section.
§ 33-1.12. Violations and Penalties. [1973 Code § 71-12; New]
Any person, corporation, firm, partnership or association violating any of
the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 33-2. ELECTRICAL WORK REGULATIONS.
§ 33-2.1. Permit Required. [1973 Code § 71-13]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to perform any
electrical work for hire in the Town of Kearny without first having obtained
a permit to do so from the Town or its authorized agent.
§ 33-2.2. Issuance of Permit; Fee. [1973 Code § 71-14]
The person designated by the Town is hereby authorized to issue such
permit upon the filing of an application in writing on forms provided by
the Town of Kearny, together with a permit fee of 25% of the underwriter's
roughing and final inspection fee or $5, whichever sum is the greater. All
fees received shall be paid over to the Treasurer of the Town of Kearny.
§ 33-2.3. Duration of Permit. [1973 Code § 71-15]
Every such permit shall remain in force and effect until the electrical work
specified therein is completed, but in no event for a longer period than
one year unless extended by the Town of Kearny. The permit shall not be
transferable or assignable.
g. Any person while engaged upon work for and as an employee of a
corporation, firm, partnership or association qualified to engage in the
business of electrical work, as provided in subsection 33-1.8 above.
§ 33-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 33-2.4
AO:733
§ 33-2.4. Display of Permit. [1973 Code § 71-16]
Any person, firm or corporation to whom such permit is issued must display
it in a prominent place at the location at which the work is being performed.
§ 33-2.5. Permits Under Control of Board of Electrical Examiners.
[1973 Code § 71-17]
All permits granted hereunder shall be under the regulation and control
of the Town of Kearny and shall be subject to such regulations as may be
issued from time to time by the State Board of Examiners of Electrical
Contractors.
§ 33-2.6. Definition. [1973 Code § 71-18]
The words "electrical work," as used in this section, shall be construed
to mean any work having to do with the installation of electrical wiring,
fixtures, motors, electrical appurtenances and currents for furnishing light,
heat and power.
§ 33-2.7. Violations and Penalties. [New]
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
Chapter 34
FEES
§ 34-1. FEE SCHEDULE. [Ord. No. 2012-22 § 3; Ord. No. 2015-46;
amended 8-4-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-25]
The following is a summary of fees in effect in the Town:
Permit/Fee Type Fees Source
Returned Check Fees $20 2-86.1b; N.J.S.A.
40:5-18
ABC Additional Interim Permit $75 N.J.S.A. 33:1-74
ABC Additional Interim Permit-Each
additional day
$5 N.J.S.A. 33:1-74
ABC Both Person-to-Person and Placeto-
Place Transfer Fee -20%
20% ABC Fee Schedule
ABC Bulk Permit $75 N.J.A.C. 13:2-23.12
ABC Club License - Municipal Fee $150 6-3.6
ABC Extension of Premises (per day) $75 ABC Fee Schedule
§ 33-2.4 KEARNY CODE § 34-1
AO:734
Permit/Fee Type Fees Source
ABC Person-to Person Transfer Fee
-10% of the Municipal Fee
10% N.J.A.C. 13:2-7.11
ABC Place-to-Place Transfer Fee -10%
of the Municipal Fee
10% N.J.A.C. 13:2-7.11
ABC Plenary Retail Consumption
License - Municipal Fee
$930 6-3.6
ABC Plenary Retail Distribution License
- Municipal Fee
$720 6-3.6
Arcade (Single building or premises
containing 5 or more coin-operated
amusement devices):
5-8.4
Coin operated amusement devices
Distributor Fee
$100 5-8.4a
Coin operated amusement device (first
machine)
$50 5-8.4b
Coin operated amusement device (each
additional machine)
$25 5-8.4b
Arcade fee (includes distribution fee) $1,500 5-8.4c
Auctioneer $75 5-4.6
Bingo License (per occasion) $10 5-35.2a,1
Canvassing - 24 Hours $30 5-3.4a
CDs $0.25 N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5d
Circuses, Exhibitions, Carnivals and
Marathons (per day except days for set
up and restoration)
$200 4-21.1b,13
Copy Machine- per letter size page (for
individuals walking off the street)
$0.05 N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5b
Copy Machine- per legal size page (for
individuals walking off the street)
$0.07 N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5b
Curb Cut $75 23-7b
Fiber Optic Cable Installation - cost
review fee
$500 30-2c,1
Fiber Optic Cable Installation-only if the
existing easement holder requires
applicants to obtain Town approval or
consent by ordinance
$200 30-2c,5
Filming Permit Daily (nonprofit) 5-71.5b
§ 34-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-1
AO:735
Permit/Fee Type Fees Source
Handicapped Parking Permit
(Restricted) (each 2-year renewal
application)
$20 7-35.2l
Handicapped Parking Permit
(Restricted) per occurrence
$40 7-35.2l
Instant Raffle games awarding cash or
merchandise (fee is for each day tickets
are sold or offered)
$20 5-35.2a,2
Land Use Book $50
Limousine and Car Services Permit $75 5-70A.5
Motion Picture Filming - basic permit
for educational purposes (permit term
not to exceed 7 consecutive days,
renewable for same
$100 5-71.5a
Motion Picture Filming - basic permit
for educational purposes for nonprofit
organizations (permit term not to
exceed 7 consecutive days, renewable
for same
$50 5-71.5a
Motion Picture Filming - commercial
vehicles used by the permittee
(maximum $500 in 1 event) total
$750 5-71.5b
Motion Picture Filming - daily filming
permit for all other applicants except
nonprofit (permit not to exceed 7
consecutive days, renewable for same
$150 5-71.5b
Motion Picture Filming - daily filming
permit for major motion picture $1M
and less $5M (permit term not to
exceed 7 consecutive days, renewable
for same
$1,000 5-71.5b
Motion Picture Filming - daily filming
permit for major motion picture in
excess of $5M budget
$2,000 5-71.5b
Motion Picture Filming - each
commercial vehicle used by the
permittee (per day) per car
$75 5-71.5b
Motion Picture Theater, Playhouse or
Amusement hall (yearly)
$250 5-30.2
Motor Vehicle Sales and Storage
(yearly)
$500 5-28.5
§ 34-1 KEARNY CODE § 34-1
AO:736
Permit/Fee Type Fees Source
Municipal Police Towing License
(annual fee)
$350 5-33.1f,2
Ordinance and Master Plan Book $75
Overnight Residential Off-Street $25 5-11.1a
Peddler License $50 5-2.6a, 1 thru 9, 11,
12
Peddler of ice cream or ice-cream
combinations
$100 5-2.6a,10
Pool Hall or Billiard Parlors License $50 5-31.2
Road Opening - PSE&G $100 23-20.7
Sidewalk Cafe $50 5-72.4
Sidewalk Sales - Owner owned $25
Sidewalk Sales - Town event sponsored $- 5-37.5b
Sidewalk Sales Violations and Penalties $50 5-37.13
Taxi Cab Driver yearly $25 5-70.8
Taxi Cab Owner (per cab 1st year) $60 5-70.6a
Taxi Cab Owner (per cab for every year
thereafter)
$50 5-70.6a
Transient Merchant or Itinerant Vendor
(valid for 180 days)
$500 5-5.8a
Vending Machines (per machine
annually)
$50 5-9.2
Cargo Container (Container going
overseas) (3 day period only)
$100
Earth Shoulder Opening Permit, $5 per
square yard, but not less than $5
$5 23-20.7b,3
Leaf Bag (per 10) $5
Obstruct sidewalk temporarily (per day) $15
Opening of Street for sewer lateral or
other utility (1 day only). Give backfill
directions
$200
Opening of Street for sewer lateral or
other utility-Review and inspection fee
$200 23-20.7
Pay Telephone processing fee if
submitted after 12-31-2001
$100 23-25.5
Pay Telephone processing fee if
submitted prior to 12-31-2001
$25 23-21.5
Permit to occupy streets $75 23-1.2
§ 34-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-1
AO:737
Permit/Fee Type Fees Source
Recycling Bin Containers (each) $15
Rental of Town Truck by residents (1
day for clean-out items only)
$150 20-1.7
Replacement of Container (Dumpster)
on street - 1st 72 hours period
$100 20-3.1b
Replacement of Container (Dumpster)
on street - 2nd 72 hour period
$50 20-3.1b
Replacement of Container (Dumpster)
on street - additional 7-day period or
part thereof
$200 20-3.1b
Replacement of Sidewalk (10-day period
only)
$50
Sidewalk or driveway entrance
construction permit
$50 20-3.1a/23-17.3
Storage of Construction Materials
inspection charge - first 15 days
$75 23-20.8f,4(d)
Storage of Construction Materials
inspection charge - per month or
portion of month thereafter
$200 23-20.8f,4(d)
Street Openings and Excavation Permit:
Bituminous-concrete surface pavements
on concrete base and reinforcedconcrete
pavements, $8 per square
yard, but not less than $50
$75 23-20.7b, 1
Street Openings and Excavation Permit:
Bituminous pavements on stone base,
$7.50 per square yard, but not less than
$25
$50 23-20.7b,2
Life Hazard Use Application fee for a
permit - Type 1
$42
Life Hazard Use Application fee for a
permit - Type 2
$166
Life Hazard Use Application fee for a
permit - Type 3
$331
Life Hazard Use Application fee for a
permit - Type 4
$497
Cat Licenses: Unneutered/Unspayed $21 9-10.2a
Cat Licenses: Late Registration (After
March 31)
$25 9-10.2a
Cat Licenses: Neutered/Spayed (with
proof)
$18 9-10.2a
§ 34-1 KEARNY CODE § 34-1
AO:738
Permit/Fee Type Fees Source
Dog/Cat Licenses: Neutered/Spayed
(with proof)
$18 9-2.1
Dog Licenses: Unneutered/Unspayed $21 9-2.1
Dog Licenses: Late Registration (After
March 31)
$25 9-2.1
Death Certificate $10
Marriage Certificate $20
Domestic Partnership Certificate $20
Burial Permits $5 N.J.S.A. 26:6-17 et
seq.
Civil Union Certificate $20
Marriage/Civil Union License
Application
$28 N.J.S.A. 37:1-12.1 et
seq.
Domestic Partnership Affidavit $28 N.J.S.A. 26:8A-13 et
seq.
No Record of Marriage Search $10
Vital Statistics Correction $10
Pet shop $50 5-1.1
Pound $100 5-1.1
Kennel $100 5-1.1
Coin-operated dry cleaning $75 5-1.1
Food vending machine (per machine
including milk)
$50 5-1.1
Mobile Retail Food Establishments $250 5-1.1
Restaurants (seating 1-20) $50 5-1.1
Restaurants (seating 21-50) $75 5-1.1
Restaurants (seating 51 and over) $100 5-1.1
Retail Food Establishment (selling area
over 5,000 square feet)
$100 5-1.1
Retail Food Establishment (selling area
under 5,000 square feet)
$50 5-1.1
Retail Food Establishment (temporary) $20 5-1.1
Food and Drinks Establishments; On-
Premises Consumption
$5 5-19.2
Shelter $100 5-1.1
Body Piercing $100 5-15.4
§ 34-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-1
AO:739
Permit/Fee Type Fees Source
Ear Piercing $50 5-15.4
Permanent cosmetics and any other
procedures
$250 5-15.4
Tattoo Parlor $250 5-15.4
Tattoo License $200
Tattoo operation renewal licenses (per
year)
$100
Massage, Bodywork and Somatic Therapy Establishments
Application Fee:
Therapist $25 5-36.9a, 1
Non therapist employee application $25 5-36.9a,2
Establishment application $100 5-36.9a,3
License and Annual Renewal of Each License:
Therapist $100 5-36.9b,1
Non therapist employee application $25 5-36.9b,2
Establishment application $50 5-36.9b,3
Marriage and Civil Ceremonies
(elsewhere)
$100 2-86.4a,2
Marriage and Civil Ceremonies (Town
Hall)
$50 2-86.4a,1
ABC Licenses $25 3-5.1e
Copy of Audio Tape $25
Copy of Video Tape $50 3-5.1k
Fingerprinting $10 3-5.1d
Letter of Good Conduct $20 3-5.1f
Loudspeakers; Amplifiers (Permit issued
by Chief of Police)
$1 5-13.2
Motor Vehicle Accident Report - request
other than in person
$5 2-87a,5
Off-Duty Police Employment -
Administrative costs (per hour)
$10 3-6.5a,5
Off-Duty Police Employment - Police
Vehicle Fees (per 8 hours shift or part
thereof)
$100 3-6.5a,4
OPRA Request - per page legal size (8 1/
2" x 14") or larger
$0.07 2-87
§ 34-1 KEARNY CODE § 34-1
AO:740
Permit/Fee Type Fees Source
OPRA Request - per page letter size
(8 1/2" x 11") and smaller
$0.05 2-87
Permit to purchase a handgun $25 3-5.1g
Reprint of a Photograph $10 3-5.1i
View a Videotape $25 3-5.1j
Adult (21 years of age to 61 years of
age) Golf registration
$20 11-6.2a
Adult (Senior Citizen 62 years of age
and older) Golf registration
$10 11-6.2a
American Legion registration $35 11-6.1a
Cheerleaders registration $35 11-6.1a
Flag Football registration $35 11-6.1a
Generals Football registration $35 11-6.1a
Girls Softball registration $35 11-6.1a
Kearny Youth Soccer registration $35 11-6.1a
Little League Baseball registration $35 11-6.1a
Mantle Baseball registration $35 11-6.1a
Senior Baseball registration $35 11-6.1a
Street Hockey registration $35 11-6.1a
Wrestling registration $35 11-6.1a
Youth Basketball registration $35 11-6.1a
Frank A. Vincent Marina permit fee for:
Resident (1 time in any 60-day period
and no more than 3 times in 1 calendar
year)
$100 11-6.1a,3
Frank A. Vincent Marina permit fee for:
Nonresident (1 time in any 60-day
period and no more than 3 times in 1
calendar year)
$200 11-4.1a,3
Parks and Recreational Facilities:
Ballfield lighting charges (per hour)
Kearny private groups
$100 11-3.4e
Parks and Recreational Facilities:
Ballfield lighting charges (per hour)
Non-Kearny private groups
$200 11-3.4e
Pool Badge 0 to 12 years (per annum) $20 11-5.1b
Pool Badge 13 to 61 years (per annum) $30 11-5.1b
Pool Badge Age 62 + (per annum) $10 11-5.1b
§ 34-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 34-1
AO:741
Permit/Fee Type Fees Source
Riverbank Park permit fee for
individual, group or organization:
Resident (1 time in any 60-day period
and no more than 3 times in 1 calendar
year)
$100 11-4.1a,1
Riverbank Park permit fee for
individual, group or organization:
Nonresident (1 time in any 60-day
period and no more than 3 times in 1
calendar year)
$200 11-4.1a,1
Riverbank Park permit fee for Youth
group or organization: Resident (1 time
in any 60-day period and no more than
3 times in 1 calendar year
$50 11-4.1a,2
Riverbank Park permit fee for Youth
group or organization: Nonresident (1
time in any 60-day period and no more
than 3 times in 1 calendar year)
$100 11-4.1a,2
Improvement to Commercial and
Industrial Structures-5-year tax
exemption application fee
$1,500 12-2.3b
Construction of New Commercial and
Industrial Structures-5 year tax
exemption application fee
$1,500 12-2.4b
Interest rate for delinquent taxes:
8% per annum on the first $1,500 $0.08 2-86.3a
18% per annum on any amount in
excess of $1,500
$0.18 2-86.3a
0% charged if paid within first 10 days
after which such payment becomes due
2-86.3b
6% per annum on any amount in excess
$10,000 if not paid prior to end of fiscal
year
$0.06 2-86.3c
Any sewer user charge not paid within
30 days, late fee of 8% per annum
together with all other applicable fees
and charges
$0.08 2-86.3d
§ 34-1 KEARNY CODE § 34-1
AO:742
Permit/Fee Type Fees Source
Parking Tax on receipts for fees for
parking, storing or garaging of motor
vehicles within the Town of Kearny
(excluding residential parking;
employee parking, when provided by an
employer or at a facility owned or
operated by the employer; municipal
metered parking; and parking receipts
subject to a tax imposed by other law or
ordinance)
12-8.2a,b
Hydrant or standpipe use $75
Off-street business parking permits
[Ord. No. 2015-46]
$525 7-34.4d
Overnight commercial off-street parking
permit (Mandee lot, Police substation
lot, 101 Kearny Avenue lot) [Ord. No.
2015-46]
$250 7-34.4g
Right-of-way permit, 1 to 5 placements
on existing poles
$500 plus
$100 for
each
additional
placement
39-6a
Right-of-way permit, new pole $1,000 39-6a
Annual fee for using wireless facility
installed pursuant to Ch. 39
$270 per
wireless
facility
39-6c
Chapter 35
LAND USE PROCEDURES
§ 35-1. PLANNING BOARD.
§ 35-1.1. Establishment; Composition. [Ord. No. 1-26-77 § 34-1;
Ord. No. 2-23-83]
There is hereby established pursuant to C.291, P.L. 1975, in the Town of
Kearny, a Planning Board of nine members consisting of the following four
classes:
a. Class I: The Mayor.
b. Class II: One of the officials of the municipality other than a member of
the Governing Body, to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that if
there is an Environmental Commission, the member of the Planning
Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the Class
§ 34-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-1.1
AO:743
§ 35-1.2. Terms. [Ord. No. 1-26-77 § 34-2]
§ 35-1.3. Vacancies. [Ord. No. 1-26-77 § 34-3]
If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 35-1.4. Organization. [Ord. No. 1-26-77 § 34-4]
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from the
members of Class IV and select a Secretary who may be either a member of
the Planning Board or a municipal employee designated by it.
II Planning Board member if there are both a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education among
the Class IV members.
c. Class III: A member of the Governing Body, to be appointed by it.
d. Class IV: Six other citizens of the municipality together with two
alternate members, to be appointed by the Mayor. The members of
Class IV shall hold no other municipal office, except that one member
may be a member of the Board of Education. A member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board
as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be a Class IV Planning Board
member unless there are among the Class IV members of the Planning
Board both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member
of the Board of Education, in which case the member of the
Environmental Commission shall be deemed to be the Class II member
of the Planning Board.
a. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his
official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class
III shall be for one year or terminate at the completion of their
respective terms of office, whichever occurs first, except for a Class II
member who is also a member of the Environmental Commission. The
term of a Class II or a Class IV member who is also a member of the
Environmental Commission shall be for three years or terminate at the
completion of his term of office as a member of the Environmental
Commission, whichever comes first.
b. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever he is no
longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his Class IV
term, whichever occurs first.
c. The terms of all Class IV members shall be appointed for terms of four
years except as otherwise herein provided. All terms shall run from
January 1 of the year in which the appointment was made.
§ 35-1.1 KEARNY CODE § 35-1.5
AO:744
§ 35-1.5. Attorney. [Ord. No. 1-26-77 § 34-5]
There is hereby created the office of Planning Board Attorney. The Planning
Board may annually appoint and fix the compensation of or agree upon
the rate of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney, who shall be an
attorney other than the Municipal Attorney.
§ 35-1.6. Experts and Staff. [Ord. No. 1-26-77 § 34-6]
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for the services of experts
and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not,
however, exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the Governing Body for its use.
§ 35-1.7. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 1-26-77 § 34-7]
The Planning Board is authorized to adopt bylaws governing its procedural
operation. It shall also have the following powers and duties:
a. To make and adopt and from time to time amend a Master Plan for the
physical development of the Town, including any areas outside its
boundaries which in the Board's judgment bear essential relation to the
planning of the Town, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-28.
b. To administer the provisions of the Land Subdivision Regulations and
Site Plan Review Regulations, Chapter 36, of the Town in accordance
with the provisions of the regulations and the Municipal Land Use Law
of 1975 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.).
c. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by State or Federal law or regulations.
d. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
e. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years, and amendments thereto,
and recommend same to the Governing Body.
f. To consider and make report to the Governing Body within 35 days after
referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it,
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26a, and also pass upon
other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by the Town
Council, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26b.
g. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant, to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
1. Variances pursuant to Section 57c of c.291, P.L. 1975, from lot area,
lot dimensional, setback and yard requirements, provided that such
§ 35-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-1.7
AO:745
§ 35-1.8. Time Limits. [Ord. No. 1-26-77 § 34-8]
relief from lot area requirements shall not be granted for more than
one lot.
2. Direction pursuant to Section 25 of the Act for issuance of a permit
for a building or structure in the bed for a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant
to Section 23 of the Act.
3. Direction pursuant to Section 27 of the Act for issuance of a permit
for a building or structure not related to a street.
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice
of a hearing on the application for development shall include
reference to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of
a permit, as the case may be.
h. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the Governing Body for the aid and assistance of the
Governing Body or other agencies or officers.
a. Minor Subdivisions. Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted or
denied within 45 days of the date of submission of a complete
application to the Planning Board or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Approval of a minor subdivision shall
expire 190 days from the date of Planning Board approval unless within
such period a plat in conformity with such approval and the provisions
of the Map Filing Law, or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision is filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer,
the Municipal Engineer and the Municipal Tax Assessor. Any such plat
or deed must be signed by the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning
Board before it will be accepted for filing by the County Recording
Officer.
b. Preliminary Approval of Major Subdivisions. Upon submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Upon submission of a complete
application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. Otherwise the Planning Board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval for the subdivision.
c. Ancillary Powers. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to
exercise its ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as set
forth in subsection 35-1.7g, the Planning Board shall grant or deny
approval of the application within 95 days after submission by the
developer of a complete application or within such further time as may
§ 35-1.7 KEARNY CODE § 35-1.8
AO:746
§ 35-1.9. Procedure for Filing Applications. [Ord. No. 1-26-77
§ 34-9]
Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Planning Board
pursuant to the provisions of c. 291, P.L. 1975, shall be filed with the
Secretary of the Planning Board. The applicant shall file, at least 14 days
before the date of the monthly meeting of the Board, 10 copies of a sketch
plat, 10 copies of an application for minor subdivision approval, 10 copies of
an application for major subdivision approval or 10 copies of an application
for site plan review, conditional use approval or planned development. At
the time of filing the application, but in no event less than 10 days prior to
the date set for the hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps
or other papers required by virtue of any provisions of this chapter or any
rule of the Planning Board. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms
from the Secretary of the Planning Board. The Secretary of the Board shall
inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate applications and of
the regular meeting dates of the Board.
§ 35-1.10. Citizens' Advisory Committee. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-10]
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens' Advisory
Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but
such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
required of the Board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of
the Mayor.
§ 35-1.11. Environmental Commission. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-11]
Whenever the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to
the Planning Board an index of the natural resources of the municipality,
the Planning Board shall make available to the Environmental Commission
an informational copy of every application for development to the Planning
be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to
act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the
application, and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the
failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on request of the
applicant.
d. Final Approval.
1. Application for final subdivision approval shall be granted or
denied within 45 days of submission of a complete application or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
2. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the
date of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall
have been duly filed by the developer with the County Recording
Officer. The Planning Board may, for good cause shown, extend the
period for recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days
from the date of signing of the plat.
§ 35-1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-1.11
AO:747
Board. Failure of the Planning Board to make such informational copy
available to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing
or proceeding.
§ 35-1.12. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-12]
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 35-2. ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 35-2.1. Establishment; Composition; Vacancies. [Ord. No. 1-27-77
§ 34-13]
§ 35-2.2. Officers. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-14]
The Board of Adjustment shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman from
its members and shall also select a Secretary who may be either a Board
member or another municipal employee.
§ 35-2.3. Attorney. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-15]
There is hereby created the office of Attorney to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may annually appoint and fix
the compensation of or agree upon the rate of compensation of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the
Municipal Attorney.
§ 35-2.4. Experts and Staff. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-16]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix
the compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the Governing Body
for its use.
a. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq., consisting of seven residents of the Town of Kearny
appointed by the Mayor and Council to serve for terms of four years
from January 1 of the year of their appointment.
b. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may hold any elective
office or position under the municipality.
c. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled
for the unexpired term only.
§ 35-1.11 KEARNY CODE § 35-2.5
AO:748
§ 35-2.5. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-17]
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 35-2.6. Powers. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-18]
§ 35-2.7. Appeals and Applications. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-19]
a. The powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq., and amendments and supplements
thereto, and with the provisions of this chapter.
b. It is further the intent of this chapter to confer upon the Zoning Board
of Adjustment as full and complete powers as may lawfully be conferred
upon such Board, including, but not by way of limitation, the authority,
in connection with any case, action or proceeding before the Board, to
interpret and construe the provisions of this chapter, or any term,
clause, sentence or word hereof, and the Zoning Map, in accordance
with the general rules of construction applicable to legislative
enactments.
c. The Board may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, grant variances from the terms of this
chapter in accordance with the general or specific rules contained
herein, and with the general rule hereby laid down that equity shall be
done in cases where the strict construction of the provisions of this
chapter would work undue hardship. The powers and duties of the
Board having been delegated to and imposed upon it by statute, the
Board shall in all cases follow the provisions applicable to it in the c.
291, P.L. 1975, or subsequent statutes in such case made and provided,
and it shall from time to time furnish to any person requesting the same
a copy of its rules and information as to how appeals or applications
may properly be filed with the Board for its decision thereon.
a. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the
municipality affected by any decision of the administrative officer. Each
appeal shall be taken within the 65 days prescribed by the statute by
filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the appeal was
taken, together with three copies of the notice with the Secretary of the
Board of Adjustment. The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for
the appeal. The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith
transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record upon which
the action appealed from was taken.
b. Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Board of
Adjustment without prior application to an administrative officer shall
§ 35-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-2.7
AO:749
§ 35-2.8. Powers to Reverse or Modify Decisions. [Ord. No. 1-27-77
§ 34-20]
In exercising the above-mentioned power, the Board of Adjustment may, in
conformity with the provisions of c. 291, P.L. 1975, or amendments thereto
or subsequent statutes applying, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from
and make such other requirement, decision or determination as ought to be
made, and to that end have all the powers of the administrative officer from
whom the appeal was taken.
§ 35-2.9. Expiration of Variance. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-21; Ord. No.
2005-(O)-42 § 1]
be filed with the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. Three
copies of the application shall be filed. At the time of filing the appeal
or application, but in no event less than 10 days prior to the date set
for the hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps or other
papers required by virtue of any provision of this chapter or any rule of
the Board of Adjustment. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms
from the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Secretary of
the Board shall inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate
proceedings and of the regular meeting dates of the Board.
c. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect
to which the decision appealed from was made, unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the
notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Board of Adjustment or by the Superior Court of New Jersey on
application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and
on due cause shown.
a. Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the
Board of Adjustment permitting the erection or alteration of any
structure or structures or permitting a specified use of any premises
shall expire by limitation unless such construction or alteration shall
have been actually commenced on each and every structure permitted
by the variance, or unless such permitted use has actually been
commenced, within nine months from the date of entry of the judgment
or determination of the Board of Adjustment; except, however, that the
running of the period of limitation herein provided shall be tolled from
the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the Board of Adjustment
to the Governing Body, or to a court of competent jurisdiction, until the
termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
b. Any variance from the term of this chapter hereafter granted by the
Kearny Planning Board permitting the erection or alteration of any
§ 35-2.7 KEARNY CODE § 35-2.9
AO:750
§ 35-2.10. Powers Granted by Law. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-22]
structure or structures or permitting specified bulk variances or waiver
to design standards of any premises shall expire by limitation unless
such construction or alteration shall have been actually commenced
on each and every structure or lands permitted by the variance, or
unless such permitted use has actually been commenced, within nine
months from the date of entry of the judgment or determination of the
Kearny Planning Board; except, however, that the running of the period
of limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the date of filing an
appeal from the decision of the Kearny Planning Board to the Governing
Body, or to a court of competent jurisdiction, until the termination in
any manner of such appeal or proceeding. (See 35-2.9a as this section
applied to the Board of Adjustment.)
a. The Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as are granted by law
to:
1. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
by an administrative official or agency based on or made in the
enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance.
2. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or
Zoning Ordinance, or for decisions upon other special questions
upon which such Board is authorized by the Zoning ordinance to
pass.
3. Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape
of a specific piece of property or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or by reason of other extraordinary and
exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, the
strict application of any regulation in the Zoning Ordinance would
result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties to or
exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of such property,
grant, upon an application or an appeal relating to such property, a
variance from such strict application, so as to relieve such
difficulties or hardship; provided, however, that no variance shall
be granted under this subsection to allow a structure or use in a
district restricted against such structure or use, and further
provided that the proposed development does not require approval
by the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use
in conjunction with which the Planning Board shall review a
request for a variance pursuant to Section 47a of the Municipal
Land Use Law of 1975, c. 291, P.L. 1975.
4. Grant a variance to allow a structure or use in a district restricted
against such structure or use in particular cases and for special
reasons, but only by the affirmative vote of at least 2/3 of the full
authorized membership of the Board.
§ 35-2.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-2.10
AO:751
§ 35-2.11. Additional Powers. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-23]
§ 35-2.12. Time Limit for Decision. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-24]
The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision not later than 120 days
after the date an appeal is taken from the decision of an administrative
officer or not later than 120 days after the date of the submission of
a complete application for development to the Board pursuant to the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70b. Failure of the Board to render a decision
within such 120-day period or within such further time as may be consented
to by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
§ 35-2.13. Public Hearings. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 34-46]
b. No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and Zoning Ordinance.
Any application under any subsection of this section may be referred to
any appropriate person or agency, including the Planning Board, for its
report, provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time
within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
a. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, in addition to the powers
specified in subsection 35-2.10 have power given by law to:
1. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the
Official Map.
2. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
b. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board,
subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67
whenever the Board is reviewing an application for approval of a use
variance pursuant to subsection 35-2.10.
a. When Required. A public hearing shall be required for all applications
before the Board of Adjustment.
b. Availability of Maps and Documents Prior to Hearing. Any maps and
documents for which approval is sought at a hearing shall be on file and
available for public inspection at least 10 days before the date of the
hearing during normal business hours in the office of the administrative
officer. The applicant may produce other documents, records or
testimony at the hearing to substantiate or clarify or supplement the
previously filed maps and documents.
§ 35-2.10 KEARNY CODE § 35-2.14
AO:752
§ 35-2.14. Notice of Public Hearings. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 34-47]
§ 35-2.15. Certification of List of Persons Entitled to Notice. [Ord.
No. 10-14-87 § 34-48]
Upon the written request of an applicant, the administrative officer of the
respective boards of the Town of Kearny shall, within seven days, make and
certify a list from the current tax duplicates of names and addresses of
owners to whom the applicant is required to give notice. The applicant shall
be entitled to rely upon the information contained in such list, and failure to
give notice to any owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing or
proceeding.
a. The applicant shall give notice of a public hearing to the owners of all
real property, as shown on the current tax records, located within 200
feet in all directions of the property in question.
b. The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing; the nature
of the matters to be considered; and identification of the property
proposed for subdivision or development by street address and block
and lot numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate of the Kearny
Tax Assessor's office, a duplicate of which shall be forwarded to the
administrative officer. The notice will also indicate that the maps and
documents will be available at a specific time and location for public
inspection pursuant to subsection 35-2.13b.
c. Notice shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the public
hearing.
d. Proof of service upon property owners and proof of publication in
affidavit form shall be submitted to the administrative officer no less
than 48 hours prior to the commencement of the public hearing.
a. Other Notification. The applicant shall provide that notice for a hearing
on an application for the development of property be given by personal
service or certified mail to:
1. The Clerk of a municipality involving property within 200 feet of
the municipality.
2. The County Planning Board where the property is adjacent to an
existing County road or proposed road shown on the Official
County Map or on the County Master Plan, or where the property
affects a County drainage facility or adjoins other County land or is
situated within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
3. The Commissioner of Transportation where the property is
adjacent to a State highway.
4. The Director of State and Regional Planning in the Department of
Community Affairs for an application exceeding 150 acres or 500
dwelling units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or
§ 35-2.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-2.15
AO:753
§ 35-2.16. Copies and Notification of Decision. [Ord. No. 10-14-87
§ 34-49]
§ 35-2.17. Corporation Representation. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 34-50]
Whenever a corporation is the applicant before the Board of Adjustment,
the corporation must be represented by an attorney.
§ 35-2.18. Submission Requirements for Applications. [Ord. No.
10-14-87 § 34-51]
Ten copies of a typewritten application shall be submitted to the
administrative officer, on forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt
of an application for zoning variance approval shall be filed not less than 10
days prior to the regular meeting date of the approving authority. Required
fees, as provided in Section 35-6 shall be submitted with the application
form.
documents required to be filed with the administrative officer of
Kearny.
b. Effect of Mailing Notice. Any notice made by certified mail shall be
deemed complete upon mailing.
c. Verbatim Recording. The approving authority shall provide for the
verbatim recording of the proceedings by either stenographer or
mechanical or electronic means for public hearings. The authority shall
furnish its transcript, or duplicate recording in lieu thereof, on request
to any interested party at his expense.
d. Written Findings and Conclusions. Each decision of the Board of
Adjustment shall be in writing and shall include findings of facts and
conclusions based thereon.
a. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board of Adjustment within
10 days of the date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, to his
attorney, without separate charge, and to all who request a copy of the
decision for a fee as specified in Section 35-6. A copy of the decision
shall also be filed by the approving authority in the office of the
administrative officer.
The administrative officer shall make a copy of such filed decision
available for public inspection at his office during reasonable hours.
b. A brief notice shall be published in the official newspaper of the
community. Such publication shall be arranged by the approving
authority. The period of time in which an appeal of the decision may be
made shall run from the publication of the decision.
§ 35-2.15 KEARNY CODE § 35-2.19
AO:754
§ 35-2.19. Variance Requirements Not Involving a Subdivision or
Site Plan. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 34-52]
The application shall be accompanied by 10 copies of a plot plan. The plot
plan shall be based on Tax Map information at a scale not less than 50 feet
to an inch. The plot plan shall be shown on one sheet, certified by a licensed
land surveyor as to existing features and boundaries. The plot plan shall
indicate:
§ 35-2.20. Applicant's Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 34-53]
The applicant shall be required to submit the following for Board of
Adjustment approval:
a. A map indicating all lots, with street address and dimensions of same,
within a 200-foot radius of the extreme limits of the parcel.
b. All existing structures, their dimensions and location on the lot in
question. All proposed construction with dimension of same. A complete
set of plans or sketches of the proposed construction, alteration or
improvement.
c. All Existing Off-Street Parking Facilities. All proposed parking
arrangements 10 feet in width and 20 feet in length).
d. Block number, lot number, street address, name of owner and owner's
mailing address.
e. Dimension of lot; i.e. lot frontage, depth, front, side and rear yard
setbacks, and bearings on street and property lines.
f. Dimension of all lots adjoining the applicant's property; i.e. each side,
front and rear. The location and type of structures on each lot, in
relation to the applicant's property line.
g. The names and addresses of owners of property in question and names
and addresses of all adjoining properties within 200 feet of the subject
property as they appear on the most recent municipal tax records,
together with Tax Map sheet reference, block and lot numbers.
h. A denial of a building or use permit from the construction official.
a. Proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or
delinquent for the property in question.
b. Certified copy of deed if the applicant is owner, or certified copy of
contract of sale if applicant is purchaser under contract.
c. Copy of a resolution and approved sketch plat from the Kearny Planning
Board if a subdivision was involved at any time in the past, if necessary.
d. Payment of all required fees and escrow funds as provided herein.
§ 35-2.19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-2.20
AO:755
§ 35-2.21. Cost of Transcripts. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 35-54]
§ 35-2.22. Issuance of Building Permit; Expiration of Variance.
[Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 34-54]
If a public permit is not obtained and paid for by the applicant within
nine months of the date of authorization of the variance by the Board of
Adjustment, such authorization and variance shall become null and void.
§ 35-3. PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO BOTH PLANNING BOARD
AND ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 35-3.1. Conflicts of Interest. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-25]
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
§ 35-3.2. Meetings. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-26]
e. Enter into a developer's agreement, prepared by the approving
authority attorney, setting forth the obligations of all parties, where
appropriate.
f. Enter into a performance guaranty agreement, in a form satisfactory to
the approving authority and Town, complying with Sections 36-13 and
36-15 of Chapter 36, where appropriate, guaranteeing performance of
the developer's agreement.
g. Convey any easements, rights-of-way or public lands in a form and
under conditions satisfactory to the approving authority and the Town.
a. Cost of Transcripts. The applicant is required to pay the costs for
transcripts which must be obtained in all appeal cases to the Mayor and
Town Council and in other appeal cases where necessary.
a. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and any meeting so
scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of
applications for development to process.
b. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board members, which meetings shall be held on
notice to the Board's members and the public in accordance with all
applicable legal requirements.
c. No action shall be taken at any meetings without a quorum being
present.
§ 35-2.20 KEARNY CODE § 35-3.2
AO:756
§ 35-3.3. Minutes. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-27]
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney; the action taken by the Board; and the
findings, if any, made by it and the reasons therefor. The minutes shall
thereafter be made available for public inspection during normal business
hours at the office of the Municipal Clerk. Any interested party shall have
the right to compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any
legal proceeding concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such
interested party may be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for
his use as provided for in the rules of the Board.
§ 35-3.4. Fees. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-28]
Fees for applications or for the rendering of any service by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment or any member of their administrative
staffs which are not otherwise provided by ordinance may be provided for
and adopted as part of the rules of the Board, and copies of the rules or of
the separate fee schedule shall be available to the public.
§ 35-3.5. Hearings. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-29]
d. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provisions of c. 291, P.L. 1975.
e. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, Chapter 231, Laws of
New Jersey 1975. An executive session for the purpose of discussing
and studying any matters to come before either Board shall not be
deemed a regular or special meeting in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9.
a. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment may make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies, which rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
or of this chapter.
b. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigation Law, P.L.
1953, c. 38 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.), shall apply.
c. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorney, if represented, or directly, if
§ 35-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-3.5
AO:757
§ 35-3.6. Notice Requirements for Hearings. [Ord. No. 1-27-77
§ 34-30]
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the applicant shall give notice thereof as
follows:
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to the time and number of witnesses.
d. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
e. Records. Each Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer or mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his expense.
a. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
b. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property, as shown on the
current tax duplicate or duplicates, located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing and
whether located within or without the municipality in which the
applicant's land is located. Such notice shall be given by serving a copy
thereof on the owner as shown on the current tax duplicate or his agent
in charge of the property or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail
to the property owner at his address as shown on the current tax
duplicate. A return receipt is not required. Notice to a partnership
owner may be made by service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate
owner may be made by service upon its president, a vice president,
secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by law to
accept service on behalf of the corporation.
c. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the Clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice required to
be given pursuant to paragraph b to the owners of lands in such
adjoining municipality which are located within 200 feet of the subject
premises.
d. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing County road or proposed road shown
on the Official County Map or on the County Master Plan, adjoining
other County land or situate within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
§ 35-3.5 KEARNY CODE § 35-3.6
AO:758
§ 35-3.7. List of Property Owners Furnished. [Ord. No. 1-27-77
§ 34-31]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the administrative officer
of the municipality or the Tax Assessor shall, within seven days after receipt
of a request therefor and upon receipt of payment of a fee of $10, make
and certify a list from the current tax duplicate of names and addresses
of owners to whom the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to
subsection 25-3.6b.
§ 35-3.8. Decisions. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-32]
e. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a State highway.
f. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to Section 6b of
c. 291, P.L. 1975.
g. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for the hearing, and the applicant shall
file an affidavit of proof of service with the Board holding the hearing on
the application for development.
h. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed to be complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
i. Form of Notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing; the
nature of the matters to be considered; identification of the property
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
Municipal Tax Assessor's office; and the location and times at which any
maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by law.
a. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board, which resolution shall include
findings of fact and legal conclusions based thereon.
b. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant or, if represented, then to his attorney,
without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to
all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed
by the Board for such service. A copy of the decision shall also be filed
§ 35-3.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-3.8
AO:759
§ 35-3.9. Publication of Decisions. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-33]
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the municipality. Such publication shall be arranged by the
Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, without separate charge to the applicant. The notice shall be sent
to the official newspaper for publication within 10 days of the date of any
such decision.
§ 35-3.10. Payment of Taxes. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-34]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and 40:55D-65, every
application for development submitted to the Planning Board or to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or
assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property
which is the subject of such application; or, if it is shown that taxes or
assessments are delinquent on the property, any approvals or other relief
granted by either Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt
payment of such taxes or assessments, or the making of adequate provisions
for the payment thereof in such manner that the municipality will be
adequately protected.
§ 35-3.11. Additional Information Required for Development in a
Redevelopment Area. [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-32]
§ 35-4. APPEALS.
in the office of the Municipal Clerk who shall make a copy of such
filed decision available to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other
public documents in the municipality.
a. Any application made to the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment with regard to real property located within an area which
has been declared by the Mayor and Council to be a redevelopment
area pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq. shall not be deemed
complete pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3 unless:
1. The applicant is the redeveloper appointed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40a:12a-8f for the redevelopment area in which the real property
which is the subject of the application is located or the application
is made with the written consent of that redeveloper and the
written consent is attached to the application, and
2. The application has been reviewed by the Mayor and Council which
in writing has found (i) that the said application is consistent with
the Redevelopment Plan adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-7
and (ii) furthers the purposes of the Plan and such written findings
are attached to the application.
§ 35-3.8 KEARNY CODE § 35-4.1
AO:760
§ 35-4.1. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Ord. No. 1-27-77
§ 34-35]
An appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by any
interested party affected by any decision of the administrative officer of the
municipality based on or made in the enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance
or Official Map. Such appeal shall be taken within 65 days by filing a notice
of appeal in the manner set forth in Article II, Section 34-19A, of this
chapter and in accordance with the provisions of Article 9 of the Municipal
Land Use Law of 1975.
§ 35-4.2. Appeals from Planning Board to Governing Body. [Ord. No.
1-27-77 § 34-36]
An appeal from any final decision of the Planning Board may be taken to
the Governing Body, provided that such appeal shall be made within 10
days of the date of publication of such final decision of the Planning Board.
Such appeal shall be made in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-17.
§ 35-4.3. Appeals from Zoning Board of Adjustment to Governing
Body. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-37]
An appeal from any decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment granting a
use variance pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17d may be taken
to the Governing Body, provided that such appeal shall be made within 10
days of the date of publication of such final decision of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
§ 35-5. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
§ 35-5.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-38]
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in c. 291, P.L. 1975,
such term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the definition of such
term found in the statute, unless a contrary intention is clearly expressed
from the context of this chapter.
§ 35-5.2. Repealer. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-39]
All sections of the Land Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance, Site Plan
Review Ordinance or any other ordinance of the Town of Kearny which
contain provisions contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and are
hereby to the extent of such inconsistency repealed.
§ 35-5.3. Provisions Continued. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-40]
Pursuant to the provisions of c. 291, P.L. 1975, Section 81, the substantive
provisions of the existing Land Subdivision Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance
and Site Plan Review Ordinance of the Town of Kearny and the development
regulations set forth therein shall continue in full force and effect for
§ 35-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-5.3
AO:761
a period of six months from the effective date of the Act or until the
Town exercises the authority delegated by the Act to regulate development,
whichever occurs first.
§ 35-5.4. Title. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-42]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Land Use Procedures
Ordinance of the Town of Kearny."
§ 35-5.5. Filing of Copies. [Ord. No. 1-27-77 § 34-43]
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter the Municipal Clerk shall file a
copy of this chapter with the County Planning Board as required by law.
The Clerk shall also file with the County Planning Board copies of all other
ordinances of the municipality relating to land use, such as the Subdivision,
Zoning and Site Plan Review Ordinances.
§ 35-6. FEES.
§ 35-6.1. Miscellaneous Fees. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 34-55]
a. A filing fee of $25 shall be required for any application made to the
Kearny Board of Adjustment, except any variance application made in
conjunction with a building permit where the estimated cost of
construction is less than $1,000, in which case the application fee shall
be $5.
Any additional fees associated with a site plan or a subdivision shall be
paid in accordance with Chapter 36, Subdivision and Site Plan Review.
b. Inspection fees of 3% of the estimated construction costs of the
improvements, as determined by the Town Engineer as provided under
the escrow provisions of this section.
c. Fees for Specific Services. The following fees shall be applicable for the
services described herein:
1. Reproduction of minutes of meetings or other reproduction costs:
$0.25 per page or the reproduction costs, plus 10% for electronic
minutes.
2. Costs of transcripts to interested parties: at cost to the
municipality.
3. Copy of decision: $0.25 per page, plus 10%.
4. Certified list of persons requiring notice: $10.
5. Publication notice: at cost to municipality.
d. Escrow Fees. In addition to the required application fees established
herein, the applicant may be required to establish one or more escrow
accounts with the Town of Kearny to cover the reasonable costs of
§ 35-5.3 KEARNY CODE § 35-6.1
AO:762
Chapter 36
professional review and consultation. The escrow fees may be required
for any variance request before the approving authority. Upon request
of a development application, the approving authority shall determine if
review is required. If review is required, the administrative officer shall
send a copy of the application and one set of all maps and supportive
data to the Town Engineer and the Planning Consultant. Within seven
days of the receipt of same, the professionals shall submit an estimate
of funds sufficient in amount to undertake technical reviews and
findings of fact relative to the application at hand. Such estimated
fees shall be approved by the approving authority. The applicant shall
deposit, forthwith upon demand, funds to meet such estimates, which
funds shall be required to be placed in an escrow account by the Town
Treasurer to be used as follows:
1. The Engineer and Planning Consultant and any other professionals
engaged shall submit vouchers for all necessary fees for
examination and review, which shall be paid in an ordinary manner.
2. Any of the aforesaid moneys left in the escrow account upon
completion of the project or phase of the application procedure, as
the case may be, shall be returned to the applicant as soon as it is
possible.
3. Should additional funds be required after the original funds are
exhausted, such funds as shall, in the judgment of the approving
authority, be necessary, shall be paid by the applicant to the Town
Treasurer and placed in the appropriate account or accounts.
4. Upon receipt of sufficient funds for the escrow account; the
administrative officer shall notify the Engineer; Planning
Consultant, and any other professionals engaged that all
appropriate examinations and reviews shall be undertaken.
5. The approving authority shall take no formal action unless all
application fees and escrow funds have been paid to the Town
Treasurer.
e. All fees required hereunder shall be paid in cash, certified check or
money order made payable to the Town of Kearny.
f. Construction Official Fees. Construction Official fees shall be paid at the
office of the Construction Official upon filing of an application for a
building permit or certificate of occupancy as follows:
1. A fee for the issuance of a building permit in conformity with the
requirements of the Building Code of the Town of Kearny.
2. An additional fee of $10 or $15 upon the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
§ 35-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 35-6.1
AO:763
SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN
§ 36-1. TITLE AND PURPOSE.
§ 36-1.1. Long Title. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-1]
The long title of this chapter shall be "An Ordinance Establishing Rules,
Regulations and Standards Governing the Subdivision of Land and Site Plan
Review Within the Town of Kearny Pursuant to the Authority Set Forth
in Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975, and Amendments and Supplements
Thereto, Setting Forth the Procedure To Be Followed by the Approving
Authority in Applying and Administering These Rules, Regulations and
Standards and Providing Penalties for the Violations Thereof."
§ 36-1.2. Short Title. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-2]
This chapter shall be known as the "Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review
Ordinance of the Town of Kearny."
§ 36-1.3. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-3]
Such regulations are deemed necessary to protect the character, stability
and orderly development of all areas of the community; to secure safety
from fire, flood, panic and other natural and manmade disasters and
hazards; to encourage the proper location and design of streets; to promote
a desirable visual and aesthetic environment through creative development
techniques and good civic design and arrangements; to promote the
conservation of open space and valuable resources; to prevent the
degradation of the environment through improper land use; to provide
adequate light, air and open space; and to provide rules, regulations and
procedures which will guide the appropriate development of lands within
the community in order to promote the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare.
§ 36-2. DEFINITIONS AND WORD USAGE.
§ 36-2.1. Word Usage. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-4]
Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number
shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word "structure"
shall include the word "building"; the word "person" includes a corporation
as well as an individual; the word "lot" includes the word "plot"; the word
"occupied" includes the words "designed, constructed, altered, converted,
rented, leased or intended to be used"; the word "shall" is mandatory and
not optional, and the word "may" is permissive.
§ 36-2.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-4]
As used in this chapter:
§ 35-6.1 KEARNY CODE § 36-2.2
AO:764
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — Shall mean the respective secretaries for
any application before the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment.
APPLICANT OR DEVELOPER — Shall mean:
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the application form
and all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, conditional use, zoning variance or direction of
the issuance of a permit pursuant to law.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Planning Board of Kearny or
the Kearny Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, as provided in Section
36-3.
BUILDING — Shall mean a combination of materials to form a construction
adapted to a permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a
roof.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Shall mean an open space area within or related
to a site designated as a development, and designed and intended for the
use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. "Common
open space" may contain such complementary structures and improvements
as are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of the development.
CONDITIONAL USE — Shall mean a use permitted in a particular zoning
district only upon showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such
use as contained in the Zoning Ordinance and upon the issuance of an
authorization therefor by the Planning Board.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean development other than
planned development.
DAYS — Shall mean the number of calendar days, for the purpose of this
chapter.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the division of a parcel of land into two
or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure or
of any mining, excavation or landfill; and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required.
DRAINAGE — Shall mean the removal of surface water or groundwater
from land by drains, grading or other means, including the control of runoff
to minimize erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or
a. A developer submitting an application for development.
The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land proposed
to be included in a proposed development, including the holder of an
option or contract for purchase or other persons having an enforceable
proprietary interest in such land.
b.
§ 36-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-2.2
AO:765
development, and the means necessary for water supply preservation or
preservation or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean the lands required for the
installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along
natural streams or watercourses for preserving the channel and providing
for the flow of water therein, to safeguard the public against flood.
EROSION — Shall mean the detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice and gravity.
FINAL APPROVAL — Shall mean the official action of the approving
authority taken on a preliminary-approved major subdivision or site plan
after all conditions, engineering plans and other requirements have been
completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been installed
or guaranties properly posted for their completion, or approval conditioned
upon the posting of such guaranties, which, in the case of subdivision, shall
be filed with the proper County recording officer.
FLOOR AREA — Shall mean the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of a building measured from the exterior walls in a building.
"Floor area" shall not include areas devoted to mechanical equipment
serving the building, stairways and elevators, areas used exclusively for offstreet
parking and loading for motor vehicles, or to any space where the
floor-to-ceiling height is less than seven feet.
GOVERNING BODY — Shall mean the Mayor and Town Council of the Town
of Kearny.
HISTORIC SITE — Shall mean any building, structure, area of property that
is significant in the history, architecture, archeology or culture of this State,
its communities or the nation and has been so designated.
INTERESTED PARTY — Shall mean any person, whether residing within or
without the Town of Kearny, whose right to use, acquire or enjoy property is
or may be affected by any action taken under this chapter, or whose right to
use, acquire or enjoy property under this chapter or under any other law of
this State or the United States has been denied, violated or infringed upon
by any action or a failure to act under this chapter.
LOT — Shall mean a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by
a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Shall mean security, other than cash, which
may be accepted by Kearny for the maintenance of any improvements
required by this chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean any subdivision not classified as a
minor subdivision.
MASTER PLAN — Shall mean a composite of one or more written or
graphic proposals for the development of Kearny which shall have been duly
adopted by the Kearny Planning Board.
§ 36-2.2 KEARNY CODE § 36-2.2
AO:766
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean any subdivision containing not more
than three lots fronting on an existing street, not involving any new street
or road or the extension of municipal facilities and not adversely affecting
the development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, which
is not adjoined by other unplatted land in the same ownership and is not
in conflict with any provisions or portions of the Master Plan, Official Map,
Zoning Ordinance, Health Code or this chapter.
OFF-SITE — Shall mean located outside the lot lines of the lot in question
but within the property (of which the lot is part) which is the subject of a
development application or contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — Shall mean not located on the property which is the subject
of a development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.
OFFICE BUILDING — Shall mean, under the provisions of Chapter 220 of
the Laws of 1975 pertaining to physically handicapped persons, a building
or structure of more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area wherein
commercial or business activity or service is performed or a profession is
practiced or wherein any combination thereof is performed or practiced in
all or the majority of such building or structure.
OFFICIAL MAP — Shall mean a map and accompanying ordinance adopted
by the Governing Body of Kearny pursuant to law. Such map shall be
deemed to be conclusive with respect to the location and width of streets
and public drainageways and the location and extent of flood control basins
and public areas, whether or not such streets, ways, basins or areas are
improved or unimproved or are in actual physical existence.
ON-SITE — Shall mean located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Shall mean located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OPEN SPACE — Shall mean any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designed or reserved for public or
private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of lands adjoining or neighboring such open space, provided that
such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets
and off-street parking and other improvements that are designed to be
incidental to the natural openness of the land.
PARTY IMMEDIATELY CONCERNED — Shall mean any applicant for
development, the owners of the subject property and all owners of property
and government agencies entitled to notice.
PERFECTED APPLICATION — Shall mean one that is submitted in a proper
and complete form, including all required application forms, maps and
reviews, prior to the scheduling of a public hearing, where required, or
formal action being taken by the approving authority; all required fees are
submitted and filed within the appropriate time schedules; proof that no
taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
§ 36-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-2.2
AO:767
property for which approval is sought; and all other governmental approvals
are received by the approving authority or can be so conditioned by the
approving authority.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Shall mean any security which may be
accepted by the Town of Kearny, including cash, provided that the Town
shall not require more than 10% of the total performance guaranty in cash.
PHYSICAL HANDICAP — Shall mean a physical impairment which confines
a person to a wheelchair; causes a person to walk with difficulty or
insecurity; affects the sight or hearing to the extent that a person
functioning in public areas is insecure or exposed to danger; causes faulty
coordination; or reduces mobility, flexibility, coordination and
perceptiveness to the extent that facilities are needed for the safety of that
person.
PLAT — Shall mean a map or maps of a subdivision or site plan pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — Shall mean the conferral of certain rights
pursuant to this chapter, prior to final approval, after specific elements of
a development plan have been agreed upon by the approving authority and
the applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Shall mean
architectural drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the
design of a project, illustrating in a schematic form its scope, scale and
relationship to its site and immediate environs.
PUBLIC AREAS — Shall mean public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and
other recreational areas; other public open spaces; scenic and historic sites;
and sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Shall mean, under the provisions of Chapter 220
of the Laws of 1975 pertaining to physically handicapped persons, any
building, structure, facility or complex used by the general public, including
but not limited to theaters, concert halls, auditoriums, museums, schools,
libraries, recreation facilities, public transportation terminals and stations,
factories, office buildings, business establishments, passenger vehicle
service stations, shopping centers, hotels or motels and public eating
places, constructed by any State, County or municipal government agency
or instrumentality or any private individual, partnership, association or
corporation, with the following exceptions: one to four family private
residences, warehouse storage areas and all buildings classified as
hazardous occupancies. As used herein, "hazardous occupancy" means the
occupancy or use of a building or structure or any portion thereof that
involves highly combustible, highly flammable or explosive material or
which has inherent characteristics that constitute a special fire hazard.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — Shall mean the land reserved or dedicated for
the installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches or required along
a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing
for the flow of water to safeguard the public against flood damage,
sedimentation and erosion.
§ 36-2.2 KEARNY CODE § 36-2.2
AO:768
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — Shall mean an open space area conveyed or
otherwise dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, board of education,
State or County agency or other public body for recreational or
conservational uses.
RESUBDIVISION — Shall mean the further division or relocation of lot
lines of any lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved
or recorded according to law or the alteration of any streets within any
subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according to law, but
does not include conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or other
instrument.
SEDIMENTATION — Shall mean the deposition of soil that has been
transported from its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other
natural means as a product of erosion.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — Shall mean a triangle-shaped easement established at
the intersection of two streets or a driveway and a street in which nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as
to obstruct vision between a height of two feet and six inches above the
center-line grade of the street or driveway. The triangle shall be determined
along such street lot lines or edge of driveway 25 feet distant from their
joint intersection.
SITE PLAN — Shall mean a development plan of one or more lots on
which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including
but not necessarily limited to topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains,
marshes and waterways; the location of all existing and proposed buildings,
drives, parking spaces, walkways, means of ingress and egress, drainage
facilities, utility services, landscaping, structures and signs, screening
devices and lighting; and any other information that may be reasonably
required in order to make an informed determination pursuant to this
chapter.
SKETCH PLAT — Shall mean the sketch map of a subdivision to be used for
the purpose of discussion and classification and meeting the requirements
of subsection 36-4.1.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive or other way which is an existing State, County or municipal
roadway or which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to
law or which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of
the County Recording Officer prior to the appointment of a Planning Board
and the grant to such Board of the power to review plats, and includes the
land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may
comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, parking areas and
other areas within the street.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a combination of materials to form a
construction for occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on,
above or below the surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land
into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other division of land, whether
§ 36-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-2.2
AO:769
immediate or future, for sale or development. The following shall not be
considered subdivisions within the meaning of this chapter, if no new streets
are created or extension of utilities are required: division of land found by
the approving authority to be for agricultural purposes where all resulting
parcels are five acres or larger in size, divisions of property by testamentary
or intestate provisions, divisions of property upon court order and
conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or other instrument. The
term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision."
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — Shall mean a committee of at least three
Planning Board members, appointed by the Chairman of the Board, for the
purpose of classifying subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and performing such other duties relating to land subdivision as
may be conferred on the committee by the Board.
§ 36-3. ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT AND FEES.
§ 36-3.1. Administration; Approving Authorities. [Ord. No. 2-9-77
§ 127-5]
a. Planning Board as Approving Authority. In accordance with Chapter
291 of the Laws of 1975, the Planning Board shall act as approving
authority for subdivision plats as a condition for filing such plats with
the County Recording Officer, either individually or as a part of a
simultaneous application, and for site plan approval as follows:
1. For minor subdivisions.
2. For preliminary and final major subdivisions and site plans.
3. For subdivisions and site plans which also require conditional use
approval.
4. For minor and major subdivisions which require site plan approval.
5. For subdivisions and site plans in which a variance is requested in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 from lot area, lot dimension,
setback and yard requirements, provided that relief from lot area
requirements shall not be granted for more than one lot.
b. Board of Adjustment as Approving Authority. In accordance with
Chapter 291 of the Laws of 1975, the Board of Adjustment shall act as
approving authority for subdivision plats as a condition for filing such
plats with the County Recording Officer, and for site plan approval as
follows:
1. Where a use variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d is requested
in which a subdivision and/or a site plan is part of the application.
c. Planning Board and Board of Adjustment Acting as Approving Authority.
In the case of a variance request pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 from
lot area, lot dimension, setback and yard requirements where the relief
sought from lot area requirements exceeds one lot, an application for
§ 36-2.2 KEARNY CODE § 36-3.1
AO:770
§ 36-3.2. Fees. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-6; Ord. No. 6-10-87; Ord. No.
8-14-91; Ord. No. 1996-30 § 1; Ord. No. 2005-(O)-42 § 7; Ord. No.
2005-(O)-42 § 1]
The following fees shall accompany the appropriate application. The fees
shall be paid in cash, certified or bank check, payable to the Town of Kearny,
as follows:
subdivision or site plan approval shall proceed initially with the
Planning Board and, if approved by the Planning Board, the applicant
shall then proceed to the Board of Adjustment as to the lot area
variances only.
d. Exception in Application of Regulation. Except for public hearings, the
approving authority, when acting upon applications for minor
preliminary and final subdivision approval, shall have the power to
grant such exceptions from the requirements of this chapter as may be
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions
of this chapter, if the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of
this chapter is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of
peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question.
e. Simultaneous Review and Approval. Except as provided in paragraph c,
the approving authority shall have the power to review and approve one
or more land use regulations simultaneously with review for subdivision
and site plan approval without the applicant being required to make
further application to the approving authority or the authority being
required to hold further hearings. The longest time period for action by
the approving authority, whether it is for subdivision, conditional use,
site plan approval or variance, shall apply. Whenever approval of a
conditional use or a use variance is requested by the applicant, notice of
the hearing on the plat shall include references to the request for such
conditional use or use variance.
a. Filing Fees.
1. Filing fee for preliminary minor subdivision: $1,000.
2. Filing fee for preliminary major subdivision: $1,500.
3. Filing fee for final subdivision: $500.
4. Filing fee for preliminary site plan: $1,500.
5. Filing fee for final site plan: $500.
6. Filing fee for simultaneous filing of preliminary and final site plan
review: $2,000.
7. Filing fee for nonconforming use/structure application: $100.
§ 36-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-3.2
AO:771
8. Filing fee for variances: (a) Bulk variance: $100 single-family, $150
for two-family, all other uses $200. (b) Use variance: $200 for a one-
, two-family and three-through-five-family; all other uses $500.
9. Interpretation of zoning regulations or zoning map: $50.
10. Fees for design waivers: $250 if a design waiver(s) is requested.
11. Fees for extensions of time or reapproval: $200.
12. Fees for a special meeting: $1,000 for meeting and $1,000 for
additional escrow.
13. Any and all applications dealing with subdivisions (major or minor)
shall include an additional fee for CADD formatting of
Georeferenced Tax Mapping. Fee to be $650 for a subdivision of
less than three lots, and $1,000 for three or greater lots.
b. Fees for Specific Services. The following fees shall be applicable for the
services described herein:
1. Reproduction of minutes of meetings or other reproduction costs:
according to State statute.
2. Cost of transcripts to interested parties: at cost to the applicant.
3. Copy of decision: according to State statute.
4. Certified list of persons requiring notice: $0.25 per lot or $10,
whichever is greater. $50 for composing and supplying 200-foot
radius map using GIS mapping system. Mailing labels (two sets)
provided upon request at an additional cost of $25.
5. Publication notice: at cost to municipality.
c. Escrow Fees. In addition to the required application fees established
herein, the applicant may be required to establish one or more escrow
accounts with the Town of Kearny to cover the reasonable costs of
professional review, consultation and site inspection fees. The escrow
fees may be required for minor/major subdivisions, subdivision review,
site plan approval, conditional use approval or any variance request
before the approving authority.
1. Upon receipt of a development application, the approving authority
shall determine if review by technical experts and counsel is
required. If review is required, the administrative officer shall send
a copy of the application and one set of all maps and supportive
data to the Town Engineer, the planning consultant and the
approving authority attorney. Within seven days of the receipt of
same, the professionals shall submit an estimate of funds sufficient
in amount to undertake technical reviews and findings of fact
relative to the application at hand.
§ 36-3.2 KEARNY CODE § 36-3.2
AO:772
2. Upon approval of a development application the approving
authority shall determine if engineering site inspections are
required. If required the engineer will set forth an estimate of
funds sufficient in amount to undertake engineering inspections of
the project.
3. Such estimated fees shall be approved by the approving authority.
The applicant shall deposit, forthwith upon demand, funds to meet
such estimates, which funds shall be required to be placed in an
escrow account by the Town Treasurer to be used in accordance
with the applicable escrow provisions set forth below:
(a) The Engineer, planning consultant, approving authority
attorney and any other professionals engaged shall submit
vouchers for all necessary fees for examination and review,
which shall be paid in an ordinary manner.
(b) Any of the aforesaid moneys left in the escrow account upon
completion of the project or phase of the application procedure
as the case may be, shall be returned to the applicant as soon
as it is possible.
(c) Should additional funds be required after the original funds are
exhausted, such funds as shall, in the judgment of the
approving authority, be necessary, shall be paid by the
applicant to the Town Treasurer and placed in the appropriate
account or accounts.
(d) Upon receipt of sufficient funds for the escrow account, the
administrative officer shall notify the Town Engineer, planning
consultant, approving authority attorney and any other
professionals engaged that all appropriate examinations and
reviews shall be undertaken.
(e) The approving authority shall take no formal action unless all
application fees and escrow funds have been paid to the Town
Treasurer.
d. Escrow Fees.
1. Unless waived by the approving authority, an applicant for
development shall deposit professional review fees in an escrow
account with the Township of Kearny for review of an application
for development and the preparation of documents related thereto.
Such fees are in addition to the application filing fees in paragraph
a. The initial escrow deposit shall be in accordance with the
following schedule:
(a) Subdivision Applications:
§ 36-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-3.2
AO:773
§ 36-3.3. Public Hearings. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-7]
Number of
Resultant Lots
Initial Escrow Deposit
0 lots to 2 lots $750
3 or more lots $250 per lot up to a maximum initial
deposit of $5,000
(b) Site Plan Applications. The largest amount resulting from the
following calculations shall be required initial escrow deposit:
Site area in square feet x $0.15/square foot up to a maximum
of $5,000.
Total gross floor area of new building addition x $0.50/square
foot up to a maximum of $5,000.
Total gross floor area of new building or building addition
involving a drive-through facility x $1/square foot up to a
maximum of $5,000.
(c) If in the course of an application the approving authority
determines that an escrow account or deposit contains
insufficient funds to perform required application reviews, the
Chief Financial Officer of the Town of Kearny shall provide the
applicant with a notice of insufficient escrow or deposit
balance. Upon such notice, the applicant shall within a
reasonable time period post a deposit to the account in an
amount to be agreed upon by the approving authority and the
applicant.
2. The charging to and processing of escrow fees and any disputes
related thereto shall be handled in accordance with the Municipal
Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1 and 40:55D-53.2.
e. The applicant shall be responsible for any and all escrows required of
the applicant and all escrows shall be paid in full prior to the application
being deemed complete. Should additional escrow funds be necessary
during the pendency of an appeal to the Zoning or Planning Boards, the
applicant shall be responsible for placing additional funds with the
Town of Kearny prior to the matter being continued before the Board.
Should additional escrow funds remain unpaid after the hearing of the
application, the Chairman of the respective Board and the Board
Secretary shall not sign the final resolution until such escrows are paid
in full as the application shall be deemed incomplete.
a. When Required. A public hearing shall be required for all applications
except minor subdivision approval and final subdivision approval and
final site plan review.
§ 36-3.2 KEARNY CODE § 36-3.3
AO:774
b. Availability of Maps and Documents Prior to Hearing. Any maps and
documents for which approval is sought at a hearing shall be on file and
available for public inspection at least 10 days before the date of the
hearing during normal business hours in the office of the administrative
officer. The applicant may produce other documents, records or
testimony at the hearing to substantiate, clarify or supplement the
previously filed maps and documents.
c. Notice of Public Hearings.
1. The applicant shall give notice of a public hearing to the owners of
all real property, as shown on the current tax records, located
within 200 feet in all directions of the property in question.
2. The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing; the
nature of the matters to be considered; and identification of the
property proposed for subdivision or development by street
address and block and lot numbers as shown on the current tax
duplicate in the Kearny Tax Assessor's office, a duplicate copy of
which shall be forwarded to the administrative officer. The notice
will also indicate that the maps and documents will be available at a
specific time and location for public inspection pursuant to
paragraph b.
3. Notice shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the public
hearing.
4. Proof of service upon property owners and proof of publication in
affidavit form shall be submitted to the administrative officer no
less than 48 hours prior to the commencement of the public
hearing.
d. Certification of List of Persons Entitled to Notice. Upon the written
request of an applicant, the administrative officer of the respective
boards of the Town of Kearny shall, within seven days, make and certify
a list from the current tax duplicates of names and addresses of owners
to whom the applicant is required to give notice. The applicant shall be
entitled to rely upon the information contained in such list, and failure
to give notice to any owner not on the list shall not invalidate any
hearing or proceeding.
e. Other Notification. The applicant shall provide that notice for a hearing
on an application for the development of property be given by personal
service or certified mail to:
1. The Clerk of a municipality involving property within 200 feet of
the municipality.
2. The County Planning Board where the property is adjacent to an
existing County road or proposed road shown on the Official
County Map or on the County Master Plan, or where the property
§ 36-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-3.3
AO:775
§ 36-3.4. Minimum Requirements; Waiver of Provisions. [Ord. No.
2-9-77 § 127-8]
affects a County drainage facility or adjoins other County land or is
situated within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
3. The Commissioner of Transportation where the property is
adjacent to a State highway.
4. The Director of State and Regional Planning in the Department of
Community Affairs for an application exceeding 150 acres or 500
dwelling units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or
documents required to be filed with the administrative officer of
Kearny.
f. Effect of Mailing Notice. Any notice made by certified mail shall be
deemed complete upon mailing.
g. Verbatim Recording Required. The approving authority shall provide
for the verbatim recording of the proceedings by either stenographer or
mechanical or electronic means for public hearings. The authority shall
furnish its transcript, or duplicate recording in lieu thereof, on request
to any interested party at his expense.
h. Written Findings and Conclusions. Each decision of the approving
authority shall be in writing and shall include findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon.
i. Copies and Notification of Decision.
1. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the approving authority
within 10 days of the date of decision to the applicant or, if
represented, to his attorney, without separate charge, and to all
who request a copy of the decision for a fee as specified herein. A
copy of the decision shall also be filed by the approving authority in
the office of the administrative officer. The administrative officer
shall make a copy of such filed decision available to any interested
party for a fee as specified herein and available for public
inspection at his office during reasonable hours.
2. A brief notice shall be published in the official newspaper of the
community. Such publication shall be arranged by the approving
authority. The period of time in which an appeal of the decision may
be made shall run from the publication of the decision.
a. The rules, regulations and standards contained herein shall be
considered the minimum requirements for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Town of Kearny. Any
action taken under the terms of this chapter shall give primary
consideration to the above-mentioned matters and to the welfare of the
entire community. However, if the applicant can clearly demonstrate
that, because of peculiar conditions pertaining to his land, the literal
§ 36-3.3 KEARNY CODE § 36-3.4
AO:776
§ 36-3.5. County Planning Board and Other Government Approvals.
[Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-9]
Any site plan or subdivision application requiring County Planning Board
or other governmental approval shall be submitted by the applicant to the
Hudson County Planning Board or other governmental agency for review
and approval. The approving authority shall condition any approval that it
may grant upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by
the County Planning Board or other governmental agency or the approval
of the County Planning Board or other governmental agency by its failure to
report therein within the required time period.
§ 36-3.6. Corporation Representation. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-10]
Whenever a corporation is the applicant before the approving authority, the
corporation must be represented by an attorney.
§ 36-4. SUBDIVISION CLASSIFICATION; MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
§ 36-4.1. Classification of Subdivisions. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-11]
enforcement of one or more of these regulations is impracticable or will
exact undue hardship, the approving authority may permit such waivers
as may be reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the
rules, regulations and standards established by this chapter.
b. The waiver provisions of this section shall be applicable to the entire
chapter herein except where specifically prohibited by law.
a. Any applicant for land subdivision shall submit 10 copies of a sketch
plat of the proposed subdivision for the purpose of classification and
preliminary discussion and 10 copies of the application form. The
sketch plat shall be submitted to the administrative officer at least two
weeks prior to the regular meeting of the approving authority. If the
applicant wishes to proceed as a major subdivision without applying for
a sketch plat classification, he may proceed as provided in Section 36-6.
b. If the plat is classified as a major subdivision by the approving authority,
a notation to that effect shall be made on the plat, which shall be
returned to the applicant for compliance with the procedures in
Sections 36-6 and 36-7.
c. The sketch plat shall be based on Tax Map information or other
similarly accurate base, at a scale not less than 200 feet to the inch. The
entire tract shall be shown on one sheet. It shall show or include the
following information:
1. The location of the portion of lots to be subdivided in relation to the
entire tract.
§ 36-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-4.1
AO:777
§ 36-4.2. Submission of Application for Minor Subdivision. [Ord.
No. 2-9-77 § 127-12]
Ten copies of an application shall be submitted to the administrative officer,
in writing, on forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt of an
application for minor subdivision approval shall be filed no less than 14 days
prior to the regular meeting date of the approving authority. Required fees,
as provided in subsection 36-3.2, shall be submitted with the application
form.
§ 36-4.3. Minor Subdivision Requirements. [Ord. No. 2-9-77
§ 127-13; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-65]
2. All existing structures and wooded areas on the parcels to be
subdivided and within a 200-foot radius of the extreme limits of the
parcels to be subdivided.
3. A map indicating all lots, with dimensions of same, within a
200-foot radius of the extreme limits of the parcels to be
subdivided.
4. The names of owners of property to be subdivided and of all
adjoining properties as they appear on the most recent municipal
tax records.
5. Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
6. Lot dimensions and bearings of parcels to be subdivided, including
areas after subdivision computed to the nearest tenth of a square
foot.
7. The location of all structures on the parcels to be subdivided,
including offsets to property lines.
8. All streets, roads and streams within 500 feet of the subdivision.
a. Map Requirements. The application shall be accompanied by 10 copies
of the proposed subdivision accurately drawn to a scale of not less than
one inch equals 50 feet, certified by a licensed land surveyor as to
existing features and boundaries. The minor subdivision plat shall be in
conformance with the Map Filing Act, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.). All design features shall be prepared by a licensed
professional engineer. The map shall indicate:
1. The location of the portion of lots to be subdivided in relation to the
entire tract.
2. All existing structures and wooded areas on the parcels to be
subdivided and within a 200-foot radius of the extreme limits of the
parcels to be subdivided.
§ 36-4.1 KEARNY CODE § 36-4.3
AO:778
3. A map indicating all lots, with dimensions of same, within a
200-foot radius of the extreme limits of the parcels to be
subdivided.
4. The names of owners of property to be subdivided and of all
adjoining properties as they appear on the most recent municipal
tax records.
5. Tax Map sheet, block and lot numbers.
6. Lot dimensions and bearings of parcels to be subdivided, including
areas after subdivision computed to the nearest tenth of a square
foot.
7. The location of all structures on the parcels to be subdivided,
including offsets to property lines.
8. All streets, roads and streams within 500 feet of the subdivision.
9. Easements, streets, buildings, watercourses, railroads, bridges,
culverts, drainpipes, rights-of-way, drainage easements and prior
variances.
10. History of any previous action or restrictions on the property.
b. Applicant's Responsibilities.
1. The applicant shall be required to submit the following for the
approving authority approval:
(a) Proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvement are
due or delinquent for the property in question.
(b) Payment of all required fees and escrow funds as provided
herein.
2. The approving authority may also require the following:
(a) Enter into a developer's agreement, prepared by the approving
authority attorney, setting forth the obligations of all parties.
(b) Enter into a performance guaranty agreement, in a form
satisfactory to the approving authority and Town, complying
with subsections 36-13.2 and 36-14.2 where appropriate,
guaranteeing performance of the developer's agreement.
(c) Convey any easements, rights-of-way or public lands in a form
and under conditions satisfactory to the approving authority
and the Town.
(d) Provide evidence that environmental elements relating to soil
erosion and sedimentation, preservation of trees, protection of
watercourses and water quality, noise pollution, topographic
limitation areas, wetland areas and other environmental and
§ 36-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-4.3
AO:779
§ 36-4.4. Action by Approving Authority. [Ord. 2-9-77 § 127-14]
§ 36-4.5. Minor Subdivision Approval. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-15]
§ 36-4.6. Effect of Minor Subdivision Approval. [Ord. No. 2-9-77
§ 127-16]
ecological facts have been reviewed, where appropriate, so as
to minimize adverse effects.
a. The approving authority shall grant or deny approval within 45 days of
submission of a complete and perfected application or within such time
as may be consented to, in writing, by the applicant.
b. Failure of the approving authority to act within the time period shall
constitute minor subdivision approval. A certificate by the Town Clerk,
whose signature shall be sufficient in lieu of the Chairman and
Secretary of the approving authority, as to the failure of the approving
authority shall be issued on request of the applicant and shall be so
accepted by the County Recording Officer for the purposes of filing
subdivision plats.
c. Whenever review or approval is required by the County Planning Board
or a State agency, under appropriate circumstances, the approving
authority shall not accept an application as perfected unless receipt of
approval is received from the County or State agency. The approving
authority may condition its approval upon a timely receipt of a favorable
report from the County or State agency.
a. Minor subdivision approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the
subdivision subject to subsection 36-4.6.
b. Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date of
approval by the approving authority unless within such a period a plat
in conformance with the Map Filing Act, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 et seq.), or a deed clearly describing the approved minor
subdivision is filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer,
the Town Engineer and the Tax Assessor. In addition, copies shall be
submitted to the Town Clerk, Construction Official, the County Board of
Taxation and the approving authority Clerk.
c. Any such plat or deed accepted for such filing shall have been signed by
the Chairman and Secretary of the approving authority.
a. The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, shall not be changed or abridged for a period
of two years after the date of minor subdivision approval, provided that
the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded as
provided herein.
§ 36-4.3 KEARNY CODE § 36-4.6
AO:780
§ 36-4.7. Required Guaranties. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-17]
Before recording a minor subdivision plat or deed in lieu thereof, the
approving authority may require the installation and maintenance of onand
off-tract improvements. The improvements may require the furnishing
of performance and maintenance guaranties in accordance with subsections
36-13.3 and 36-14.3.
§ 36-5. (RESERVED)
§ 36-6. PRELIMINARY APPROVAL OF MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
§ 36-6.1. Submission of Application. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-18]
Sixteen copies of an application shall be submitted to the administrative
officer in writing on forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt of an
application for preliminary major subdivision approval shall be filed no less
than 14 days prior to the regular meeting date of the approving authority.
Required fees, as provided in subsection 36-3.2, shall be submitted with the
application form.
§ 36-6.2. Preliminary Plat Requirements. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-19]
b. If a minor subdivision is granted on a particular tract of land, another
minor subdivision on the same tract of land shall not be given until at
least two years after the first minor subdivision has been granted.
a. The application shall be accompanied by 16 copies of the proposed
subdivision accurately drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals
50 feet, certified by a licensed land surveyor as to existing features and
boundaries. The subdivision plat shall be in conformance with the Map
Filing Act, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.). All design
features shall be prepared by a licensed professional engineer.
b. Preliminary Plat Details. The preliminary plat shall contain the
following:
1. Date. All revisions shall be noted and dated.
2. A key map showing the location of the tract with reference to the
surrounding properties, existing streets and streams within 500
feet of the subdivision.
3. Title of development; North arrow; scale; block and lot number; the
name and address of the record owner; the name and address of
the applicant; the name and address, license number and seal of
the person preparing the subdivision. If the owner of the premises
is a corporation, the name and address of the president and
secretary shall be submitted on the application.
4. All distances shall be in feet and decimals of a foot and all bearings
shall be given to the nearest 10 seconds.
§ 36-4.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-6.2
AO:781
5. The names, as shown on current tax records, of all owners of
property within 200 feet of the subdivision, together with the block
and lot numbers of the property.
6. The zoning district in which the parcel is located, together with the
zone boundaries within 200 feet of the extreme limits of the
property in question.
7. Survey data showing boundaries of the property, building or
setback lines and lines of existing and proposed streets, lots,
reservations, easements and areas dedicated to public use,
including grants, restrictions and rights-of-way, to be prepared by a
licensed land surveyor.
8. Reference to any existing or proposed covenants, deed restrictions,
exceptions or variances covering all or any part of the parcel. A
copy of such covenants, deed restrictions, exceptions or variances
shall be submitted with the application.
9. The distances, measured along the right-of-way lines of existing
streets abutting the property, to the nearest intersections with
other public streets.
10. Location of existing buildings and all other structures, including
walls, fences, culverts and bridges, with spot elevations of such
buildings and structures. Structures to be removed shall be
indicated by dashed lines; structures to remain shall be indicated
by solid lines.
11. Location of all existing and proposed storm drainage structures
and utility lines, whether publicly or privately owned, with pipe
sizes, grades and direction of flow, locations and inlets, manholes
or other appurtenances and appropriate invert and other
elevations. If any existing utility lines are underground, the
estimated location of the utility lines shall be shown.
12. Existing and proposed contours, referred to United States Coast
and Geodetic Survey datum, with a contour interval of one foot
slopes of less than 3%; an interval of two feet for slopes of more
than 3% but less than 15%; and an interval of five feet for slopes of
15% or more. Existing contours are to be indicated by dashed lines
and proposed contours are to be indicated by solid lines.
13. Location of existing rock outcrops, high points, watercourses,
depressions, ponds, marshes, wooded areas and other significant
existing features, including previous flood elevations of
watercourses, ponds and marsh areas, as determined by survey.
14. All proposed streets, with profiles, indicating grading; cross
sections showing the width of roadways and sidewalks; and
location and size of utility lines conforming to Town standards and
specifications.
§ 36-6.2 KEARNY CODE § 36-6.2
AO:782
§ 36-6.3. Procedural Requirements. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-20; Ord.
No. 2004-(O)-65]
15. The location of all existing and proposed waterlines, valves and
hydrants and all sewer lines or alternative means of sewerage and
sewage disposal and treatment.
16. Existing and proposed stormwater drainage system. All plans shall
be accompanied by a separate sketch showing all existing drainage
within five 500 feet of any boundary, and all areas and any other
surface area contributing to the calculations, and showing methods
used in the drainage calculations.
17. Acreage, to the nearest tenth of an acre, of tract to be subdivided
and the area, in square feet, of all lots.
18. Such other information or data as may be required by the
approving authority, the County Planning Board or other
governmental agencies for determination that the details of the
subdivision are in accordance with the standards of this chapter
and all other applicable laws, ordinances or resolutions.
a. Preliminary Subdivision Plat Review.
1. The applicant shall submit the preliminary subdivision application
and plat maps and payment of all required fees to the
administrative officer, who shall submit copies of the preliminary
plat to the following:
(a) Approving authority attorney.
(b) Town Engineer.
(c) Planning Consultant.
(d) Construction Official.
(e) Secretary of Board of Health.
(f) Superintendent of Public Works.
(g) Fire Chief.
(h) Police Chief.
(i) Water Purveyor.
(j) County Board of Taxation.
(k) Board of Education.
(l) Shade Tree Commission.
(m) Other municipal officials and agencies as directed by the
approving authority.
§ 36-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-6.3
AO:783
2. The above persons and boards shall make recommendations to the
approving authority in writing within 14 days of the application
submission. The approving authority shall take the
recommendations into account, but shall have the authority to
proceed in the absence of such recommendations if the approving
authority finds such recommendations not to be essential to its
determination.
3. If the preliminary plat is found to be incomplete, the applicant shall
be notified by certified mail thereof within 35 days of the date of
submission, or it shall be deemed to be perfected as to content.
4. Where adjustments or changes are required in the plat submission,
the applicant shall be required to modify the plat in order to qualify
as a perfected application as to content and for public hearing
purposes.
b. Approving Authority Review. The approving authority shall review the
applications for preliminary subdivision approval and shall ensure that
the following requirements have been met:
1. The detailed drawings, specifications and estimates meet all
applicable codes and ordinances as well as recommendations,
where appropriate, of municipal officials and agencies.
2. Proof has been submitted that no taxes or assessments are due or
delinquent on property for which preliminary subdivision approval
is sought.
3. All applicable fees and escrow funds have been paid or posted as
required herein.
4. All requirements of other governmental units have been complied
with.
c. Other Governmental Approvals. Any preliminary approval required for
County subdivision approval or any other County, State or Federal
approval shall be submitted by the applicant for review and approval.
The approving authority shall not take final action until approval is
granted by the governmental agency or a statement is issued
authorizing the municipal approving authority to proceed in its
application, except as provided in subsection 36-3.5 herein.
d. Public Hearings. Upon submission of a perfected application, the
approving authority shall schedule a public hearing for the applicant.
The applicant shall meet all of the requirements established in
subsection 36-3.3c for public hearings.
e. Time Period in Which to Act. The approving authority shall grant,
condition or deny preliminary subdivision approval within 45 days of
receipt of a perfected and complete application or within such further
time as may be consented to by the applicant for a subdivision of 10 or
§ 36-6.3 KEARNY CODE § 36-6.3
AO:784
§ 36-6.4. Effect of Preliminary Approval. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-21]
fewer lots, or 95 days for a subdivision containing more than 10 lots.
Failure of the approving authority to act within the prescribed time
periods or to obtain an extension from the applicant, in writing, shall
constitute a preliminary approval by the approving authority.
f. Applicant's Responsibilities. Prior to approving authority acceptance of
a preliminary subdivision, the applicant shall be required to:
1. Enter into a developer's agreement, prepared by the approving
authority attorney, setting forth the obligations of all parties.
2. Enter into a performance guaranty agreement, in a form
satisfactory to the approving authority and Town, complying with
Sections 36-13 and 36-14 where appropriate, guaranteeing
performance of the developer's agreement, where appropriate.
3. Convey any easements, rights-of-way or public lands in a form and
under conditions satisfactory to the approving authority and the
Town.
4. Provide evidence that environmental elements relating to soil
erosion and sedimentation, preservation of trees, protection of
watercourses and water quality noise pollution, topographic
limitation areas, wetland areas and other environmental and
ecological facts have been reviewed, where appropriate, so as to
minimize adverse effects.
a. If the approving authority acts favorably on a preliminary plat, the
applicant shall submit four copies of a correct map to the administrative
officer. The Chairman and Secretary shall affix their signatures to the
plat, with a notation that it has received preliminary approval, and one
such plat shall be returned to the applicant for compliance with final
approval requirements.
b. Except as provided herein, preliminary approval of a major subdivision
shall confer the following rights for a three-year period from the date of
approval to the applicant:
1. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements, except that nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the Town from modifying, by ordinance, such general
terms and conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public
health and safety.
2. That the applicant may submit for final approval, on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval, the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat, as the case may be.
§ 36-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-6.4
AO:785
§ 36-7. FINAL APPROVAL OF MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
§ 36-7.1. Submission of Application. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-22]
Ten copies of an application shall be submitted to the administrative officer
in writing on forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt of an
application for final approval shall be filed no less than 14 days prior to the
regular meeting of the approving authority. Required fees, as provided in
Section 36-3, shall be submitted with the application form.
§ 36-7.2. Plat Requirements. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-23]
3. That the applicant may apply for and the approving authority may
grant extensions on such preliminary approval for additional
periods of at least one year but not to exceed a total extension of
two years, provided that if the design standards have been revised
by ordinance, such revised standards shall govern beyond the
three-year period.
c. In the case of a subdivision of 50 acres or more, the approving authority
may grant the rights referred to in paragraphs b.1, b.2 and b.3 above
for such a period of time longer than three years as shall be determined
by the approving authority to be reasonable, taking into consideration
the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under preliminary approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may apply for
thereafter and the approving authority may thereafter grant an
extension to preliminary approval for such additional period of time as
shall be determined by the approving authority to be reasonable, taking
into consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under preliminary approval, the potential number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the section or sections
awaiting final approval, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development, provided that if the design
standards have been revised, such revised standards shall govern
beyond the three-year period.
d. Failure to obtain final approval within the prescribed time limits as
herein defined shall void the preliminary plat approval.
a. Ten print copies shall be submitted for final subdivision approval.
Unless the preliminary plat is approved without changes, the final plat
shall have incorporated all changes or modifications required by the
approving authority.
b. Final Plat Details. The final plat shall be drawn at a scale of not less
than one inch equals 50 feet and in compliance with all the provisions of
the Map Filing Act, P.L. 1960, c. 141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.). The
final plat shall show or be accompanied by the following:
§ 36-6.4 KEARNY CODE § 36-7.2
AO:786
1. Date, name and location of the subdivision, the name of the owner,
graphic scale and reference meridian.
2. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land reserved or dedicated to
public use, all lot lines and other site lines; with accurate
dimensions, bearing or deflection angles and radii, arcs and central
angles of all curves; and the area of each lot.
3. The names, exact locations and widths of all existing and recorded
streets intersecting or paralleling the plot boundaries within a
distance of 200 feet.
4. The purpose of any easement or land reserved for or dedicated to
public use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites, other
than residential, shall be noted.
5. Lot, block and street numbers as approved by the Town Engineer,
including lot and block numbers of abutting property.
6. Minimum building setback line on all lots and other sites.
7. Location and description of all monuments.
8. Names of the owners of adjoining unsubdivided land.
9. Certification by the applicant's surveyor and engineer as to
accuracy of details of plat.
10. Certification that the applicant is the agent or owner of the land or
that the owner has given consent under an option agreement.
11. When approval of a plat is required by any other officer or body of a
municipality, County or State, such approval shall be certified on
the plat, or evidence shall be submitted that an application has
been made for such approval.
12. Proposed final grades of all streets shall be shown to a scale of one
inch equals five feet vertical and one inch equals 50 feet horizontal,
on sheets 22 inches by 36 inches, and drawings shall include both
plans and profiles and shall show elevations of all monuments
referred to United States Coast and Geodetic Survey level bench
marks, and such elevations shall be shown in feet and hundredths
of a foot.
13. Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
14. Certificate from the Tax Collector that all taxes are paid to date.
15. Written proof that the lands set aside or shown for easement,
public use or streets are free and clear of all liens and
encumbrances.
§ 36-7.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-7.2
AO:787
§ 36-7.3. Procedural Requirements. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-24]
16. Contours at five-foot intervals for slopes averaging 10% or greater
and at two foot intervals for land of lesser slope.
a. Final Subdivision Plat Review.
1. The applicant shall submit the completed application and maps and
the payment of all required fees to the administrative officer, who
shall submit copies of same to:
(a) Town Engineer.
(b) Board of Health.
(c) Construction Official.
(d) Tax Assessor.
(e) County Planning Board.
(f) Approving authority attorney.
(g) Town Clerk.
2. The above persons and boards shall make recommendations in
writing to the approving authority within 14 days of the application
submission.
b. Determination as to Compliance. The Town Engineer and the approving
authority attorney, where appropriate, shall advise the approving
authority of the following:
1. The nature of the improvements to be required as a condition of
final approval.
2. The estimated value of the improvements installed or to be
installed.
3. The nature and amount of performance or maintenance guaranties,
if any, to be required as a condition to final approval.
4. The provisions of open space reservation or dedication and the
standards for open space organizations.
5. The amounts to be deposited to reimburse the approving authority
and the Town for costs incurred for legal, engineering, planning
and other professional reviews and work, for recording fees and for
any other costs anticipated by the approving agency, where
applicable.
6. Any other conditions upon which final approval will be granted or
conditioned.
§ 36-7.2 KEARNY CODE § 36-7.3
AO:788
c. Applicant's Responsibilities. The applicant shall be required to submit
the following for the approving authority approval:
1. Maintenance guaranties, if any, for work completed prior to final
approval.
2. Evidence of compliance with any other conditions imposed by the
approving authority or other governmental agency or utility.
3. Proof that all required fees and escrow funds have been paid as
required herein.
4. Proof that no taxes or assessments for local improvements are due
or delinquent on property for which final subdivision approval is
sought.
d. Other Governmental Approvals. Any final approval required for County
subdivision approval and any other County, State or Federal approval
shall be submitted by the applicant for review and approval. The
approving authority shall not take any final action until approval is
granted by the governmental agency or a statement is issued
authorizing the municipal approving authority to proceed in its
application, except as provided in subsection 36-3.5 herein.
e. Approving Authority Action.
1. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete and perfected application to the
administrative officer or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the approving authority to
act within the period prescribed shall constitute final approval, and
a certificate of the Town Clerk as to the failure of the approving
authority to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it
shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other
evidence of approval and shall be so accepted by the County
Recording Officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
2. Unless the preliminary plat has been approved without changes,
the final plat shall incorporate all changes or modifications
required by the approving authority.
3. The final plat shall be accompanied by a certificate of the Town
Engineer that he is in receipt of a map which shows all utilities in
exact location and elevation and which identifies the utilities
already installed. The certificate shall also state:
(a) That the applicant has installed all required improvements; or
(b) That the applicant has posted a performance guaranty with the
Town Clerk in sufficient amount and proper form to assure the
completion of all required improvements.
§ 36-7.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-7.3
AO:789
§ 36-7.4. Effect of Final Approval. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-25]
4. If the approving authority approves the final plat, a notation to that
effect shall be made on each plat and shall be signed by the
Chairman and Secretary of the approving authority.
5. Copies of the final plat shall be filed by the approving authority
with the following:
(a) Administrative officer of the approving authority.
(b) Town Engineer.
(c) Construction Official.
(d) Tax Assessor.
(e) Town Clerk.
(f) County Planning Board.
(g) County Board of Taxation.
(h) Other governmental units or municipal officials where
required.
f. Filing of Final Subdivision Approval Plats.
1. Final subdivision approval shall expire 95 days from the date of
signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have
been duly filed by the applicant with the County Recording Officer.
2. The approving authority may for good and sufficient cause shown
extend the period of recording for an additional period not to
exceed 190 days from the date of signing the plat.
3. No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the County
Recording Officer until it has been approved by the approving
authority as indicated on the instrument by the signature of the
Chairman and Secretary of the approving authority or a certificate
has been issued pursuant to the provisions of c. 291, P.L. 1975. The
signatures of the Chairman and Secretary of the approving
authority shall not be affixed until the developer has posted the
guaranties required pursuant to Sections 36-13 and 36-14, where
appropriate. If the County Recording Officer records any plat
without such approval, such recording shall be deemed null and
void and, upon request of the Town of Kearny, the plat shall be
expunged from the official records.
4. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54c, it shall be the duty of the
County Recording Officer to notify the approving authority, in
writing, within seven days of the filing of any plat, identifying such
instrument by its title, date of filing and official number.
§ 36-7.3 KEARNY CODE § 36-7.4
AO:790
§ 36-8. (RESERVED)
§ 36-9. SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
§ 36-9.1. Application of Requirements. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-26]
§ 36-9.2. Types of Development Requiring Site Plan Approval;
Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-27; Ord. No. 1999-O-5 §§ 1, 2]
a. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary subdivision
approval first granted and all other rights conferred upon the applicant
pursuant to subsection 36-6.4 of this chapter, whether conditionally or
otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date
of final approval, provided that the rights conferred by this section shall
expire if the plat has not been duly recorded within the required time
period. If the applicant has followed the standards prescribed for final
approval and has duly recorded the plat as required, the approving
authority may extend such period of protection for extensions of one
year, but not to exceed three extensions. Notwithstanding any other
provisions of this chapter, the granting of final approval terminates the
time period of preliminary approval pursuant to subsection 36-6.4
herein for the section granted final approval.
b. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned development or
planned residential development or residential cluster of 50 acres or
conventional subdivision of 150 acres or more, the approving authority
may grant the rights referred to in paragraph a of this subsection for
such time period, no longer than two years, as shall be determined by
the approving agency to be reasonable, taking into consideration the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under final approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness
of the development. The applicant may apply thereafter, and the
approving authority may thereafter grant, an extension of final approval
for such additional period of time as shall be determined by the
approving authority to be reasonable, taking into consideration the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under final approval, the number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area remaining to be developed, economic conditions and the
comprehensiveness of the development.
a. Except as provided herein, no building or excavation permit shall be
issued for a building, structure or use or any enlargement, expansion or
change of use unless a site plan is first submitted and approved by the
approving authority.
b. No certificate of occupancy shall be given unless all construction and
conditions conform to the site plan as approved, unless conditionally
approved by the approving authority as provided herein.
§ 36-7.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-9.2
AO:791
§ 36-9.2A. Application for Building Permit Exempt from Review
That Changes Footprint of an Existing or Pre-Existing Structure.
[Ord. No. 2010-18 §§ 1 — 5]
a. Site plan review shall not be required for single family or two family
detached dwellings or for such accessory uses as a private garage,
toolhouse, garden and private greenhouses, swimming pools and other
similar uses incidental to a single family or two family detached
dwelling or for similar improvements as accessory uses to a principal
use.
b. Site plan approval shall not be required where:
1. Minor repairs to the interior of a building do not involve structural
change or enlargement of the building, as determined by the
Construction Official.
2. Renovations or alterations to the exterior design of a building or
structure do not involve any enlargement of the building or major
structural change, as determined by the Construction Official.
3. In the M, L-I and SKM Zones, the relocation of an underground
petroleum product storage tank to an aboveground location which
does not alter the arrangement of parking and circulation.
c. However, the Construction Official, at his discretion, may refer any
application for a building permit to the approving authority for site plan
approval, paragraphs b.1, b.2 and b.3 notwithstanding, where in the
Construction Official's judgment the construction, reconstruction,
alteration or change of use will affect circulation, water supply, sewage
disposal, drainage, landscaping, signs, lighting, off-street parking or
loading or the lack of any or all of these factors, environmental factors
and other considerations as specified in this chapter.
d. Except as provided in paragraph b.1, b.2 and b.3 herein, all
construction, reconstruction, alteration or enlargement of a building,
structure or use or a change of use or occupancy on or in a
nonconforming structure, use or lot shall require site plan approval.
a. Notice to Owners of Adjacent Properties.
1. Except as set forth in paragraph 2 below, all applications for
building permits that are exempt from site plan review pursuant to
subsection 36-9.2a but which will change the building footprint of
the primary structure and/or increase the footprint of an accessory
structure, shall be subject to the requirements of paragraphs 3
through 5 below.
2. The requirements of paragraphs 3 through 5 shall not apply to
work that was approved by the Planning Board or Zoning Board in
a public hearing.
§ 36-9.2 KEARNY CODE § 36-9.2A
AO:792
§ 36-9.3. Filing for Preliminary Approval. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-28]
§ 36-9.4. Procedural Requirements for Preliminary Approval. [Ord.
No. 2-9-77 § 127-29]
3. When an application is submitted for work that meets the
requirements of paragraph 1, the Construction Code Official shall
send notice to each property owner that owns land that borders on
the property where the work will be done. That notice shall advise
the adjoining owners that (i) applications can be reviewed at the
Building Department and (ii) they can submit, within 10 days, any
evidence that they believe renders the application for a building
permit inaccurate. This includes but is not limited to surveys or
other evidence that demonstrates that the proposed work will
violate setback requirements.
4. If no objections are received, the Construction Code Official may
issue the building permit, provided that all other Code
requirements are met.
5. If objections are received, the Construction Code Official shall
advise the Mayor and Council of the objections and the Mayor and
Council may advise the Construction Code Official of the
recommended course of action; provided, however that the
Construction Code Official shall not be required to take any action
that is not in conformity with the Uniform Construction Code. If the
Mayor and Council do not act within 20 days of referral by the
Construction Code Official, the Construction Code Official shall act
in the manner deemed appropriate under the Uniform Construction
Code.
a. An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer in
writing, in triplicate, on forms supplied by the approving authority.
Receipt of an application for preliminary site plan approval shall be
filed no less than 14 days prior to the regular meeting date of the
approving authority. Required fees, as provided in Section 36-3, shall be
submitted with the application form.
b. The approving authority shall accept simultaneous applications for
preliminary and final site plan approval where so requested by the
applicant, provided that all of the conditions, requirements and
safeguards established for preliminary and final site plan approval are
adhered to.
a. Preliminary Site Plan Review.
1. The applicant shall submit the preliminary site plan application and
plat maps and payment of all required fees to the administrative
officer, who shall submit copies of the preliminary plat to the
following:
§ 36-9.2A ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-9.4
AO:793
(a) Approving authority attorney.
(b) Town Engineer.
(c) Planning Consultant.
(d) Construction Official.
(e) Secretary of Board of Health.
(f) Superintendent of Public Works.
(g) Fire Department.
(h) Police Department.
(i) Water Purveyor.
(j) Shade Tree Commission.
(k) Beautification and Environmental Committee.
2. The professionals and boards shall make recommendations to the
approving authority in writing within 14 days of the application
submission. The approving authority shall take the
recommendations into account, but shall have the authority to
proceed in the absence of such recommendations which are not
essential to its determination.
3. If the preliminary site plan is found to be incomplete, the applicant
shall be notified thereof within 35 days of the date of submission, or
it shall be deemed to be perfected as to content.
4. Where adjustments or changes are required in the site plan
submission, the applicant shall be required to modify the plat in
order to qualify as a perfected application as to content and for
public hearing purposes.
b. Other Governmental Approvals. Any preliminary site plan approval
required for County site plan approval or for any other County, State or
Federal agency shall be submitted by the applicant for review and
approval. The approving authority shall not take any final action until
approval is granted by the governmental agency or a statement is
issued authorizing the municipal approving authority to proceed in its
application, except as provided in subsection 36-3.5.
c. Public Hearings. Upon submission of a perfected application, the
approving authority shall schedule a public hearing for the applicant.
The applicant shall meet all of the requirements established in
subsection 36-3.3c for public hearings.
d. Time Period in Which to Act.
1. The approving authority shall grant, condition or deny preliminary
site plan approval within 45 days of receipt of a perfected and
§ 36-9.4 KEARNY CODE § 36-9.4
AO:794
§ 36-9.5. Effect of Preliminary Approval. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-30]
complete site plan application for a site plan of 10 acres or less
or within 95 days of submission of a perfected and complete
application for a site plan of more than 10 acres or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant for both
classes of site plans.
2. Failure of the approving authority to act within the prescribed time
periods or to obtain an extension from the applicant, in writing,
shall constitute a preliminary approval by the approving authority.
a. Preliminary approval of a site plan shall confer upon the applicant the
following rights for a three-year period from the date of the preliminary
approval:
1. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and on-tract
and off-tract improvements; and any requirements peculiar to the
specific site plan. The municipality may modify, by ordinance, such
general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as they may
relate to public health and safety, provided that such modifications
are in accord with amendments adopted by ordinance subsequent
to approval.
2. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary site plan.
3. That the applicant may apply for and the approving authority may
grant extensions on such preliminary approval for an additional
period of one year, but not to exceed a total extension of two years,
provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
b. In the case of a site plan for an area of 50 acres or more, the approving
authority may grant the rights referred to in paragraphs a.1, a.2 and a.3
above for such a time period, longer than three years, as shall be
determined by one approving authority to be reasonable, taking into
consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under preliminary approval, economic conditions and
the comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may apply
for thereafter and the approving authority may thereafter grant an
extension to preliminary approval for such additional period of time as
shall be determined by the approving authority to be reasonable, taking
into consideration the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor
area permissible under preliminary approval, the potential number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the section or sections
awaiting final approval, economic conditions and the
§ 36-9.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-9.5
AO:795
§ 36-9.6. Filing for Final Approval. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-31]
An application shall be submitted to the administrative officer in writing,
in triplicate, on forms supplied by the approving authority. Receipt of an
application for final approval of a site plan shall be filed no less than 14 days
prior to the regular meeting date of the approving authority. Required fees,
as provided in Section 36-3, shall be submitted with the application form.
§ 36-9.7. Procedural Requirements for Final Approval. [Ord. No.
2-9-77 § 127-32]
comprehensiveness of the development, provided that if the design
standards have been revised, such revised standards may govern.
c. Failure to obtain final approval within the prescribed time limits as
herein defined shall void the preliminary plat approval.
a. Final Site Plan Review.
1. The applicant shall submit the final site plan application and plat
maps and payment of all required fees to the administrative officer,
who shall submit copies of the plat to the following:
(a) Approving authority attorney.
(b) Secretary of Board of Health.
(c) Town Engineer.
(d) Planning Consultant.
(e) Construction Official.
(f) Superintendent of Public Works.
(g) Shade Tree Commission.
(h) Beautification and Environmental Committee.
2. The professionals and boards shall make recommendations to the
approving authority, in writing, within 14 days of the application
submission. The approving authority shall take the
recommendations into account, but shall have the authority to
proceed in the absence of such recommendations if the approving
authority finds such recommendations not to be essential to its
determination.
b. The approving authority shall approve the application for final site plan
approval with or without conditions, provided that the following
requirements have been met:
1. The detailed drawings, specifications and estimates meet all
applicable codes and ordinances.
§ 36-9.5 KEARNY CODE § 36-9.7
AO:796
§ 36-9.8. Effect of Final Approval. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-33]
2. The final plans are substantially the same as the approved
preliminary site plan and conditions governing same.
3. All improvements have been installed or bonds posted to ensure the
installation of improvements.
4. The applicant agrees, in writing, to all conditions of final approval.
5. Proof has been submitted that no taxes or assessment for local
improvements are due or delinquent on property for which final
site plan approval is sought.
6. All applicable fees have been paid prior to any final action by the
approving authority.
7. Requirements of other governmental units have been complied
with.
c. Other Governmental Approvals. Any final site plan approval required
for County approval or any other County, State or Federal agency
approval shall be submitted by the applicant for review and approval.
The approving authority shall not take any final action until approval is
granted by the governmental agency or a statement is issued
authorizing the municipal approving authority to proceed in its
application, except as provided in subsection 36-3.5 herein.
d. Time Period in Which to Act.
1. The approving authority shall grant, condition or deny final site
plan approval within 45 days of receipt of a perfected and complete
site plan application or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant.
2. Failure of the approving authority to act within the prescribed time
period or to obtain an extension from the applicant, in writing, shall
constitute final approval, and a certificate of the Town Clerk as to
the failure of the approving authority to act shall be issued on
request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the
written endorsement or other evidence of approval.
e. Final Site Plan Approval Authorization. Upon approval of the site
development plan and upon compliance with all conditions, the Town
Engineer and the Chairman and the Secretary of the approving
authority shall be authorized to sign the plan, and the Secretary shall
affix the seal of the Board. The tracing shall be and remain a permanent
record of the approving authority, and the applicant shall supply to the
approving authority the number of prints reasonably required for its
records. A print shall be forwarded to each of the professionals
identified in paragraph a above.
§ 36-9.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-9.8
AO:797
§ 36-9.9. Additional Site Plan Elements. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-34;
Ord. No. 2003-(O)-40]
a. Final approval shall terminate the time period of preliminary approval
for the section granted final approval and shall guarantee the applicant
the zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval and all
other rights conferred upon the applicant as part of preliminary
approval, which shall not be changed for a period of two years after the
date of final approval.
b. Final approval shall expire two years from the date of final approval
unless the applicant has secured a building permit to commence
construction. The approving authority may extend final approval and
the protection offered under subsection 36-9.7 for one year. Up to three
such extensions may be granted.
c. In the case of a site plan for a planned development of 50 acres, or
conventional site plan for 150 acres or more, the approving authority
may extend the rights granted under final approval for such period of
time, longer than two years, as shall be determined by the approving
authority to be reasonable, taking into consideration the number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under final
approval, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development. The applicant may apply for thereafter, and the approving
authority may thereafter grant, an extension of final approval for such
additional time as shall be determined by the approving authority to be
reasonable taking into consideration the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, the number
of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area remaining to be
developed, economic conditions and the comprehensiveness of the
development.
d. The approving authority may, as a condition of final approval:
1. Grant final approval only for designated geographic sections of the
development.
2. Grant final approval for certain work but require resubmission for
final approval for designated elements, such as but not limited to
landscaping, signs, street furniture, etc., and require approval of
these elements as a prerequisite for a certificate of occupancy of
zoning permit.
3. Condition the granting of a certificate of occupancy or zoning
permit subject to the applicant or developer or subsequent heirs or
assignees meeting certain requirements within a designated period
of time, not to exceed one year from the date of issuance of the
certificate of occupancy or zoning permit. This may include but is
not limited to the installation of improvements, reevaluation of
circulation patterns, etc.
§ 36-9.8 KEARNY CODE § 36-9.9
AO:798
§ 36-10. DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISIONS.
§ 36-10.1. General Requirements. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-35]
§ 36-10.2. Streets. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-36]
The arrangement of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official Map
shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of existing streets
or with a minimum right-of-way of 50 feet.
a. Site Plan Amendments. Amended site plan applications shall be filed
with the approving authority and shall be considered at the next regular
meeting date of the approving authority, provided that the amended
application is received no less than 14 days before the meeting date and
that the amendments are minor in nature.
b. Compliance.
1. All proposed improvements of development indicated on the
approved site plan shall meet the requirements of all applicable
codes, ordinances and specifications of the community, County,
State or Federal governments and other agencies with jurisdiction
over matters pertaining to site development.
2. It shall be the joint responsibility of the Town Engineer and the
Construction Official to enforce their respective rules and
regulations to ensure compliance with the site plan approval map
and other specified conditions as may be imposed on the
development.
c. Site Plan Binding. The site plan, as approved by the approving
authority, shall be binding upon the applicant. Any changes from the
approved plan shall require resubmission and reapproval by the
approving authority, except as provided in paragraph a above.
d. Revocation of Building Permit, Certificate of Occupancy, or Zoning
Permit. In the event of a failure to comply with any condition of site plan
approval, the Construction Code Official, on his own initiative or upon
recommendation from the Engineer, may revoke the building permit,
certificate of occupancy or zoning permit, as the case may be, and seek
to enjoin the violation or take such other steps as permitted by law.
a. The applicant shall observe the following requirements and principles
of land subdivision in each subdivision or portion thereof.
b. The subdivision plat shall conform to the design standards that will
encourage good development patterns within the Town. Where either
an Official Map or Master Plan or both have been adopted, the
subdivision shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown
thereon. The streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks
and playgrounds shown on an adopted Master Plan or Official Map shall
be considered an approval of subdivision plats.
§ 36-9.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-10.2
AO:799
a. Minor Streets. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage
through traffic unless deemed necessary by the approving authority.
b. Regional Highways. Subdivisions abutting regional highways may be
required to provide a marginal service road or reverse frontage with a
buffer strip for planting, or some other means of separation of through
and local traffic as the approving authority may determine to be
appropriate.
c. Pavement Width of Streets. The pavement width of all streets shall be a
minimum of 30 feet for all local streets and may be greater for collector
and arterial streets.
d. Minimum Right-of-Way Width. The right-of-way width shall be
measured from lot line to lot line and shall not be less than 50 feet in
either case, except when shown at a greater width on the Master Plan
or Official Map of the Town of Kearny or the street constitutes an
extension of an existing street with a greater width than 50 feet.
e. Substandard Street Right-of-Way and Pavement Width. In connection
with subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not
conform to widths as shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or the
street width requirements of this chapter, the applicant shall dedicate
additional right-of-way or pavement width along either one or both
sides of the road. If the subdivision is along one side only, 1/2 of the
required extra width shall be dedicated.
f. Street Grades. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed
6%. Grades on other streets shall not exceed 10%. No street shall have
a minimum grade of less than 1/2%.
g. Street Intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right
angles as is possible and in no case shall be less than 60°. The block
corners at intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with a curve
having a radius of not less than 20 feet.
h. Street Jogs. Street jogs shall have center-line offsets of not less than
125 feet.
i. Reverse-Curve Tangents. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be
introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets.
j. Street Line Deflection. When connecting street lines deflect from each
other at any one point by more than 10° and not more than 45°, they
shall be connected by a curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for
minor streets and 300 feet for arterial and collector streets.
k. Changes in Grade. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical
curves of sufficient radius to provide a smooth transition and proper
sight distance.
l. Cul-de-Sac Streets. Dead-end streets (cul-de-sacs) shall not be longer
than 600 feet and shall provide a turnaround at the end with a radius of
§ 36-10.2 KEARNY CODE § 36-10.2
AO:800
§ 36-10.3. Block Patterns. [Ord. 2-9-77 § 127-37]
§ 36-10.4. Lots. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-38]
not less than 50 feet and tangent whenever possible to the right side
of the street. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a singular
turnaround shall be provided and provisions made for future extension
of the street and reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining
properties.
m. Street Names. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so
nearly duplicate as to be confused with the names of existing streets.
The continuation of an existing street shall have the same name. The
Police Department shall approve the names of all streets.
n. Sidewalks. Where sidewalks are required, there shall be provided a
minimum walkway width of four feet constructed in accordance with
the requirements of the Town Engineer.
a. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the Zoning
Ordinance and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and
safety of street traffic.
b. In blocks of 1,000 or more feet in length, pedestrian crosswalks nay be
required in locations deemed necessary by the approving authority.
Such walkways shall be at least 10 feet wide in right-of-way with a fivefoot-
wide improved pavement surface. The walkway may also include
other improvements, including streetlighting.
c. For all uses, including commercial, industrial and planned development
group areas, block size shall be sufficient to accommodate the proposed
uses and to permit reasonable access, circulation and fire-fighting and
emergency services.
a. Lot dimensions and areas shall not be less than the requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance.
b. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets and radial to curved streets.
c. Each lot must front upon an approved and improved street with a rightof-
way width of at least 50 feet in width, except as provided herein.
d. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra-width line, and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
e. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to such factors such as rock formations, drainage
conditions, watercourses, historic sites, flood conditions or similar
§ 36-10.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-10.4
AO:801
§ 36-10.5. Public Use and Service Areas; Floodways. [Ord. No.
2-9-77 § 127-39]
§ 36-10.6. Water Mains, Culverts and Storm and Sanitary Sewers.
[Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-40]
All installations of water mains, culverts and storm and sanitary sewers
shall be connected with an approved system and shall be adequate to handle
all present and probable future development.
§ 36-10.7. Underground Utilities. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-41]
circumstances, the approving authority may, after adequate
investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
a. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourses and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose.
b. Natural features, such as trees, brooks, hilltops and views shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing
such features.
c. Any public use as defined herein shall be of suitable size, shape and
location under the provision of reservation contained herein.
d. In a large-scale development, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such easements shall
be at least 15 feet wide and shall be located in consultation with the
utility companies or municipal departments concerned.
a. For all major subdivision, the applicant shall arrange with the serving
utility for the underground installation of all utility distribution supply
lines and service connections in accordance with the provisions of the
applicable standard terms and conditions incorporated as a part of its
tariffs as the same are then on file with the State of New Jersey, Board
of Public Utility Commissioners, and shall submit to the approving
authority prior to the granting of final approval a written instrument
from each serving utility which shall evidence full compliance with the
provisions of this subsection; provided, however, that lots in such
subdivisions which abut existing streets where overhead electric or
telephone distribution supply lines have theretofore been installed on
any portion of the streets involved may be supplied with electric and
telephone service from such overhead lines, but the service connections
from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed underground. The
location of access facilities for servicing the utility in the proposed
subdivision shall be developed in conjunction with and as a part of the
complete subdivision plan.
§ 36-10.4 KEARNY CODE § 36-10.7
AO:802
§ 36-10.8. Topsoil Protection, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control.
[Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-42]
§ 36-11. SITE PLAN DETAILS.
§ 36-11.1. Required Information. [Ord. 2-9-77 § 127-43]
b. Whenever the utility is not installed in the public right-of-way, an
appropriate utility easement not less than 20 feet in width shall be
provided.
c. The approving authority may in its discretion waive the installation of
the underground utilities where such installation will result in peculiar
and exceptional practical difficulties to or exceptional and undue
hardship upon the applicant by reason of exceptional topographic
conditions or by reason of their extraordinary and exceptional situation
or condition of the lands in such subdivision.
d. Whenever underground utilities are installed in accordance with the
provisions hereof, fire alarm systems servicing the development shall
also be installed in an appropriate subsurface distribution system
connecting the necessary alarm stations. The manner of installation and
the number and location of alarm stations shall be in a manner
approved by the Fire Department.
a. No topsoil shall be removed from the site or used as spoil. Topsoil
moved during the course of construction shall be redistributed so as to
provide at least six inches of cover to all areas of the subdivision and
shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
b. All applications for subdivision shall be in accordance with the Kearny
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance, or, where same has not
been adopted, the applicant shall meet the requirements of Chapter
251, Laws of 1975, the New Jersey Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act. The applicant shall provide evidence of approval from the Soil
Conservation Service, where applicable, prior to action by the
approving authority or required public hearings.
a. All applications for site plan approval shall be prepared, signed and
sealed by a professional engineer or architect. They shall bear the
signature and seal of a licensed land surveyor as to topographic and
boundary survey data.
b. All site plans shall comply with the requirements hereinafter set forth
and shall contain the following information and data where applicable.
1. A title block shall be indicated in the lower right-hand corner of the
plan and shall include the name and address of the record owner;
the name and address of the applicant, including the block and lot
number of the site; the title of the development; and the name,
address, license number and seal of the person preparing the plan.
§ 36-10.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-11.1
AO:803
If the owner is a corporation, the name and address of the
president and secretary shall be submitted with the application.
2. A date block of the site plan adjacent to the title block containing
the date of preparation. All subsequent revisions shall be noted and
dated.
3. A key map showing the location of the tract with reference to
surrounding properties, existing railroads, streets, streams, rivers,
drainage rights-of-way and water or utility rights-of-way or
easements within 500 feet of the boundaries of the subject
premises.
4. A scale of not less than 50 feet to the inch shall be used and a
graphic representation of the scale shall be displayed, and a North
arrow. All distances and dimensions shall be in feet and decimals of
a foot and all bearings shall be given to the nearest 10 seconds.
5. A map indicating all parcels and lots, together with the names of all
owners of adjacent property within 200 feet of the subject premises
with the respective block and lot numbers of the properties, as
shown on the current municipal tax records.
6. Zone boundaries shall be shown on the site plan as they affect the
parcel. Adjacent zone districts within 200 feet shall also be
indicated. Such features may be shown on a separate map or as a
key on the detail map itself.
7. Property lines of the entire property, required building setback
lines and lines of existing and proposed streets, lots, reservations,
easements and areas dedicated to public use, including grants,
restrictions and rights-of-way. The total area of the subject property
shall be indicated in square feet.
8. Reference to any existing covenants that are in effect or are
intended to cover all or any of the tract. A copy of such covenants,
deed restrictions, easements or exceptions shall be submitted with
the application. If there are no known covenants, deed restrictions,
easements or exceptions affecting the site, a notation to that effect
shall be indicated on the site plan.
9. Location of existing buildings on the site which shall remain and all
other structures, such as walls, fences, culverts, bridges, roadways,
etc., with spot elevations of such structures. Structures to be
removed shall be indicated by dashed lines; structures to remain
shall be indicated by solid lines.
10. Right-of-way and pavement widths of all streets upon which the
subject property has access. All distances as measured along the
right-of-way lines of existing streets abutting the property to the
nearest intersection with any other street.
§ 36-11.1 KEARNY CODE § 36-11.1
AO:804
11. Location plans and elevations of all proposed buildings and other
structures, including required yard and setback areas, building
height in feet and stories and lot coverage calculations.
12. Location, height, dimensions and details of all signs either
freestanding or affixed to a building. Where signs are not to be
provided, a notation to that effect shall be indicated on the site
plan.
13. Location of all storm drainage structures, including rim and invert
elevations, and sediment control devices and utility lines whether
publicly or privately owned, with pipe sizes, grades and direction of
flow; and, if any existing utility lines are underground, the
estimated location of the already underground utility lines shall be
shown.
14. Existing and proposed contours, referred to United States Coast
and Geodetic Survey datum, with a contour interval of one foot for
slopes of 3% or less; an interval of two feet for slopes of more than
3% but less than 15%; and an interval of five feet for slopes of 15%
or more. Existing contours are to be shown by dashed lines and
proposed contours are to be clearly indicated by solid lines.
15. Location of existing rock outcrops, high points, watercourses,
depressions, woodland areas and other significant existing
features, including previous flood elevations of watercourses where
available and ponds and marsh areas as may be determined by
survey.
16. All proposed streets with profiles indicating grading; and cross
sections showing width of roadway, location and width of sidewalk,
where required, and location and size of utility lines according to
community standards and specifications.
17. The proposed use or uses of land and buildings and proposed
location of buildings, including proposed grades. Floor space of all
buildings and estimated number of employees, housing units or
other capacity measurements, where required, shall also be
indicated. If the precise use of the building is unknown at the time
of application, an amended plan showing the proposed use shall be
required prior to a certificate of occupancy.
18. All means of vehicular ingress and egress to and from the site onto
public or private streets, showing the size and location of driveways
and curb cuts, including the possible organization of traffic
channels, acceleration and deceleration lanes, additional width and
other traffic controls which may be required. Improvements, such
as roads, curbs, sidewalks and other design detail, shall be
indicated, including dimensions of parking stalls, access aisles,
curb radii, direction of traffic flow and other conditions as may be
required in the Zoning Ordinance or this chapter.
§ 36-11.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-11.1
AO:805
§ 36-11.2. Legends to be Indicated. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-44]
The following legends shall be indicated on the site plan.
19. The location and design of any off-street parking areas or loading
areas showing size and location of bays, aisles and barriers.
20. The location of all proposed waterlines, valves and hydrants and all
sewer lines or alternative means of water supply or sewage
disposal and treatment in conformance with the applicable
municipal standards and appropriate utility companies, where
applicable, including rim and invert elevations.
21. The proposed location, direction of illumination, power and time of
proposed outdoor lighting in conformance with applicable
standards of the community, including type of standards to be
employed, radius of light and intensity in footcandles.
22. The proposed screening and landscaping and a planting plan
indicating natural vegetation to remain and areas to be planted and
type of vegetation to be utilized.
23. The proposed stormwater drainage system as to conform with
designs based on a fifteen-year storm, using a one hour intensity of
2.0 inches. All site plans shall be accompanied by a plan sketch
showing all existing drainage within 500 feet of any boundary, and
all areas such as paved areas, grassed areas, wooded areas and any
other surface area contributing to the calculations and methods
used in the determination.
24. Such other information or data as may be required by the
approving authority in order to determine that the details of the
site plan are in accordance with the standards of the Zoning
Ordinance or standards contained herein.
25. Such other information or data as may be required by the
approving authority for determination that the details of the site
plan are in accordance with all applicable municipal, County and
State ordinances and regulations.
a. To be signed before submission:
I CONSENT TO THE FILING OF THIS SITE PLAN WITH THE
__________ OF THE TOWN OF KEARNY.
Applicant
Date
b. To be completed before submission:
SITE PLAN OF
LOT BLOCK ZONE
§ 36-11.1 KEARNY CODE § 36-11.2
AO:806
DATE SCALE
APPLICANT
ADDRESS
c. To be signed before submission:
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT I HAVE PREPARED THIS SITE PLAN AND
THAT ALL DIMENSIONS AND INFORMATION ARE CORRECT.
Name
Title and License Number
d. To be signed before issuance of building permit:
APPROVED BY THE__________ OF THE TOWN OF KEARNY.
Date
Chairperson
e. To be signed before __________ approval is given:
I HAVE REVIEWED THIS SITE PLAN AND CERTIFY THAT IT MEETS
ALL CODES AND ORDINANCES UNDER MY JURISDICTION.
Date
Engineer
f. To be signed before issuance of building permit:
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT ALL REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS HAVE
BEEN INSTALLED OR THAT A PERFORMANCE GUARANTY HAS
BEEN POSTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH § __________ OF THE SITE
PLAN ORDINANCE.
Building Inspector
Engineer
g. To be signed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy:
§ 36-11.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-11.2
AO:807
§ 36-12. DESIGN STANDARDS FOR SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
§ 36-12.1. General Requirements. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-45]
In reviewing any application for site plan approval, conditional use approval
or combinations thereof, the approving authority, advisory boards,
professional advisers and the applicant shall be guided by the general and
specific requirements contained herein.
I HEREBY CERTIFY THAT ALL THE REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS OF
THIS SITE PLAN HAVE BEEN INSTALLED IN COMPLIANCE WITH
ALL APPLICABLE CODES AND ORDINANCES.
Date
Building Inspector
Date
Engineer
OCCUPANCY PERMIT ISSUED
Date
a. Circulation.
1. The circulation system shall consider pedestrian and vehicular
traffic movement within and adjacent to the plat with particular
emphasis on the provision and layout of parking areas, off-street
loading and unloading and movement of people, goods and vehicles
from access roads, within the site and between buildings and
vehicles.
2. All parking spaces shall be usable and safely and conveniently
arranged. Access to the site from adjacent roads shall be designed
so as to interfere as little as possible with traffic flow on these roads
and to permit vehicles a rapid and safe ingress and egress to the
site.
b. Building Design and Layout. The design and layout of buildings and
parking areas shall be reviewed so as to provide an aesthetically
pleasing design and efficient arrangement. Particular attention shall be
given to safety and fire protection; impact on surrounding development
and contiguous and adjacent buildings and lands; and environmental
considerations.
c. Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided to ensure safe movement
of persons and vehicles and for security purposes. Directional lights
shall be arranged so as to minimize glare and reflection on adjacent
properties.
d. Buffering. Buffering, where required, shall be located around the
perimeter of the site to minimize headlights of vehicles, noise, light
§ 36-11.2 KEARNY CODE § 36-12.1
AO:808
§ 36-12.2. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [Ord. No. 2-9-77
§ 127-46; Ord. No. 4-10-91; Ord. No. 1999-O-5 §§ 4, 5]
from structures and the movement of people and vehicles and to shield
activities from adjacent properties. Buffering may consist of fencing,
evergreens, shrubs, bushes or deciduous trees, or combinations
thereof, to achieve the stated objectives.
e. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be provided as part of the overall plan
designed and integrated into building arrangements, topography and
parking and buffering requirements. Landscaping shall include trees,
bushes, shrubs, ground cover, perennials, annuals, plants, sculpture,
art, street furniture and the use of building and paving materials in an
imaginative manner.
f. Signs. Signs shall be designed so as to be aesthetically pleasing and
harmonious with other signs on the site and located so as to achieve
their purpose without constituting hazards to vehicles and pedestrians.
g. Utilities.
1. Storm drainage, sanitary waste disposal, water supply and solid
waste disposal shall be reviewed and considered. Particular
emphasis shall be given to the adequacy of existing systems and the
need for improvements to adequately carry runoff and sewage and
to maintain an adequate supply of water at sufficient pressure.
2. Solid waste disposal shall be reviewed to ensure frequent
collection, aesthetic considerations and protection against vermin
and rodents. All systems shall meet municipal specifications as to
installation and construction.
h. Environmental Considerations.
1. Environmental elements relating to soil erosion and sedimentation,
preservation of trees, protection of watercourses and water quality,
noise pollution, topographic limitation areas, wetland areas and
other environmental and ecological factors will be reviewed, where
appropriate, to minimize adverse development effects.
2. Provisions shall be made for the elimination of all loud and offense
noise to the general public.
a. Number of Parking Spaces Required. The number of off-street parking
spaces required shall be as set forth in the following table. If
determination of the number of required parking spaces results in a
fractional space, the fraction shall require one additional parking
space.
§ 36-12.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-12.2
AO:809
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Required Parking Spaces
Banks and savings
institutions
1 for each 300 square feet of floor area or 8
for each teller window, whichever is
greater
Bowling lanes 5 for each lane
Churches and other
places of worship
1 for each 3 seats or 1 for each 72 inches of
seating space when benches rather than
seats are used
Commercial recreation
(except for theaters and
bowling alleys)
1 for each 125 square feet
Funeral homes and
mortuaries
10 for each parlor or slumber room
Industrial and
manufacturing uses
1 for each 500 square feet of floor area or 2
for each 4 employees in the maximum
working shift, whichever is greater
Laboratory and research
uses
1 for every 300 square feet of floor area
Medical or dental clinics
or offices
4 for each doctor or dentist, plus 1 for each
employee
Motels, hotels and motor
lodges
1 for each rental unit and, in addition,
compliance with the requirements for each
particular additional use located on the
property, such as restaurants, eating and
drinking establishments, retail stores and
meeting rooms
Nursing homes,
hospitals and
convalescing homes
1 for every 2 beds, plus 1 per staff member
and employee in the maximum work shift
Offices, business and
professional (other than
medical and dental)
1 for each 250 square feet of floor area,
except that if an office use includes an area
of 1,000 square feet or greater having
more than 1 employee per 250 square feet,
the required parking shall be 0.75 spaces
for each employee providing the result is
greater than that determined by floor area
alone for the entire office space
Residential dwellings,
except one- and twofamily
dwellings
2 for each dwelling unit
§ 36-12.2 KEARNY CODE § 36-12.2
AO:810
Off-Street Parking Requirements
Use Required Parking Spaces
Restaurants, eating and
drinking establishments
and catering halls
1 for every 2 1/2 seats, plus 1 for each 2
employees
Restaurants, fast-food 1 for each 2 seats, plus 1 for each 2
employees in the maximum work shift, or a
minimum of 40 parking spaces, whichever
is greater
Retail stores, store
groups, shops and
shopping centers
1 for each 150 square feet of floor area
where the floor area shall not exceed 2,000
square feet; and 1 for each 175 square feet
of floor area where the floor area shall
exceed 2,000 square feet
Senior Citizen Housing 1 for every 3 dwelling units
Taxi dispatch offices 1 for each on-site employee in the
maximum working shift plus a minimum of
5 spaces for taxis
Theaters 1 for each 3 seats
Wholesale
establishments,
warehouses and
furniture stores
1 for each 600 square feet of floor area
Mixed land uses Mixed land uses in the same building shall
be calculated as the sum of the individual
uses unless the applicant can demonstrate
to the approving authority that the parking
characteristics of the individual uses are
such that the total needs of the
development are less than the sum of the
parts, and the number of spaces to be
provided will satisfy the lesser need
Other uses not provided
herein
To be determined by the approving
authority
b. Location of Parking Spaces. The approving authority shall approve the
location of all proposed parking spaces on the site and shall take into
consideration the size and topography of the site; visibility from the site
to the adjoining street, as well as within the parking area; conditions of
safety relating to the movement of people and vehicles; and the glare,
noise, dust and other similar considerations.
c. Parking Area Design Standards.
1. Aisle Width. Provision shall be made for the safe and adequate
circulation of pedestrians and vehicles within and adjoining the
§ 36-12.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-12.2
AO:811
subject property. The width of all aisles providing direct access to
individual parking stalls shall be in accordance with the standards
established in the following table. Only one-way traffic shall be
permitted in aisles of less than 24 feet.
Parking Angle
(degrees)
Minimum Aisle Width
(feet)
0 (parallel) 12
30 12
45 13
60 18
90 (perpendicular) 24
d. Size of Parking Stalls.
1. Parking stalls for churches, community buildings and social halls,
hospitals and nursing homes, manufacturing and industrial uses,
business and professional offices and wholesale and warehouse
establishments shall have a minimum area of 180 square feet of
space, exclusive of aisles, and shall measure nine feet in width and
20 feet in length.
2. For all other uses, there shall be a minimum area of 200 square feet
of space, exclusive of aisles, which shall measure 10 feet in width
and 20 feet in length.
e. Circulation Within Parking Area.
1. Except for attendant parking, all parking spaces shall be designed
free and clear of any obstruction to individual parking stalls.
2. Such parking spaces shall be located in such a fashion as to permit
all vehicles to exit in a safe and orderly manner. Under no condition
shall vehicles be permitted to back out of a parking lot driveway or
otherwise block the free movement of traffic within the parking
area or specific points of safety control, such as fire hydrants,
doorways, elevators or other similar locations.
3. Aisle widths and circulation patterns shall be designed to permit
emergency and service vehicles, such as delivery trucks, solid
waste collection vehicles and the like, to have reasonable access to
and space for their intended functions.
4. Pedestrian circulation within a parking area shall be, to as great an
extent as possible, separated from vehicle traffic. Safety zones,
crossing points and sidewalk areas, where warranted, shall be
provided.
§ 36-12.2 KEARNY CODE § 36-12.2
AO:812
5. The use of pedestrian carts or other similar accessory vehicles shall
not be permitted to be retained within the driving area of the
parking facility.
f. Driveway Design Criteria.
1. Location of Driveways.
(a) All entrance and exit driveways to a public or private street
shall be so located as to afford maximum safety to the roadway
and to provide for safe and convenient ingress and egress and
to minimize conflict with the flow of traffic.
(b) In no case shall there be permitted unrestricted access along
the length of a street or streets upon which the parking area
abuts.
(c) Where a site is located at the intersection of two streets, no
driveway entrance or exit shall be located within 50 feet of the
point where the curb return of the street intersection and the
curbline meet.
(d) No part of any driveway shall be located closer than 20 feet to
any other driveway on an adjoining parcel nor shall more than
one driveway be located closer than 40 feet to another
driveway on the same site as measured from the closest edge
of any two driveways along the same right-of-way line.
(e) No entrance of exit driveway shall be located on a traffic circle
or on a ramp of an interchange or within 50 feet of the
beginning of any ramp or other portion of an interchange.
2. Geometric Design. The geometric design of a driveway connection
to a public or private street shall be governed by sound traffic
engineering principals. The following guidelines are utilized in
preparing a geometric design, but some deviation may be
necessitated from time to time due to the many variables
encountered in the course of preparing a design. The applicant
should be aware, therefore, that although the driveway layout may
conform to these guidelines, conditions may dictate deviation from
them, and requirements of the municipal engineer shall be final.
(a) Two-way operation. Driveways used for two-way operation will
intersect a public or private street at an angle as near to 90° as
site conditions will permit and in no case will be less than 60°.
(b) One-way operation. Driveways used for vehicles in one
direction of travel (right-turn only) shall not form an angle
smaller than 45° with a public street.
(c) The dimensions of driveways shall be designed to adequately
accommodate the volume and character of vehicles anticipated
to be attracted daily onto the land development for which a site
§ 36-12.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-12.2
AO:813
plan is prepared. The required maximum and minimum
dimensions for driveway connection to a public or private
street at 90° are indicated in the following table. Driveways
serving large volumes of daily traffic or traffic over 25% of
which is truck traffic shall be required to utilize high-tomaximum
dimensions. Driveways serving low daily traffic
volumes or traffic less than 25% of which is truck traffic shall
be permitted to use low-to-minimum dimensions.
Driveway Width, Depressed Curb and Curb Return
Radius Standards
One-Way Operation
Curb Return Radius
(feet)
Driveway
Width
(feet)
Depressed
Curb
(feet) Min. Max.
3-to 10-family residences 12-15 32-35 20 30
Over 10-family
residences
15-16 35-38 20 30
Commercial and
industrial
15-30 35-50 35 45
Service stations 20-30 35-50 20 35
Two-Way Operation
Curb Return Radius
(feet)
Driveway
Width
(feet)
Depressed
Curb
(feet) Min. Max.
3-to 10- family
residences
22-26 44-50 20 30
Over 10-family
residences
24-30 46-52 25 35
Commercial and
industrial
30-50 50-70 35 45
Service stations 40-50 50-60 20 35
Driveways connecting to a public or private street at an angle shall have the same widths as
shown in the above table. The width of depressed curbs and radius of curb returns shall provide
for the sharpest turning radii of vehicles using the driveway, keeping the vehicles within their
prescribed lanes.
(d) Any vertical curve on a driveway shall be flat enough to
prevent the dragging of any vehicle undercarriage.
§ 36-12.2 KEARNY CODE § 36-12.2
AO:814
§ 36-12.3. Off-Street Loading Requirements. [Ord. 2-9-77 § 127-47]
(e) Should the sidewalk be so close to the curb at a depressed curb
driveway as to cause the ramp to be too steep and be likely to
cause undercarriage drag, the sidewalk shall be appropriately
lowered to provide a suitable ramp gradient.
g. Maintenance of Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas. Every parcel of
land used as a public or private off-street parking or loading area shall
be maintained in good condition, free of hazards and deterioration. All
pavement areas, sidewalks, curbs, drainage facilities, lighting,
bumpers, guardrails, markings, signs, landscaping and other
improvements shall be maintained in workable, safe and good
condition.
h. Waiver of Parking Requirements. If any applicant can clearly
demonstrate to the approving authority that, because of the nature of
the operation or use, the parking requirements of this section are
unnecessary or excessive, the approving authority shall have the power
to approve a site plan showing less paved parking area than required by
this section; provided, however, that a landscaped area of sufficient size
to meet the deficiency shall be set aside and reserved for the purpose of
meeting future off-street parking requirements in the event that a
change of use of the premises shall make such additional off-street
parking spaces necessary.
i. Other Off-Street Parking Requirements.
1. Limitations as to Use. All off-street parking areas shall be used
solely for the parking of passenger automobiles, and no commercial
repair work or service of any kind shall be constructed on such
parking lot.
2. Nonavailability. At any time that the required off-street parking
facilities cease to be available as required, the certificate of
occupancy for the building or buildings built in conjunction with
such parking areas shall be canceled and become null and void.
j. Off-Street Parking Construction.
1. All off-street parking areas shall be graded and drained so as to
dispose of all surface water in a manner so as not to unreasonably
impair the surroundings.
2. All off-street parking areas, aisles and driveways shall be surfaced
with asphalt, bituminous or cement binder pavement according to
specifications established for this purpose by the Town Engineer.
3. All parking areas and access drives shall be edged by a concrete
curb or Belgian block set at least six inches above the paved
surface.
§ 36-12.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-12.3
AO:815
a. In any district, in connection with every building or building group or
part thereof hereinafter erected which is to be utilized by industrial and
commercial uses or requires the distribution of material or
merchandise by vehicles and for any residential development
containing 30 or more dwelling units and for large-scale public and
quasi-public uses, there shall be provided and maintained, on the same
zone lot with such building, off-street loading spaces in accordance with
the requirements of the following table.
Off-Street Loading Requirements
Floor Area
(square feet)
Land Use1 At Which First
Berth is Required
At Which Second
Berth is Required2
Industrial:
Manufacturing 5,000 40,000
Warehouse 5,000 40,000
Laboratory, research 5,000 40,000
Commercial:
Wholesale 5,000 40,000
Retail 5,000 20,000
Service
establishments 5,000 40,000
Commercial
recreation 5,000 100,000
Restaurants 2,000 25,000
Office buildings 5,000 100,000
Hotels 10,000 100,000
Funeral homes 10,000 100,000
Residential:
Apartment buildings 20,000 100,000
Institutional, public:
Schools 10,000 100,000
Hospitals, nursing
homes 10,000 100,000
Auditoriums, arenas 10,000 100,000
§ 36-12.3 KEARNY CODE § 36-12.3
AO:816
§ 36-12.4. Lighting and Signs. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-48]
Notes:
1 In the case of a multiple-use building, the amount of off-street
loading space required shall be equal to the sum of the parts
unless same can be demonstrated to be in excess, as shall be
subject to determination by the approving authority.
2 An additional berth shall be required for each additional amount
of square feet as indicated as required between the need for oneand
two-berth intervals.
b. Each such loading space shall not be less than 12 feet in width and 35
feet in length, depending upon the functions to be performed. The
overall floor-to-ceiling height or clear height distance shall not be less
than 12 feet, which may be increased where required.
c. Except for required buffer areas, each such loading space may occupy
any required side or rear yard but shall not be located in the required
front yard. When adjoining a residential use, institutional use or place
of general assembly, a suitably screened or landscaped buffer shall be
provided.
d. Off-street loading spaces shall not be located within any fire prevention
zone, within 25 feet of any fire hydrant or within 10 feet of any stairway,
doorway, elevator or other general means of entry to and from a
building for the general public, nor shall it block or in any way interfere
with the free flow of pedestrians from any means of ingress or egress,
nor shall it interfere with the free flow of pedestrians or vehicles. All
such loading spaces shall be appropriately indicated by sign or other
visual communication as to the location.
e. All loading and unloading operations shall be conducted entirely within
the boundaries of the lot concerned, and no vehicle or conveyance shall
in any manner use public streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way for loading
or unloading operations other than for ingress or egress to the lot.
a. Lighting. In connection with every site plan, the applicant shall submit
plans for all proposed exterior lighting. These plans shall include the
location, type of light, radius of light and intensity in footcandles. The
following design standards shall be followed:
1. The style of the light and light standard shall be consistent with the
architectural style of the principal building.
2. The maximum height of freestanding lights shall not exceed the
height of the principal building or 35 feet, whichever is less.
3. All lights shall be shielded to restrict the maximum apex angle of
the cone of illumination to 150°.
§ 36-12.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-12.4
AO:817
§ 36-12.5. Landscaping and Buffer Areas. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-49]
§ 36-12.6. Utility Improvements. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-50]
4. Where lights along property lines will be visible to adjacent
property, the lights shall be appropriately shielded.
5. Spotlight-type fixtures attached to buildings shall be avoided,
except where properly screened from adjacent properties.
6. Freestanding lights shall be so located and protected as to avoid
being damaged by vehicles.
7. Lighting shall not be permitted which requires flashing or
intermittent illumination. Lighting which requires change in color,
intensity or hue shall likewise be prohibited. The lighting shall in no
way interfere with, detract from or diminish in any way the
effectiveness of any traffic signal or similar safety or warning
device.
b. Signs.
1. Each site plan application shall include a sign plan showing the
specific design, location, size, construction and illumination.
2. If the applicant is unable to provide the details for signs, the
approving authority shall condition its approval upon receipt of
same prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and shall be
subject to the Town Sign Ordinance.
a. Landscaping. A landscaping plan shall be submitted with each site plan
application. The plan shall identify existing and proposed trees, shrubs,
bushes, plant material, ground cover and natural features such as
boulders and rock outcroppings.
b. Buffer Areas. Buffers, including fences, landscaping, berms and
mounds, shall be used to minimize any adverse impacts or nuisances
from the site to adjacent areas and shall be provided:
1. Along property lines shielding various uses from one another.
2. Where interior roads or driveways run parallel with roadways
exterior to the site.
3. Where parking areas abut other properties.
4. In the general area of refuse storage areas, loading and unloading
areas and outdoor storage areas.
5. As wind-break areas.
6. To shield areas from deleterious noise or other adverse conditions.
a. Gas, Electric and Telephone Service.
§ 36-12.4 KEARNY CODE § 36-12.6
AO:818
1. Gas, electric and telephone service shall be provided by the
applicant in concert with the appropriate public utility providing
such service. The service on the site shall be provided as a part of
an underground system.
2. If such facilities cannot be reasonably provided due to topographic
or geologic condition of the land or due to technological
circumstances, and where the applicant can adequately
demonstrate the lack of feasibility of same to the satisfaction of the
approving authority, a waiver of this requirement may be granted.
3. Where existing utility lines, such as electric and telephone poles,
exist off-tract and require relocation as a result of the proposed
development, the approving authority shall be assured that the
relocation will not create or maintain any hazardous or dangerous
conditions.
b. Water Supply and Sanitary Sewage Disposal. Adequate provisions for
water supply and sanitary sewage disposal shall be indicated. The
facilities shall include and not be limited to approvals, where
appropriate, of the engineer of the serving utility company, the
Department of Health and the Fire Department. The locations of all
proposed fire hydrants or similar facilities shall be indicated on the
plan, and the areas shall provide for appropriate fire lanes or protective
areas which shall not be impeded by parking or standing vehicles or
other obstructions, particularly in commercial centers.
c. Stormwater Drainage.
1. Provisions shall be made for the safe and adequate drainage of
surface runoff waters in and from the premises so that flooding and
erosion of the property and the property of others will be
prevented.
2. Each site plan submitted to the approving authority shall be
reviewed by the Town Engineer to establish requirements to
prevent adverse drainage conditions both on and off the site.
3. The drainage systems shall be designed in conformance to
accepted engineering standards. To facilitate the review of
proposed drainage facilities for development, design calculations
prepared by the applicant's engineer shall accompany the
application.
4. The design considerations shall include but not be limited to
drainage areas, runoff calculations, storm drains, pipelines, inlet
designs and manholes.
5. Unless otherwise stipulated by the Municipal Engineer, drainage
facilities shall be designed on the basis of a fifteen-year storm,
using a one-hour intensity of two inches.
§ 36-12.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-12.7
AO:819
§ 36-12.7. Street Improvements. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-51]
a. Curbing.
1. General.
(a) Where curbing is lacking an applicant for site plan approval
shall install curbing along the extent of all property fronting
public and private streets in accordance with municipal
standards and specifications.
(b) The Municipal Engineer may require curbing within parking
areas in order to facilitate drainage and provide separation
between pedestrian and vehicular movement.
2. Alignment and Grade. Curb grading and alignment is to be
determined as established in the area unless otherwise required by
the Municipal Engineer.
3. Curbing at Driveway Openings. Where a proposed driveway is to
serve any land development of 50 or more parking spaces, curbing
need not be carried across the driveway opening as a depressed
curb, but rather may be swept back as curb returns. Where the
driveway serves a facility having less than 50 parking spaces, a
depressed curb driveway shall be utilized.
b. Street Widening.
1. The right-of-way width, measured from lot line to lot line, shall not
be less than 50 feet, except when shown at a greater width on the
Master Plan or Official Map or when the street constitutes an
extension of an existing street with a greater width than 50 feet.
2. In connection with site plans that adjoin or include existing streets
that do not conform to widths as shown on the Official Map or
Master Plan or are less than 50 feet in width, the applicant shall
dedicate additional width along either one or both sides of the road.
If the site plan is along one side only, 1/2 of the required difference
in roadway width shall be dedicated.
c. Sidewalks.
1. Each land development requiring site plan approval may be
required to provide a sidewalk within the street right-of-way.
2. Pedestrian walkways or sidewalks may also be required for any
development of 50 or more parking spaces within the parking area
to provide convenient and safe access for pedestrian circulation.
3. Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete, brick or other similar
material and shall be at least four feet in width.
4. Sidewalks between parking areas and principal structures, along
aisles and driveways and wherever pedestrian traffic shall occur
§ 36-12.7 KEARNY CODE § 36-12.7
AO:820
§ 36-12.8. Refuse Collection and Storage. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-52]
§ 36-12.9. Additional Design Standards. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-53]
shall be raised six inches or more above the parking area except
when crossing streets or driveways. Sidewalks, when constructed
along a building, shall be located not less than three feet from the
building.
a. Provision shall be made for the proper storage and collection of refuse.
All such storage shall be maintained within the confines of an enclosed
building or structure and shall be reasonably accessible for vehicular
collection on the site or shall be appropriately screened and landscaped
where outdoor storage is necessary.
b. The Board of Health shall approve the location and method of collection
on the site.
a. Retaining Walls. Retaining walls shall be designed to be safe and
adequate for the purpose intended. The walls shall not detract from the
aesthetic beauty of the site when constructed and to this end shall be
fenced or landscaped in accordance with the plans to be approved by
the approving authority.
b. Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage, where permitted, shall be suitably
located and approved by the approving authority, which shall consider
the relationship of such areas to adjacent properties and roadways;
provided, however, that n all such cases where storage is permitted,
such areas shall be suitably screened.
c. Design Standards for Physically Handicapped Persons.
1. Applicability. In accordance with Chapters 220, 221 and 224 of the
Laws of 1975, all plans and specifications for the construction or
remodeling of any public building, as defined herein, shall provide
facilities for the physically handicapped.
2. Design of Facilities and Buildings.
(a) All public buildings shall contain at least one principal
entrance accessible to and usable by physically handicapped
persons, which entrance shall be either ramped or at ground
level.
(b) On each floor open to the public, at least one water closet shall
be provided for each sex. In general, toilet facilities shall be
provided to accommodate wheelchair occupants, which
facilities shall include adequate stall door width, grab rails,
sufficient space and appropriate height.
§ 36-12.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-12.9
AO:821
§ 36-13. ON-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS.
§ 36-13.1. Improvements Required; Certification. [Ord. No. 2-9-77
§ 127-54]
(c) A drinking fountain of suitable height and extension for
wheelchair occupants shall be provided on every floor open to
the public.
(d) In a multi-story building an elevator sufficient in size to
accommodate a wheelchair shall be provided.
(e) At least one public telephone at a height accessible to
wheelchair occupants shall be provided.
3. Parking Lot Design.
(a) A minimum of 1% of the total number of parking spaces, but
not less than two parking spaces, shall be designed and
designated for physically handicapped persons. The spaces
shall be most accessible and approximate to the building or
buildings which the parking spaces serve.
(b) Each space or group of spaces shall be identified with a clearly
visible sign displaying the international symbol of access along
with the following wording: "These spaces reserved for
physically handicapped drivers."
(c) Each space shall be 12 feet wide to allow room for persons in
wheelchairs or on braces or crutches to get in and out of either
side of an automobile onto level, paved surface suitable for
wheeling and walking.
(d) Where possible, such spaces shall be located so that persons in
wheelchairs or using braces or crutches are not compelled to
wheel or walk behind parked cars.
(e) Where applicable, curb ramps shall be provided to permit
handicapped people access from parking area to sidewalk.
4. Sidewalks. A sidewalk hereafter constructed or reconstructed on
public or private property for public use shall be constructed in a
manner that will facilitate use by physically handicapped persons.
At points of intersection between pedestrian and motorized lines of
travel, and at other points where necessary to avoid abrupt
changes in grade, a sidewalk shall slope gradually to street level so
as to provide an uninterrupted line of travel.
a. Before recording final subdivision plats or approving site plan plats, the
approving authority shall require that the applicant shall have installed
or shall have furnished performance guaranties for the installation of
on-tract improvements in accordance with Town specifications as
§ 36-12.9 KEARNY CODE § 36-13.1
AO:822
§ 36-13.2. Performance Guaranty. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-55]
follows: streets, street signs, grading, pavement, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, walkways, streetlighting, shade trees, water mains, fire
hydrants, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of
sewage disposal, drainage structures, erosion control and
sedimentation control devices, public improvements of open space and
surveyors' monuments as required by the Map Filing Act, P.L. 1960, c.
141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.).
b. All such required improvements shall be certified by the Town Engineer
unless the applicant shall have filed a performance guaranty sufficient
in amount to cover the cost of all such improvements or uncompleted
portions thereof as estimated by the Town Engineer.
a. The performance guaranty shall be furnished in favor of the Town in an
amount equal to 120% of the cost of installation for improvements it
may deem necessary or appropriate as specified in subsection 36-13.1.
b. The amount of any performance guaranty may be reduced by the
Governing Body, by resolution, when portions of the improvements have
been certified by the Town Engineer to have been completed. The time
allowed for installation of the improvements for which the performance
guaranty has been provided may be extended by the approving
authority and the Governing Body by resolution.
c. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guaranty, the obligor and surety, if
any, shall be liable thereon to the Town for the reasonable cost of the
improvements not completed or corrected, and the Town may, either
prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof, complete such
improvements.
d. When all of the required improvements have been completed, the
obligor shall notify the Governing Body, in writing, by certified mail
addressed in care of the Town Clerk, of the completion of the
improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Town Engineer.
Thereupon, the Town Engineer shall inspect all of the improvements
and shall file a detailed report, in writing, with the Governing Body,
indicating either approval, partial approval or rejection of the
improvements with a statement of reasons for any rejection. If partial
approval is indicated, the cost of the improvements rejected shall be set
forth.
e. The Governing Body shall either approve, partially approve or reject the
improvements on the basis of the report of the Town Engineer with the
advice and consent of the approving authority and shall notify the
obligor, in writing, by certified mail, of the contents of the report and
the action of the approving authority with relation thereto, not later
than 65 days after receipt of the notice from the obligor of the
completion of the improvements. Where partial approval is granted, the
§ 36-13.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-13.2
AO:823
§ 36-13.3. Maintenance Guaranty. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-56]
§ 36-13.4. Other Governmental Agencies or Public Utilities. [Ord.
No. 2-9-77 § 127-57]
In the event that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the improvements
are covered by a performance guaranty to another governmental agency,
no performance or maintenance guaranty, as the case may be, shall be
required by the Town for such utilities or improvements.
§ 36-13.5. Inspection and Approval. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-58]
All improvements listed in Sections 36-13 and 36-14 shall be subject to
inspection and approval by the Town Engineer, who shall be notified by
obligor shall be released from all liability pursuant to its performance
guaranty, except for that portion adequately sufficient to secure
provision of the improvements not yet approved. Failure of the
Governing Body to send or provide such notification to the obligor
within 65 days shall be deemed to constitute approval of the
improvements, and the obligor and surety, if any, shall be released from
all liability, pursuant to such performance guaranty.
f. If any portion of the required improvements are rejected, the approving
authority may require the obligor to complete such improvements, and,
upon completion, the same procedure of notification as set forth in this
section shall be followed.
g. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the
obligor to contest, by legal proceedings, any determination of the
Governing Body or the Town Engineer.
h. The performance guaranty shall be approved by the Governing Body as
to form, sufficiency and execution. Such performance guaranty shall
run for a period to be fixed by the approving authority. However, with
the consent of the owner and the surety, if there is one, the Governing
Body may, by resolution, extend the term of such performance guaranty
for an additional period not to exceed one year.
a. Prior to the acceptance of any improvement herein, a maintenance
guaranty shall be furnished in favor of the Town of Kearny for a period
not exceeding two years after final acceptance of the improvement, in
an amount not to exceed 15% of the cost of the improvement.
b. Simultaneously with the submission of a maintenance guaranty, the
applicant shall file with the Town as-built drawings accurately showing
the location, profile and size of all storm drains, catch basins, sanitary
sewers, water mains and all utility and service connections constructed
in the subdivision or site plan.
§ 36-13.2 KEARNY CODE § 36-13.5
AO:824
the applicant at least 24 hours prior to the start of construction. No
underground installation shall be covered until inspected and approved.
§ 36-14. OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS.
§ 36-14.1. Applicability, Improvements Required. [Ord. No. 2-9-77
§ 127-59]
§ 36-14.2. Determinations of Approving Authority. [Ord. No. 2-9-77
§ 127-60]
a. Any subdivision or site plan requiring off-tract improvements, as
defined herein, shall comply with the provisions of this section.
b. An off-tract improvement shall be one or more required improvements
which are necessary for the successful completion of a development in
the interest of furthering the public health, safety and general welfare,
and where the improvements are located off-tract.
c. An off-tract improvement shall be required where either the existing
facilities serving the area or subarea are already operating at a
deficient level of service, or the inclusion of a new development will
make such present level of service deficient according to engineering
standards utilized in determining such levels of service.
d. The proportionate contribution of any such off-tract improvement to the
applicant shall be reasonably related to the relative benefit or use of the
total area so served.
e. Under the conditions of this chapter, off-tract improvements shall be
limited to new or improved water distribution, sanitary sewage disposal
and distribution and stormwater and drainage distribution facilities and
all necessary appurtenances thereto; utility easements to new or
improved street and right-of-way widths, traffic regulation and control
devices, intersection improvements, utility relocation where not
provided elsewhere and other traffic, circulation and safety factors
which are directly related to the property or properties in question.
f. Off-tract improvements shall not include the improvement costs for an
entire utility system or street system or major segment thereof,
including sewage treatment plants or water supply or treatment
facilities or other similar undertaking, unless the improvement is
significantly affected by the property or properties in question.
a. Each subdivision or site plan requiring approving authority action shall
be subject to a determination and findings as follows:
1. That certain off-tract improvements are or are not necessary to
implement such subdivision or site plan.
2. That, in instances where off-tract improvements are required, the
terms and conditions which shall be imposed upon the applicant
§ 36-13.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-14.2
AO:825
§ 36-14.3. Methods of Implementation. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-61]
shall ensure the successful and reasonable implementation of
same.
b. Regulations governing off-tract improvements shall be based upon
circulation and comprehensive utility plans pursuant to the adopted
Master Plan by the Kearny Planning Board or adopted utility or
circulation plans of Kearny or other governmental or utility authority.
c. In the event that the approving authority determines that one or more
improvements constitute an off-tract improvement, the approving
authority, by resolution, shall notify the Governing Body of same,
specifying the authority's recommendation relative to the estimated
cost of same, the owner or the developer's pro-rata share of the cost
and possible methods or means to implement same, including but not
limited to performance guaranties, cash contributions, development
agreements and other forms of surety.
d. Where an applicant pays the amount determined as the pro-rata share
under protest, he shall institute legal action within one year of such
payment in order to preserve the right to a judicial determination as to
the fairness and reasonableness of such amount.
e. The approving authority shall not take any final action on a preliminary
subdivision or site plan until all aspects of such conditions have been
mutually agreed to by both the applicant and the Governing Body, and a
written resolution to that effect by the Governing Body has been
transmitted to the approving authority.
a. Performance and Maintenance Guaranties. Where a performance of
maintenance guaranty or other surety is required in connection with an
off-tract improvement, the applicant shall be required to follow the
same procedure and requirements as specified in Section 36-13.
b. Development Agreement. Where a development agreement is required
governing off-tract improvements or other conditions as may be
required by this chapter or by the approving authority, the agreement
shall be in accordance with subsections 36-6.3e and 36-9.7b.4. The
agreement may specify the amount of cash contributions, if any, the
method of payment and the obligation or obligations to be undertaken
by the Town of Kearny.
c. Cash Contributions.
1. When Not Required. Cash contributions for off-tract improvements
shall not be required under the following terms or conditions:
(a) Where other County or State agencies or utility authorities
have jurisdiction over the subject improvement and require a
cash contribution, guaranty or other surety of the applicant in
lieu of such conditions imposed by Kearny; or
§ 36-14.2 KEARNY CODE § 36-14.3
AO:826
§ 36-14.4. Criteria for Determination of Cost to Applicant. [Ord. No.
2-9-77 § 127-62]
Where a cash contribution or other financial distribution is determined, the
following criteria shall be utilized in determining the proportionate share of
such improvement to the applicant.
(b) Where a benefit assessment or other similar tax levy is
imposed upon the applicant and other landowners similarly
situated within a designated service area for the off-tract
improvements provided; or
(c) Where the applicant, where legally permissive, can undertake
the improvements in lieu of the municipality subject to
standards and other conditions as may be imposed by Kearny.
2. Methods of Payment.
(a) Where a cash contribution is required, the contribution will be
deposited with the Town Treasurer of the Town of Kearny with
transmittal letters forwarded to the Governing Body, the Town
Engineer and the approving authority.
(b) Any and all moneys received by the Town Treasurer shall be
deposited in an escrow account for the purpose of undertaking
the improvements specified. Where such improvements are not
undertaken or initiated for a period of 10 years, the funds shall
be returned to the owner of record of the properties, provided
that the conditions specified in paragraph c.1 have not been
imposed. Where such condition does exist, funds held in
escrow will be returned as soon as practical to the owner of
record of the properties.
a. Street widening, alignment, corrections, channelization of
intersections, construction of barriers, new or improved traffic
signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks, trees, utility improvements not
covered elsewhere, the construction of new streets and other similar
street or traffic improvements: The applicant's proportionate cost shall
be in the ratio of the estimated peak-hour traffic generated by the
proposed property or properties to the sum of the present deficiency in
peak-hour traffic capacity of the present facility and the estimated
peak-hour traffic generated by the proposed development. The ratio
thus calculated shall be increased by 10% for contingencies.
b. Water distribution facilities, including the installation of new water
mains, the extension of existing water mains, the relocation of such
facilities and the installation of other appurtenances associated
therewith: The applicant's proportionate cost shall be in the ratio of the
estimated daily use of water from the property or properties, in gallons
per day, for the existing system or subsystem and the estimated daily
§ 36-14.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-14.4
AO:827
§ 36-15. OPEN SPACE AND PUBLIC AREAS.
§ 36-15.1. Standards for Establishment of Open Space
Organizations. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-63]
use of water for the proposed development. The ratio thus calculated
shall be increased by 10% for contingencies.
c. Sanitary sewage distribution facilities, including the installation,
relocation or replacement of collector and interceptor sewers and the
installation, relocation or replacement of other appurtenances
associated therewith: The applicant's proportionate cost shall be in the
ratio of the estimated daily flow, in gallons, to the sum of the present
deficient capacity for the existing system or subsystem and the
estimated daily flow from the proposed project or development. In the
case where the peak flow from the proposed development may occur
during the peak flow period for the existing system, the ratio shall be
the estimated peak flow rate from the proposed development, in gallons
per minute, to the sum of the present peak flow deficiency in the
existing system or subsystem and the estimated peak flow rate from the
proposed development. The greater of the two ratios thus calculated
shall be increased by 10% for contingencies and shall be the ratio used
to determine the cost to the applicant.
d. Stormwater and drainage improvements, including the installation,
relocation or replacement of transmission lines, culverts and catch
basins, and the installation, relocation or replacement of other
appurtenances associated therewith: The applicant's proportionate cost
shall be in the ratio of the estimated peak surface runoff as proposed to
be delivered into the existing system, measured in cubic feet per
second, to the sum of the existing peak-hour flow, in cubic feet per
second, deficient for the existing system and the estimated flow as
proposed to be delivered. The ratio thus calculated shall be increased
by 10% for contingencies.
a. Under the provisions of this chapter and State statutes, the Town of
Kearny, other governmental agencies, the Board of Education and
State, County and other public bodies can be designated to maintain
and accept public open space for recreational or conservational use.
These public agencies can accept and maintain such open space,
provided that the dedication is not conditioned upon the same being
made available to public use.
b. Where a subdivision or site plan indicates an area is to be utilized for
open space, this chapter shall require that the applicant provide for an
organization for the ownership and maintenance of the open space for
the benefit of owners or residents of the development, if the open space
is not dedicated to the municipality or other governmental agency. Such
organization shall not be dissolved and shall not dispose of any open
space, by sale or otherwise, except to an organization conceived and
§ 36-14.4 KEARNY CODE § 36-15.1
AO:828
established to own and maintain the open space for the benefit of such
development, and thereafter such organization shall not be dissolved or
dispose of any of its open space without first offering to dedicate the
same to the Town of Kearny wherein the land is located.
c. In the event that such organization shall fail to retain the open space in
reasonable order and condition, the administrative officer designated
by resolution to administer this section may serve written notice upon
the owners of the development setting forth the manner in which the
organization has failed to maintain the open space in reasonable
condition, and the notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies
of maintenance be cured within 35 days thereof and shall state the date
and place of a hearing thereon, which shall be held within 15 days of
the notice. At such hearing, the designated municipal body or
administrative officer may modify the terms of the original notice as to
deficiencies and may give a reasonable extension of time not to exceed
65 days within which they may be cured. If the deficiencies set forth in
the original notice or in the modification thereof shall not be cured
within 35 days or any permitted extension thereof, the Town, in order to
preserve the open space and maintain the same for a period of one year,
may enter upon and maintain such land. The entry and maintenance
shall not vest in the public any rights to use the open space except when
the same is voluntarily dedicated to the public by the owners. Before
the expiration of the year, the designated Town Body or officer, as the
case may be, shall, upon its initiative or upon the request of the
organization theretofore responsible for the maintenance of the open
space, call a public hearing, upon 15 days' written notice to such
organization and to the owners of the development, to be held by such
Town Body or officer, at which hearing such organization and the
owners of the development shall show cause why such maintenance by
the Town shall not, at the election of the Town, continue for a
succeeding year. If the designated Town Body or officer shall determine
that such organization is ready and able to maintain the open space in
reasonable condition, the Town shall cease to maintain the open space
at the end of the year. If the Town Body or officer shall determine that
such organization is not ready and able to maintain the open space in
reasonable condition, the Town may, in its discretion, continue to
maintain the open space during the next succeeding year, subject to a
similar hearing and determination in each year thereafter. The decision
of the Town Body or officer in any case shall constitute a final
administrative decision subject to judicial review.
d. If a municipal body or officer is not designated by resolution to
administer this section, the Governing Body shall have the same powers
and be subject to the same restrictions as provided in this section.
e. The cost of such maintenance by the Town shall be assessed pro rata
against the properties within the development that have a right of
enjoyment of the open space in accordance with assessed value at the
time of imposition of the lien, and shall become a lien and tax on the
§ 36-15.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-15.1
AO:829
§ 36-15.2. Reservation of Public Areas. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-64]
§ 36-16. APPEALS AND PENALTIES.
§ 36-16.1. Appeals to Governing Body. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-65;
Ord. No. 12-13-89]
properties and be added to and be a part of the taxes to be levied and
assessed thereon and shall be enforced and collected, with interest, by
the same officers and in the same manner as other taxes.
a. Applicability.
1. If the Master Plan of Kearny or the Official Map of the Town
provides for the reservation of designated streets, public
drainageways, flood control basins or public areas within the
proposed development, before approving a subdivision or site plan,
the approving authority may further require that such streets,
ways, basins or areas be shown on the plat in locations and sizes
suitable to their intended uses. The approving authority may
reserve the location and extent of such streets, ways, basins or
areas shown on the plat for a period of one year after the approval
of the final plat or within such further time as may be agreed to by
the developer.
2. Unless during such period or extension thereof the government
entity having jurisdiction shall have entered into a contract to
purchase or institute condemnation proceedings according to law
for the fee or a lesser interest in the land comprising such streets,
ways, basins or areas, the applicant shall not be bound by such
reservations shown on the plat and may proceed to use such land
for private use in accordance with applicable development
regulations. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the
streets and roadways, flood control basins or public drainageways
necessitated by the subdivision or land development and required
for final approval.
b. Compensation to Applicant. The applicant shall be entitled to just
compensation for actual loss found to be caused by such temporary
reservation and deprivation of use. In such instances, unless a lesser
amount has previously been mutually agreed upon, just compensation
shall be deemed to be fair market value of an option to purchase the
land reserved for the period of reservation, provided that determination
of such fair market value shall include but not be limited to
consideration of real property taxes apportioned to the land reserved
and prorated for the period of reservation. The applicant shall be
compensated for the reasonable increased cost of legal, engineering or
other professional services incurred in connection with obtaining
subdivision or site plan approval caused by the resolution.
c. Procedure for payment: to be determined by the Governing Body.
§ 36-15.1 KEARNY CODE § 36-16.1
AO:830
a. Any interested party may appeal to the Governing Body the affirmative
decision of the Board of Adjustment approving an application pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d with a simultaneous application for a major or
minor subdivision or site plan approval. Such appeal shall be made
within 10 days of the date of publication of such final decision as
provided by law. The appeal to the Governing Body shall be made by
serving the Town Clerk, in person or by certified mail, with a notice of
appeal specifying the grounds thereof, the name and address of the
appellant and the name and address of the attorney, if represented.
Such appeal shall be decided by the Governing Body only upon the
record established before the approving authority.
b. Notice of the Meeting. Notice of the meeting to review the record below
shall be given by the Governing Body by personal service or certified
mail to the appellant, to those entitled to notice of a decision and to the
approving authority at least 10 days prior to the date of the meeting.
The parties may submit oral and written argument on the record at
such meeting, and the Governing Body shall provide for verbatim
recording and transcripts of such meeting.
c. Decision by Governing Body. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17C
the Governing Body shall conclude a review of the record below not
later than 95 days from the date of publication of notice of the decision
below pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10 unless the applicant consents in
writing to an extension of such period. Failure of the Governing Body to
hold a hearing and conclude a review of the record below and to render
a decision within such specified period shall constitute a decision
affirming the action of the Board.
d. Action of Governing Body. The Governing Body may reserve, remand or
affirm, wholly or in part, or modify the final decision of the approving
authority. The affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized
membership of the Governing Body shall be necessary to reverse,
remand or modify any final action of either Board.
e. Appeal Stays all Proceedings. An appeal to the Governing Body shall
stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect to which the
decision appealed from was made unless the approving authority
certifies to the Governing Body, after the notice of appeal shall have
been filed with the approving authority, that by reasons of fact stated in
the certificate a stay would, in its opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by
an order of the Superior Court with notice to the approving authority
from whom the appeal is taken and on good cause shown.
f. Copy of Decision; Notice. The Governing Body shall mail a copy of the
decision to the appellant or, if represented, to his attorney, without
separate charge, and for a charge of $0.25 per page to any interested
party who requested it, not later than 10 days after the date of the
decision. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of Kearny. Such publication shall be arranged by the
§ 36-16.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-16.1
AO:831
§ 36-16.2. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-66]
§ 36-17. AMENDMENTS AND INTERPRETATION.
§ 36-17.1. Amendments. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-67]
All amendments of this chapter shall be adopted in accordance with the
provisions of New Jersey law.
§ 36-17.2. Interpretation of Provisions. [Ord. No. 2-9-77 § 127-68]
In the interpretation and the application of the provisions of this chapter,
they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
health, safety, morals and general welfare. It is not intended to interfere
with or abrogate or annul other rules, regulations or ordinances, provided
appellant. The period of time in which an appeal to a court of competent
jurisdiction may be made shall run from the date of the first publication
by the appellant.
a. Premature Sale. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted,
any person transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell, except
pursuant to an agreement expressly conditioned on final subdivision
approval, as owner or agent, any land which forms a part of a
subdivision for which Town approval is required, such person shall be
subject to a penalty of $500. Each lot disposition shall be deemed a
separate violation.
b. Civil Action. In addition to the foregoing, the Town of Kearny may
institute and maintain a civil action:
1. For injunctive relief.
2. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such
a contract of sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued
in accordance with law.
c. Effect on Transferee, Purchaser or Grantee. In any such action, the
transferee, purchaser or grantee is entitled to a lien upon the portion of
the land from which the subdivision was made that remains in the
possession of the developer or his assigns or successors to secure the
return of any deposits made or purchase price paid and, also, to a
reasonable search fee, survey expense and title closing expense, if any.
Any such action must be brought within two years after the date of the
recording of the instrument of transfer, sale or conveyance of the land
or within six years, if unrecorded.
d. Other Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine
not to exceed $500 for each offense. Each day that a violation occurs or
is committed shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 36-16.1 KEARNY CODE § 36-17.2
AO:832
that where this chapter imposed greater restrictions, the provisions of this
chapter shall apply.
§ 36-18. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL REGULATIONS.
§ 36-18.1. Scope and Purpose. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-30 § 1]
a. Policy Statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPS. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity and groundwater
recharge.
b. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
developments" as defined in subsection 36-18.2.
c. Applicability.
1. This section shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not preempted
by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
2. This section shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Town of Kearny.
d. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this section are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and does
not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits
or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this section shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This section
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annual any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different
§ 36-17.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-18.1
AO:833
§ 36-18.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-30 § 2]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this section shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this section its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
COMPACTION — Shall mean the increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — Shall mean a pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic
uses serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and
access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — Shall means an agency designate by the
County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The County review
agency may either be:
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — Shall mean a person professionally qualified and
duly licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and preparation
of drawings and specifications.
DESIGNATE CENTER — Shall mean a State Development and
Redevelopment Plan Centers as designated by the State Planning
Commission such as urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the division of a parcel of land into two
or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, by any
person, for which permission is required under the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development of agriculture
lands, development means: any activity that requires a State permit; any
activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State
Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any
activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
a. A County planning agency; or
A County water resource association created under N.J.S.A.
58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinances.
b.
§ 36-18.1 KEARNY CODE § 36-18.2
AO:834
DRAINAGE AREA — Shall mean a geographic area within which
stormwater, sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular
receiving waterbody or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — Shall mean a neighborhood
designated by the Urban Coordinating Council" in consultation and
conjunction with" the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — Shall mean an area or feature
which is of significant environmental value, including but not limited to:
stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered
or threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge
areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using
the Department's Landscapes Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Non-game Species Program.
EROSION — Shall mean the detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Shall mean a surface that has been covered with
a layer of material so that is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — Shall mean the process by which water seeps into the soil
from precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any "development" that provides
for ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the
purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure
and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean any city, borough, town, township or village.
NODE — Shall mean an area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — Shall mean a chemical element or compound, such as
nitrogen or phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the
development of organisms.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, the Town of Kearny, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Shall mean any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy
Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.), thermal waste, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural, and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged
§ 36-18.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-18.2
AO:835
directly or indirectly to the land, ground waters or surface waters of the
State, or to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both
hazardous and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — Shall mean the amount of water from precipitation that
infiltrates into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
SEDIMENT — Shall mean solid material, mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — Shall mean that lot or lots upon which a major development is to
occur or has occurred.
SOIL — Shall mean all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any
origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — Shall mean an area delineated on the State
Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is
intended to be the focus for much of the State's future redevelopment and
revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — Shall mean the geographic application of the
State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — Shall mean an excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin) or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Shall mean any structural
or nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater or to eliminate illicit or
illegal non-stormwater discharges into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Shall mean waterflow on the surface of the
ground or in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Shall mean a flood hazard area, which
may be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— Shall mean a neighborhood given priority access to State resources
through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
§ 36-18.2 KEARNY CODE § 36-18.2
AO:836
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE — Shall mean a zone designated by the New
Jersey Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Enterprise
Urban Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT — Shall mean previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or ground water, whether
natural or artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — Shall mean an area that is inundated or
saturated by surface water or ground water at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support,
a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly known as hydrolytic vegetation.
§ 36-18.3. General Standards. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-30 § 3]
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPN1) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA 1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
a.
b. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
c. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
d.
a. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management
Measures.
1. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in subsection 36-18.4. To the maximum extent
practicable, these standards shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies into the design.
If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards,
structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet
these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
2. The standards in this section apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or Water Quality Management Plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
§ 36-18.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-18.4
AO:837
§ 36-18.4. Stormwater Management Requirements for Major
Development. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-30 § 4; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-64 § 1]
a. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with subsection 36-18.10.
b. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department Landscape Project or Natural Heritage
Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150
particularly Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys
muhlnebergi (bog turtle).
c. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of subsection 36-18.4f and g.
1. The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
2. The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
3. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access is
made of permeable material.
d. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of subsection 36-18.4f and g may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
1. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
2. The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of subsection 36-18.4f and g to the
maximum extent practicable;
3. The applicant demonstrates that in order to meet the requirements
of subsection 36-18.4f and g, existing structures currently in use,
such as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
4. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under paragraph d,3 above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream that would
§ 36-18.4 KEARNY CODE § 36-18.4
AO:838
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
subsection 36-18.4f and g that were not achievable on-site.
e. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies.
1. To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in subsection
36-18.4f and g shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies set forth at subsection
36-18.4e into the design. The applicant shall identify the
nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of the project.
If the applicant contends that is not feasible for engineering,
environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural
stormwater management measures identified in paragraph 2 below
into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify
the strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
2. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from preconstruction
to post construction. "Time of concentration" is
defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point on the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including cleaning and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
(1) Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy subsection 36-18.4e,3 below;
§ 36-18.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-18.4
AO:839
(2) Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
(3) Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
(4) When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
3. Site design features identified under subsection 36-18.4e,2(i)(2)
above shall comply with the following standard to control passage
of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For
purposes of this paragraph, "solid and floatable materials" means
sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see subsection
36-18.4e,3(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or
is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
Examples of grate subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (noncurb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch gates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridge), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than 7.0 square inches, or be no greater than
2.0 inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
§ 36-18.4 KEARNY CODE § 36-18.4
AO:840
(1) Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
(2) Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in subsection 36-18.4g,1 are conveyed through
any device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space 4 5/8 inches long and 1 1/2 inches
wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in subsection 36-18.4g,1; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:47.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
4. Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in subsection 36-18.4f
and g shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate County Clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
5. Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in subsection 36-18.7, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org.
f. Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity
Standards.
1. This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major developments.
§ 36-18.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-18.4
AO:841
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performances standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
(1) The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at subsection 36-18.5 either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to post-construction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
(2) This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the "urban redevelopment area," or to
projects subject to paragraph (3) below.
(3) The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills or toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material."
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
§ 36-18.4 KEARNY CODE § 36-18.4
AO:842
materials: intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
(4) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
superficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewerage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at subsection 36-18.5, complete
one of the following:
(1) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two, 10- and 100-year storm
events do not exceed, at any point in time, the preconstruction
runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
(2) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there in no increase, as compared to the
preconstruction condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for two-, ten-, and 100-year
storm events and that the increased volume or change in
timing of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damage
at or downstream of the site. This analysis shall include the
analysis of impacts or existing land uses and projected
land uses assuming full development under existing zoning
and land use ordinance in the drainage area;
(3) Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the two-, ten- and
100-year storm events are 50%, 75% and 80%,
respectively, of the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The
percentages apply only to the post-construction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the portion of the
site on which the proposed development or project is to be
constructed. The percentages shall not be applied to postconstruction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard
areas if the increased volume of stormwater runoff will not
increase flood damages below the point of discharge; or
§ 36-18.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-18.4
AO:843
(4) In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with paragraphs (1), (2) and (3)
above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
2. Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at subsection 36-18.2 shall be
submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review
and approval in accordance with the requirements of this section
and any applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for
stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purpose of
this section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber, and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
g. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards.
1. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional 1/4 acre of impervious surface is being
proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce TSS
does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge regulated
under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed under the New
Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically exempt under a
NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water quality design
storm is 1.25 inches of rainfall in two hours. Water quality
calculations shall take into account the distribution of rain from the
water quality design storm, as reflected in Table 1. The calculation
of the volume of runoff may take into account the implementation
of nonstructural and structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
0 0.0000
5 0.0083
10 0.0166
15 0.0250
20 0.0500
25 0.0750
§ 36-18.4 KEARNY CODE § 36-18.4
AO:844
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(inches)
30 0.1000
35 0.1330
40 0.1660
45 0.2000
50 0.2583
55 0.3583
60 0.6250
65 0.8917
70 0.9917
75 1.0500
80 1.0840
85 1.1170
90 1.1500
95 1.1750
100 1.2000
105 1.2250
110 1.2334
115 1.2417
120 1.2500
2. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in subsection 36-18.7, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual
and other sources of technical guidance are listed in subsection
36-18.7. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the removal
rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and
methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the design
engineer provides documentation demonstrating the capability of
these alternative rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of
any approved alternative rate or method of calculating the removal
rate shall be provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0418.
§ 36-18.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-18.4
AO:845
3. If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A+B-(AXB)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPS, and
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first
BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater
Wetland
90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment
Device
See subsection 36-18.6c.
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
4. If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the subareas converge on site in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
5. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of this site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in subsection 36-18.4f and g
6. Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, which may
be obtained from the address identified in subsection 36-18.7.
§ 36-18.4 KEARNY CODE § 36-18.4
AO:846
7. In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measure shall be designed to prevent any
increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
8. Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain in to or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follow:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
(1) A 300-foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards or from the centerline of the waterway where the
bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or
vegetation allowed to follow natural succession is
provided.
(2) Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under paragraph (1) above shall
only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural
use, parking area or maintained lawn area). The
encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or
centerline of the waterway where the bank is undefined.
All encroachments proposed under this subparagraph
shall be subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
§ 36-18.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-18.4
AO:847
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
(1) Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One Waterway;
(2) Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a 95% TSS post-construction removal
rate;
(3) Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
(4) The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
(5) A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
(6) All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to subsection 36-18.4g,8 has been approved
by the Department of Environmental Protection, then the
provisions of the plan shall be the applicable special water
resource protection area requirements for that waterway. A
stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to
paragraph g,8 shall maintain or enhance the current functional
value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area as defined in paragraph g,8(a)(1) above. In no
case shall a stream corridor protection plan allow the
reduction of the Special Water Resource Protection Area to
less than 150 feet as measured perpendicular to the waterway
subject to this subsection.
§ 36-18.4 KEARNY CODE § 36-18.4
AO:848
§ 36-18.5. Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater
Recharge. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-30 § 5]
(e) Paragraph g,8 does not apply to the construction of one
individual single family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
a. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
1. The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods;
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 — Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds; or
(b) The Rational Methods for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
2. For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at subsection 36-18.5a,1(a) and the
Rational and Modified Rational Methods at subsection
36-18.5a,1(b). A runoff coefficient or a groundwater recharge land
cover for an existing condition may be used on all or a portion of
the site if the design engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition
has existed on the site or portion of the site for at least five years
without interruption prior to the time of application. If more than
one land cover have existed on the site during the five years
immediately prior to the time of application, the land cover with the
lowest runoff potential shall be used for the computations. In
addition, there is the presumption that the site is in good
hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park),
with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with good
hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land use
type is cultivation).
3. In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts that may reduce pre-construction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
§ 36-18.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-18.5
AO:849
§ 36-18.6. Standards for Structural Stormwater Management
Measures. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-30 § 6]
4. In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
5. If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
b. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
1. The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSP-32, A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual: as
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
a. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
1. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes depth the seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
2. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
§ 36-18.5 KEARNY CODE § 36-18.6
AO:850
§ 36-18.7. Sources for Technical Guidance. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-30
§ 7]
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of subsection 36-18.8b.
3. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4. and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
4. At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
5. Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
subsection 36-18.8.
b. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design
engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and
water quality design and performance standards established by
subsection 36-18.4 of this section.
c. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of subsection 36-18.4 of this section, provided the pollutant removal
rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced
Technology and certified by the Department.
a. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at 1 and 2 below, which are available from
Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
1. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devises, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
2. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
b. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
§ 36-18.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-18.7
AO:851
§ 36-18.8. Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins.
[Ord. No. 2005-(O)-30 § 8; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-64 § 2]
1. The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540.
2. The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Services, 732-932-9306; and
3. The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a) 4. The
location, address, and telephone number of each Soil Conservation
District may be obtained from the State Soil Conservation
Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey, 08625, (609)
292-5540.
a. This subsection sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This subsection applies to any new stormwater management basin.
b. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflows Grates and Escape
Provisions.
1. A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six
inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
2. An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
§ 36-18.7 KEARNY CODE § 36-18.8
AO:852
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
3. For purposes of this paragraph 3, escape provisions means the
permanent installation ladders, steps, rungs, or other features that
provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
subsection 36-18.8c a freestanding outlet structure may be
exempted from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than three horizontal to one vertical.
c. Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards.
1. A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written funding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, County or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
d. Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management Plan.
§ 36-18.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-18.8
AO:853
§ 36-18.9. Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan.
[Ord. No. 2005-(O)-30 § 9]
a. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan.
1. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this section, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater
Plan at subsection 36-18.9c below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this section.
3. The applicant shall submit 18 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
subsection 36-18.9c of this section.
b. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval. The applicant's Site
Development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this section.
c. Checklist Requirements. The following information shall be required:
1. Topographic Base Map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as
§ 36-18.8 KEARNY CODE § 36-18.9
AO:854
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and flood plains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing manmade structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and
manmade features not otherwise shown.
2. Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
3. Project Description and Site Plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high ground
water elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
4. Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of subsections
36-18.3 through 36-18.6 are being met. The focus of this plan shall
be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the objective
of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality and
stormwater quantity problems at the source by land management
and source controls whenever possible.
5. Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
§ 36-18.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-18.9
AO:855
§ 36-18.10. Maintenance and Repair. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-30 § 10]
6. Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in subsection 36-18.4 of this
section.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g. infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site borings logs or soil pits profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pots shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
7. Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of subsection 36-18.10.
8. Waiver from Submission Requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this ordinance may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in subsections 36-18.9c,1 through c,6 when it
can be demonstrated that the information requested is impossible
to obtain or it would create a hardship on the applicant to obtain
and its absence will not materially affect the review process.
a. Applicability.
1. Projects subject to review as in subsection 36-18.1c of this section
shall comply with the requirements of subsection 36-18.10b and c.
b. General Maintenance.
1. The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
2. The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
§ 36-18.9 KEARNY CODE § 36-18.10
AO:856
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
3. Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
4. If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 36-18.10b,2 above is not a public agency, the
maintenance plan and any future revisions based on subsection
36-18.10b,7 below shall be recorded upon the deed of record for
each property on which the maintenance described in the
maintenance plan must be undertaken.
5. Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
6. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 36-18.10b,2 above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
7. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 36-18.10b,2 above shall evaluate the effectiveness of
the maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and
the deed as needed.
8. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 36-18.10b,2 above shall retain and make available, upon
request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by subsection 36-18.10b,6
and 7 above.
9. The requirements of subsection 36-10.10b,3 and b,4 do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
10. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the Municipal
§ 36-18.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 36-18.10
AO:857
§ 36-18.11. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-30 § 11]
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this section shall be
subject to the penalties as set forth in subsection 36-16.2d of this chapter,
unless otherwise provided by law.
§ 36-18.12. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-30 § 12]
This section shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the County
review agency, or 60 days from the receipt of the section by the county
review agency if the County review agency should fail to act.
§ 36-18.13. Severability. [Ord. No. 2005-(O)-30 § 13]
If the provisions of any subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of
this section shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any
subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this section.
Chapter 37
(RESERVED)
Chapter 38
ZONING
Editor's Note: Originally adopted by Ord. No. 12-29-52. Amended in
its entirety by Ord. No. 4-23-80, and again, amended in its entirety
by Ord. No. 10-14-87.
§ 38-1. TITLE AND PURPOSE.
§ 38-1.1. Title. [Ord. No. 10-14-87]
An ordinance limiting and restricting to specific districts and regulating
therein buildings and structures according to their construction and the
nature and extent of their use and the nature and extent of the uses of
Engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or County may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
c. Nothing in this section shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 36-18.10 KEARNY CODE § 38-1.1
AO:858
land; regulating and restricting the height, number of stories and sizes
of buildings and other structures; the size of yards, courts, and other
open spaces, the density of population and the location, use and extent of
buildings and structures for trade, industry, residence, or other purposes;
providing for the administration and enforcement of the provisions herein;
all for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals and general
welfare of the Town of Kearny and its people.
§ 38-1.2. Short Title. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-1.200]
This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of the Town
of Kearny."
§ 38-1.3. General Intent. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-1.300; Ord. No.
2002-O-78; Ord. No. 2003-(O)-23]
The intent of this chapter is to establish a precise and detailed plan for the
use of land and buildings in the Town of Kearny, enacted in order to promote
and to protect the public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and
the general welfare of the people.
The Zoning Ordinance for the Town of Kearny shall be viewed as a
permissive ordinance. In no instance after the adoption of this chapter
shall any use be permitted in the Town of Kearny which is not listed as a
permitted or accessory use as specified in the Use Schedule of Regulations
in this chapter.
The intent of the subchapter pertaining to Wireless Telecommunications
Equipment is to enable the location within the Town of those antennas
which are necessary to provide adequate wireless telecommunications
services while, at the same time, limiting the number of supporting towers
to the fewest possible and minimizing the impact of the antennas, accessory
equipment, and supporting structures on residences, streetscapes, and
vistas throughout the municipality.
§ 38-1.4. Purpose. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-1.400; Ord. No.
2002-O-78; Ord. No. 2003-(O)-23]
Such regulations are deemed necessary to achieve the following purposes:
a. Promote Orderly Development. To protect the character and maintain
the stability of all areas within the Town, and to promote the orderly
and beneficial development of such areas.
b. Regulate Intensity of Use. To regulate the intensity of use of zoning lots,
and to determine the area of open spaces surrounding buildings
necessary to provide adequate light and air, privacy and convenience of
access to property and to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
c. Regulate Location of Buildings and Establish Standards of
Development. To establish building lines and the location of buildings
designed for residential, commercial, industrial, office, or other uses
§ 38-1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-1.4
AO:859
within such lines and to fix reasonable standards to which buildings or
structures shall conform.
d. Prohibit Incompatible Uses. To prohibit uses, buildings or structures
which are incompatible with the character of development or the
permitted uses within specified zoning districts.
e. Regulate Alterations of Existing Buildings. To prevent such additions to,
and alterations or remodeling of, existing buildings or structures as
would not comply with the restrictions and limitations imposed
hereunder.
f. Limit Congestion in Streets. To limit congestion in the public streets
and so protect the public health, safety, conveniences, and the general
welfare by providing for off-street parking of motor vehicles and for the
loading and unloading of commercial vehicles.
g. Protect Against Hazards. To provide protection against fire, explosion,
noxious fumes, and other hazards in the interest of the public health,
safety, comfort, and the general welfare.
h. Conserve Taxable Value of Land. To conserve the taxable value of land
and buildings throughout the Town.
i. Consistent with Municipal Land Use Law. To be consistent with the
purposes of the Municipal Land Use Law C 40:55D-1 et seq.
j. Regulate the Placement of Wireless Telecommunications Antennas and
Related Equipment.
1. To encourage the location of antennas upon, or within, existing
structures, including existing buildings, existing wireless
telecommunications towers, existing water towers, and existing
telephone and electric towers, especially those existing structures
situated in nonresidential districts;
2. To encourage the configuration of telecommunications facilities in
a manner that minimizes and mitigates any adverse impact upon
affected properties, streetscapes, and vistas through careful
design, siting, screening, landscaping, and innovative
camouflaging techniques;
3. To encourage the co-location of as many antennas as possible, of as
many wireless telecommunications carriers as possible, on existing
towers and other structures in nonresidential districts;
4. To discourage the construction of new towers which do not have
the likelihood of being used by a number of wireless
telecommunications carriers;
5. To minimize the total number of wireless telecommunications
towers within the Town;
§ 38-1.4 KEARNY CODE § 38-1.4
AO:860
§ 38-2. DEFINITIONS.
§ 38-2.1. General. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-2.100]
Unless the context otherwise indicates, the following definitions shall be
used in the interpretation and construction of the chapter. Words used in
the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include the
plural, and the plural the singular; the word "building" shall include the
word "structure;" the word "person" includes a corporation as well as an
individual; the word "lot" includes the word "plot," the word "occupied"
includes the words "designed or intended to be occupied," the word "used"
shall include the words "arranged, designed, constructed, altered,
converted, rented, leased, or intended to be used;" the word "shall" is
mandatory and not optional, and the word "may" is permissive.
§ 38-2.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-2.200; Ord. No.
11-8-89; Ord. No. 6-27-90; Ord. No. 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1999-O-2 § 1;
Ord. No. 2000-0-27 § 1; Ord. No. 2002-O-78; Ord. No. 2003-(O)-23;
Ord. No. 2003-(O)-31 § 1; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-12; Ord. No.
2004-(O)-64; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-70 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-06 § 1;
Ord. No. 2006-(O)-09 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-20 §§ 1 — 3; Ord. No.
2006-(O)-29; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-30 §§ 1 — 3; Ord. No. 2010-24 § 1]
As used in this chapter:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — Shall mean a use or structure
subordinate to the principal use of a building or structure on the same zone
lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the principal use of the
principal building.
ADDITION — Shall mean an extension or increase in floor area or height of
a building or structure.
6. To discourage adverse impacts on community aesthetics;
7. To formulate and maintain, for land use planning purposes, a
complete inventory of all wireless telecommunications antenna
towers, and related facilities within the Town, and others in the
vicinity of the Town, which are capable of providing service within
the municipality;
8. To enhance the ability of the carriers of wireless
telecommunications services who adhere to the specific
requirements and intent of the ordinance provisions to provide
such service quickly, effectively, and efficiently; and
9. To comply with the mandate of the Federal Telecommunications Act
of 1996, 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7), which preserves local
government authority to enforce zoning requirements which
protect public safety, public and private property, and community
aesthetics.
§ 38-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-2.2
AO:861
ALLEYWAY — Shall mean a private driveway in Planned Residential
Developments for providing direct vehicular access to residential units, not
required for general circulation and not exceeding 600 feet in length with
dual access, nor 300 feet in length with single access to a public or private
roadway.
ALTERATION — Shall mean a change or rearrangement in the structural
parts or in means of egress; or an enlargement, whether by extending on a
side or by increasing in height; or the moving from one location or position
to another.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — Shall mean a place where animals or pets are given
medical or surgical treatment. Use as a kennel shall be limited to hospital
use and treatment.
ANIMAL KENNEL — Shall mean any building, structure or premises in
which animals are kept, boarded or trained for commercial gain.
ANTENNA — Shall mean any device specifically designed for the reception
or transmission or both, of radio frequency signals.
APARTMENT — Shall mean a portion of a building consisting of a group of
rooms used as a dwelling for a family and set apart as a separate unit from
other units or portions of the building.
APPLICANT — Shall mean a developer submitting an application for
development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the application form
and all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision plat, site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning
variance or direction of issuance of a permit pursuant to law.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — Shall mean the Planning Board of the Town of
Kearny unless a different agency is designated by ordinance.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS OR GASOLINE STATION — Shall mean
a public building or place of business where gasoline, fuel, oil and grease
and/or batteries, tires and automobile accessories are supplied and
dispensed directly to the motor vehicle trade and where minor repair
service is rendered.
BASEMENT — Shall mean a story partly above grade level having more
than 1/2 of its floor-to-ceiling height above the average level of the adjoining
ground. A basement shall be counted as a story if used for business or
dwelling purposes.
BATHROOM FACILITIES — Shall mean a room equipped with a bathtub or
shower, sink and a toilet.
BAY WINDOW — Shall mean a window projecting beyond the wall line of
the building and extending down to the foundations.
BEDROOM — Shall mean a room in a dwelling in which one or more persons
normally sleep.
§ 38-2.2 KEARNY CODE § 38-2.2
AO:862
BILLBOARD — Shall mean a sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a
location other than the premises on which the sign is located.
BOARD — Shall mean the Planning Board of the Town of Kearny.
BOARDING HOUSE OR ROOMING HOUSE — Shall mean a residence
structure other than a motel or hotel where lodging and/or meals are
provided for compensation.
BUILDING — Shall mean a combination of materials to form a construction
adopted to permanent, temporary or continuous occupancy and having a
roof.
BUILDING COVERAGE — Shall mean that portion of a lot which is occupied
by all principal and accessory buildings, but not including covered
walkways, steps, patios, decks, uncovered porches, parking lots, or outdoor
residential swimming pools and swimming pool decks, or similar
improvements thereto. In the event that any other floor of a building
exceeds the dimensions of the ground floor, the area of the larger floor shall
be used in the computation of building coverage.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — Shall mean a structure in which is conducted the
principal use of the site on which it is situated.
CANNABIS REGULATORY COMMISSION — The Commission created by
the CUMMA.[Added 6-23-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-12]
CARPORT — Shall mean a roofed structure providing space for the parking
of motor vehicles and enclosed on not more than two sides.
CELLAR — Shall mean a story partly above grade level having more than
1/2 of its floor-to-ceiling height below the average level of the adjoining
ground. No cellar or portion thereof shall be used as a dwelling unit.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — Shall mean the certificate issued by the
construction official which permits the use of a building in accordance with
the approved plans and specifications and which certifies compliance with
the provisions of law for the use and occupancy of the building or land, the
special stipulations or conditions of the building permit and authorization,
where appropriate, by the Approving Authority.
CHANGE OF USE — Shall mean any use which substantially differs from
the previous use of a building or land.
CHASSIS — Shall mean a special trailer or undercarriage on which
containers are moved over the road by truck.
CHILD DAY CARE CENTER — Shall mean a facility providing a program
less than 24 hours per day per child for the care of more than five children,
2 1/2 years or older.
CLUBS, LODGES, SOCIAL AND COMMUNITY CENTER BUILDING — Shall
mean a building or structure used to house a group of people organized
for a common purpose to pursue common goals, interests, or activities and
§ 38-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-2.2
AO:863
usually characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees
or dues, and regular meetings.
CO-LOCATION — Shall mean the mounting of personal wireless service
facilities used by two or more competing providers on the same antenna
support structure, monopole or antenna tower.
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL DRIVEWAY — Shall mean a driveway
providing access for commercial or industrial use of property.
COMMON DRIVEWAY — Shall mean two or more driveways on adjoining
properties, which share a single access point onto a Town street or road.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — Shall mean an open space area within or related
to a site designated as a development, and designed and intended for the
use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the development. Common
open space may contain such complementary structures and improvements
as are necessary and appropriate for the use and enjoyment of residents
and owners of the development.
CONTAINER — Shall mean a recognized vehicle for transporting cargo,
comprised of a box constructed with varying dimensions to withstand
shipment conditions in transportation. Containers may be transferred
between different transportation systems. When mounted on a chassis, it
comprises a trailer. Standard measuring unit for a container is a TEU
(Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit). One standard forty-foot container equals two
TEU's.
CONVENTIONAL HOUSING — Shall mean any residential development
other than limited income house (LIH), as defined in this chapter.
COURT — Shall mean a court is an unoccupied space which is bounded by
three or more attached building walls other than a front, side, or rear yard
on the same lot with the principal building.
CROSS DOCKING — Shall mean loading docks situated along parallel walls.
COURT, DEPTH OF AN OUTER — The horizontal dimensions between
its open end and the end opposite.
a.
COURT, HEIGHT OF — The vertical distance from the lowest level it is
required to serve to the top of the highest wall which bounds it within
the same lot.
b.
COURT, INNER — A court entirely enclosed by walls or opening on a
side lot line.
c.
COURT, OUTER — A court opening for its full width on a street, a front
yard, a rear yard, or a side yard.
d.
e. COURT, WIDTH OF AN INNER — Its lesser horizontal dimension.
COURT, WIDTH OF AN OUTER — Its horizontal dimension parallel with
its principal open end.
f.
§ 38-2.2 KEARNY CODE § 38-2.2
AO:864
CUMMA — The New Jersey Compassionate Use Medical Marijuana Act, P.L.
2009, c. 307 (approved January 18, 2010, codified at N.J.S.A. 24:61-1 et
seq.), as amended and supplemented through the date hereof to include
its renaming as the Jake Honig Compassionate Use Medical Cannabis
Act.[Added 6-23-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-12]
CURB LEVEL — Shall mean the mean level of the curb at that street
frontage of the building where the average curb level is highest. Where the
lot level is higher than the curb level, the average level of the former along
the wall in question may be taken as the base for measuring the height of a
wall adjacent to a yard or court.
DAY NURSERY — Shall mean a facility providing a program less than 24
hours per day per child for the care of more than five children not more than
2 1/2 years old.
DENSITY, GROSS — Shall mean a number expressing dwelling units per
gross acre of land within a parcel of property.
DEVELOPER — Shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot
or of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the division of a parcel of land into two
or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other structure, or
of any mining, excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required.
DEVELOPMENT GROUP — Shall mean the development of land and more
than one principal building or structure on a zone lot designated to be
maintained and operated by one or more persons, planned as an entity and
therefore susceptible to development and regulation and a complex land use
unit, rather than an aggregate of individual buildings or structures located
on separate unrelated lots or parcels.
DISTRICT — Shall mean a district or a zone shall be any portion of the
territory of the Town of Kearny within which certain uniform regulations
and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the
provisions of this chapter.
DORMITORY — Shall mean a space in a building where group sleeping
accommodations are provided for persons not members of the same family
group, in one room, or in a series of closely associated rooms.
DRIVEWAY — Shall mean a private driveway, alleyway, road, or other
avenue of vehicular travel that runs through any part of a private parcel of
land that connects to a public roadway.
DRIVEWAY IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean the upgrading or reconstruction
of preexisting driveway such as adding or replacing permanent surface, i.e.,
concrete or asphalt.
§ 38-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-2.2
AO:865
DUPLEX TOWNHOUSE — Shall mean a dwelling unit designed for and
occupied by no more than one family or household. Each such dwelling unit
is comprised of more than one level and has direct access to the outdoors.
Such unit may be situated partially or wholly above or below another similar
unit; provided, however, that no more than two such units may be included
in a building between two party walls which extend from the foundations
to and through the roof and which may be attached to no more than two
buildings accommodating townhouses or duplex townhouses or apartments.
Each duplex townhouse shall be provided with individual cooking, sleeping
and sanitary facilities for the use of one family or household. For the
purpose of this chapter a duplex townhouse may be in condominium,
cooperative or leasehold ownership or any combination thereof.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean one or more rooms (a) occupied as separate
living quarters or designed so that it or they may be occupied as a separate
living quarters, (b) isolated and secure from access to all other portions of
the building in which it or they are located, and (c) which include all of the
following:
DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY — Shall mean a structure containing more
than two dwelling units with direct access from the outside for each
dwelling unit or through a common hall.
DWELLING, ONE FAMILY — Shall mean a detached building on a single lot
containing one dwelling unit. A one family dwelling unit is also referred to
as a "single family dwelling."
DWELLING, TWO FAMILY — Shall mean a structure on a single lot
containing two dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the
other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or unpierced
ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall, except for
a common stairwell exterior to both dwelling units or any structure
containing two dwelling units, regardless of the building's configuration.
ESSENTIAL SERVICE — Shall mean the erection, construction, alteration,
or maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam or
water transmission systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals,
light stations, telephone lines and accessories herewith, reasonably
necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or
municipal or other governmental agencies or for the public health, safety,
or general welfare.
FAA APPLICATION — Shall mean any application, or other request, to the
Federal Aviation Administration for a license, certificate, waiver, special
temporary authorization, or any other instrument of authorization issued
a. Bathroom facilities not shared by occupants of any other dwelling unit,
b. Kitchen facilities, and
A separate means of egress not requiring access or passage through a
private portion of another dwelling unit.
c.
§ 38-2.2 KEARNY CODE § 38-2.2
AO:866
by the Federal Aviation Administration regarding an applicant's
telecommunications structures, antennas, and equipment.
FAA FILINGS — Shall mean any application with all attachments, exhibits,
appendices, memoranda, amendments, supplements, and comments; all
correspondence addressed to the Federal Aviation Administration;
individual comments or objections of other parties, including but not limited
to, informal objections, petitions to deny, proposed findings of fact,
conclusions of law, and briefs on appeal; the initial decision of Federal
Aviation Administration; notices of appeal; all briefs and other documents
on appeal; and all other related matters.
FAMILY — Shall mean any number of persons related by blood, marriage
or adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit and using certain
rooms and housekeeping facilities in common. A family shall also include
foster children placed with a family in such dwelling by the Division of Youth
and Family Services in the Department of Institutions and Agencies or a
duly incorporated child care agency and children placed pursuant to law in
single-family dwellings known as group homes.
FCC APPLICATION — Shall mean any application, or other request, to
the Federal Communications Commission for a license, certificate, waiver,
special temporary authorization, or any other instrument of authorization
issued by the Federal Communications Commission under the
Telecommunications Act of 1934, or the Telecommunications Act of 1996.
FCC FILING — Shall mean any application with all attachments, exhibits,
appendices, memoranda, amendments, supplements, and comments; all
correspondence addressed to the Federal Communications Commission;
individual comments or objections of other parties, including but not limited
to informal objections, petitions to deny, proposed findings of fact,
conclusions of law, and briefs on appeal; the initial decision of the Federal
Communications Commission; notices of appeal; all briefs and other
documents on appeal; and all other related matters.
FLOOR AREA — Shall mean the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of a building measured from the exterior walls in a building.
Floor area shall not include areas devoted to mechanical equipment serving
the building, stairways and elevators, areas devoted exclusively to off-street
parking and loading space for motor vehicles, and to any space where the
floor to ceiling height shall be less than seven feet.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.) — Shall mean the gross floor area of all
buildings and structures, including parking decks, on the lot divided by the
lot area.
FREIGHT FORWARDING — Shall mean an establishment primarily engaged
in the transshipment of goods from shippers to receivers for a charge,
covering the entire transportation route and, in turn, making use of services
of other transportation establishments as instrumentalities in effecting
delivery. Freight forwarding facilities may include areas for the temporary
storage, transfer, repacking, consolidation or distribution of such goods and
accessory parking and servicing of trucks and trailers.
§ 38-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-2.2
AO:867
GARAGE, PRIVATE COMMERCIAL — Shall mean a structure which is
accessory to a nonresidential establishment, building, or use and is
primarily for the parking and storage of vehicles operated by the customers,
visitors, and employees of such building.
GARAGE, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — Shall mean a structure which is
accessory to a residential building and which is used primarily for the
parking and storage of vehicles owned and operated by the residents
thereof, and which is not a separate commercial enterprise available to the
public.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Shall mean a building or structure for the storage or
parking of vehicles and in which provisions may be made for repairing or
servicing of such vehicles as a use incidental to the vehicle storage use.
GARDEN APARTMENT — Shall mean one or more multiple-family buildings
not exceeding three stories or 35 feet in height, containing off-street
parking, outdoor recreation facilities, landscaped areas and other
appurtenant facilities.
HEIGHT OF A BUILDING — Shall mean the vertical distance measured, in
the case of flat roofs, from the curb level to the level of the highest point of
the room beams adjacent to the street wall and, in the case of pitched roofs,
from the curb level to the mean the highest point of the roof.
HEIGHT OF A COURT — Shall mean the vertical distance from the lowest
level it is required to serve to the top of the highest wall which bounds it
within the same lot.
HEIGHT OF AN ANTENNA —
HISTORIC SITE — Shall mean any building, structure, area or property that
is significant in the history, architecture, archeology or culture of this State,
its communities or the Nation and has been so designated.
HOME OCCUPATION — Shall mean any activity carried out for gain by a
resident conducted as an accessory use in the residence dwelling unit.
HOTEL — Shall mean any building containing six or more guest rooms
intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to
be occupied or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests.
Height of an antenna, if required to be measured from ground level
shall mean the measurement which is made from the mean grade of
the surrounding terrain to a radius of 50 feet and up to and including
the highest point of the antenna or antenna support, whichever is
higher. Height from ground level shall be measured from mean surface
grade ground level regardless of whether or not the antenna support is
mounted on an existing structure or extends to ground level.
a.
Height of an antenna, if required to be measured from the roof line,
shall mean the measurement which is made from the exterior surface
of the roof covering the top floor of the building, but shall not include
any penthouse, structure, or enclosure used solely to house heating,
ventilating, air-conditioning, elevator, or other utility facilities.
b.
§ 38-2.2 KEARNY CODE § 38-2.2
AO:868
HOUSEHOLD — Shall mean a family or a group of not more than three
persons who are not so related living together as a single housekeeping
unit.
IMPROVED LOT COVERAGE — Shall mean the percentage of lot area which
is improved with principal and accessory buildings and structures, exclusive
of decks, uncovered porches, outdoor residential swimming pools and pool
decks, but including driveways, parking lots, pedestrian walkways, signs,
and other manmade improvements on the ground surface.
INDIGENOUS LIMITED INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Shall mean a low income
or moderate income household which includes at least one resident of the
Town of Kearny or at least one salaried employee of the Town of Kearny,
or at least one salaried employee of the Board of Education of the Town of
Kearny.
INTERMODAL FACILITY — Shall mean a facility principally used for the
transfer of cargo from one mode of transportation to another. The cargo
is primarily containerized and is not broken down or consolidated on site.
Intermodal facilities may include trailer parking areas and interior areas for
the repair and servicing of trailers, containers, and trucks utilized on site.
JOINT DRIVEWAY — See definition of "Common driveway" above.
JUNKYARD — Shall mean the use of any area, lot, parcel, building or
structure for the storage, sale, processing, or abandonment of junk
including scrap metal and other materials, or for the dismantling,
demolition or abandonment of any inoperable mechanical equipment,
machinery, or vehicles or parts thereof. A "junkyard" shall not include the
storage of materials for processing of discarded or salvaged materials as
part of a permitted industrial or recycling operation on the same premises.
KITCHEN FACILITIES — Shall mean an area with a stove or an oven where
food is cooked or prepared.
LIMITED INCOME HOUSING (LIH) — Shall mean dwelling
accommodations made available to indigenous or non-indigenous low and
moderate income households at costs not exceeding the limits provided in
subsection 38-6.10d.
LOT — Shall mean a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by
a plat or otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit. (Also known as a zone lot.)
LOT, CORNER — A parcel of land at the junction of and abutting on two
or more intersecting streets. The owner of a "corner lot" in any district
may, at the time application is made for a building permit designate
either street frontage as the front of the lot. The principal structure
must face on the frontage selected.
a.
b. LOT, INTERIOR — A parcel of land other than a corner lot.
LOT, THROUGH — A parcel of land which extends through from one
street to another.
c.
§ 38-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-2.2
AO:869
LOT AREA — Shall mean the computed area contained within the lot lines.
LOT DEPTH — Shall mean a mean horizontal distance between the front lot
line and the rear lot line, measured perpendicular or radial to the front lot
line to the furthest distance thereof.
LOT FRONTAGE — Shall mean the length of the front lot line.
LOT LINES — Shall mean a line of record bounding the lot.
LOT WIDTH — Shall mean the distance between the side lines measured
parallel to the front lot line at the required front yard setback line.
LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Shall mean a household in which the total
income is not more than that specified in subsection 38-6.10d.
MALL — Shall mean a mall is a roofed over common pedestrian area serving
more than one tenant within a covered building.
MARIJUANA — All parts of the plant Genus Cannabis L., whether growing
or not; the seeds thereof; and every compound, manufacture, salt,
derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its seeds, except those
containing resin extracted from the plant; but shall not include the mature
stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from
the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks, fiber, oil, or cake, or the
sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination as defined by
New Jersey Controlled Dangerous Substances Act, P.L. 1970, c. 226 (N.J.S.A.
24:21-2).[Added 6-23-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-12]
MARQUEE SIGN — Shall mean a sign attached to or hung from a marquee
canopy or other covered structure projecting from and supported by the
building and extending beyond the building wall, building line or street lot
line.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT CENTER or
ALTERNATIVE TREATMENT CENTER — An organization approved by the
Department of Health and Community Wellness to perform activities
necessary to provide registered qualifying patients with usable marijuana
and related paraphernalia in accordance with the provisions of the CUMMA.
This term shall include the organization's officers, directors, board
members, and employees.[Added 6-23-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-12]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA CULTIVATION FACILITY — A commercial entity
licensed under the CUMMA that cultivates, dries, trims, or cures marijuana
for sale to marijuana product manufacturing facilities, and to other
marijuana cultivation facilities, but not to consumers, which holds all
LOT LINE, FRONT — The lot line separating the lot from the street
right-of-way. Also referred to as a "street line."
a.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite and most distant from the
front lot line.
b.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A side
lot line separating a lot from a street is called a side street lot line.
c.
§ 38-2.2 KEARNY CODE § 38-2.2
AO:870
required state licenses and permits.[Added 6-23-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-12]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY — A retail establishment licensed
under the CUMMA to dispense marijuana for the medical use of marijuana
to qualifying patients.[Added 6-23-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-12]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITY — Any of the following: medical marijuana
alternative treatment center; medical marijuana dispensary; medical
marijuana cultivation facility; medical marijuana manufacturing facility;
medical marijuana safety compliance facility.[Added 6-23-2020 by Ord.
No. 2020-12]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA MANUFACTURING FACILITY — A commercial
facility licensed under a commercial entity licensed under the CUMMA
that receives marijuana from a licensed cultivation facility and extracts
resin from the marijuana or creates a marijuana-infused product for sale
and transfer in packaged form to a medical marijuana center, which holds
all required state licenses and permits.[Added 6-23-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-12]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA SAFETY COMPLIANCE FACILITY — A commercial
facility licensed under the CUMMA that receives marijuana from a licensed
cultivation facility, licensed processing facility, or licensed caregiver, tests
it for contaminants and for tetrahydrocannabinol and other cannabinoids,
returns the test results, and may return the marijuana to the marijuana
facility.[Added 6-23-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-12]
MEDICAL USE OF MARIJUANA — The acquisition, possession, transport,
or use of marijuana or paraphernalia by a registered qualifying patient
as authorized by the CUMMA and New Jersey Controlled Dangerous
Substances Act, P.L. 1970, c. 226 (N.J.S.A. 24:21-2).[Added 6-23-2020 by
Ord. No. 2020-12]
MEZZANINE — Shall mean an intermediate level between the floor and
ceiling of any story, and covering not more than 33% of the floor area of the
room in which it is located. An intermediate level exceeding 33% of the floor
area of the room in which is it located is considered another story.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Shall mean a household in which the
total income is not less nor more than that specified in subsection 38-6.10d.
MOTEL — Shall mean a hotel as defined in this chapter.
MOTOR FREIGHT FACILITY — Shall mean truck terminal.
MULTI-FAMILY APARTMENT HOUSE — Shall mean a building or portion
thereof containing more than two dwelling units and not classified as a
one or two family dwelling, or a townhouse. (See definition for "Dwelling,
multiple-family.")
NONCONFORMING LOT — Shall mean a lot the area, dimension or location
of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this
chapter, but fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment.
§ 38-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-2.2
AO:871
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure the size,
dimension or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision
or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance, but which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reasons of such
adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONFORMING USE — Shall mean a use or activity which was lawful
prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of this Zoning Ordinance, but
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it
is located by reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONINDIGENOUS LIMITED INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Shall mean a low
income household or a moderate income household other than an
indigenous limited income household as defined in this chapter.
OCCUPANCY — Shall mean the purpose for which a structure or part
thereof or premises is used or intended to be used.
OFF-SITE — Shall mean located outside the lot lines of the lot in question
but within the property (of which the lot is part) which is the subject of a
development application or contiguous portion of a street right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — Shall mean not located on the property which is the subject
of a development application nor on a contiguous portion of a street rightof-
way.
ON-SITE — Shall mean located on the lot in question.
ON-TRACT — Shall mean located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on a contiguous portion of a street or right-ofway.
OPEN SPACE — Shall mean any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated or reserved for public or private use
or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of the owners and occupants of
land adjoining or neighboring such open space; provided that such areas
may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street
parking and other improvements that are designed to be incidental to the
natural openness of the land.
ORIEL WINDOW — Shall mean a window projected beyond and suspended
from the wall of a building or cantilevered therefrom.
PARKING AREA, PRIVATE — Shall mean any open area used for the
temporary storage of automobiles and other vehicles for the use solely by
the occupants thereof to which such use is accessory.
PARKING AREA, PUBLIC — Shall mean any open area other than a street
or other public way used for the temporary storage of automobiles and
other vehicles and available to the public whether for a fee, or without
compensation, or as an accommodation for clients, customers, or
employees.
PARTY WALL — Shall mean a common shared wall on an interior lot line
between two separate structures, buildings, or dwelling units.
§ 38-2.2 KEARNY CODE § 38-2.2
AO:872
PENTHOUSE — Shall mean an enclosed structure above the roof of a
building, other than a roof structure or bulkhead, occupying not more than
33% of the roof area.
PERMIT — Shall mean an official document or certificate issued by the
approving authority having jurisdiction, authorizing performance of a
specified activity not otherwise forbidden by law.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, association, partnership, corporation
or cooperative group.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE — Shall mean mobile services, unlicensed
wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access services,
including cellular radiotelephone, specialized mobile radio system and
personal communications services.
PLAN — Shall mean the provisions for development of a planned
development, including a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use,
location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or
density of development, public or private streets, ways and parking
facilities, open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the
plan" when used in this chapter shall mean the written and graphic
materials referred to in this definition.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean an area of a
minimum contiguous size as specified by ordinance to be developed
according to a plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with
appurtenant common areas to accommodate commercial or office uses or
both and other uses incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted
by ordinance.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean planned unit development,
planned unit residential development, residential cluster, planned
commercial development or planned industrial development.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean an area of a
minimum contiguous size as specified by ordinance to be developed
according to a plan as a single entity containing one or more structures with
appurtenant common areas to accommodate industrial uses and other uses
incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by ordinance.
PLANNING BOARD — Shall mean the Planning Board of the Town of
Kearny.
PREVAILING SETBACK — Shall mean the average distance from the front
lot line to the front building wall of a structure on all lots within 200 feet on
the same side of the block.
PUBLIC AREAS — Shall mean public areas including a. public parks,
playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas; b. other public open
spaces; c. scenic and historic sites; and d. sites for schools and other public
buildings and structures.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Shall mean any building which is primarily used and/
or primarily occupied by the United States, the State of New Jersey, the
§ 38-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-2.2
AO:873
Town of Kearny, or any subdivision or agency thereof, which building is used
primarily for police, fire, public health, education, recreation, or any other
governmental purpose.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — Shall mean an open space area conveyed or
otherwise dedicated to a municipality, municipal agency, board of education,
State or County agency, or other public body for recreational or
conservation uses.
REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Shall mean an area determined to be in need
of redevelopment pursuant to the "Local Redevelopment and Housing Law,"
N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1, et seq.
RELOCATE DRIVEWAY — Shall mean a change in access point, general
design, length or drainage of an existing driveway.
REPAIR — Shall mean the reconstruction or renewal of any part of an
existing building for the purpose of its maintenance.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER — Shall mean an area to be developed as a single
entity according to a plan containing residential housing units which have a
common or public open space area as an appurtenance.
RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY — Shall mean a driveway providing access used
for a single, two-family or multi-family purposes only.
RESTAURANT — Shall mean a building or structure designed, used or
intended for use in which either food or beverage or both are sold and
consumed primarily within the confines of an enclosed structure on the site.
A restaurant shall not include refreshment stands commonly called snack
or dairy bars where consumption takes place outside of the structure or in
automobiles parked upon the premises, whether brought to the automobiles
by the customer or by employees of the establishment. A restaurant shall
also include pick-up delivery services wherein food is prepared on the
premises for off-premises consumption.
RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD — Shall mean an establishment whose principal
business is the sale of pre-packaged or rapidly prepared food directly to
the customer in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either within the
restaurant building or off premises.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA — Shall mean a device or instrument used
for the reception of television or other electronic communications signal
broadcast or relayed from an earth satellite. It may be a solid, open mesh,
or bar configured structure in the shape of a shallow disk or parabola.
SIGHT TRIANGLE — Shall mean a triangle-shaped easement established at
the intersection of two streets or a driveway and a street in which nothing
shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow in such a manner as
to obstruct vision between the height of two feet and six inches above the
centerline grade of the street or driveway. The triangle shall be determined
along such street lot lines or edges of driveway 25 feet distant from their
property line.
§ 38-2.2 KEARNY CODE § 38-2.2
AO:874
SIGN — Shall mean any device for visual communication that is used for the
purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public.
SIGN AREA — Shall mean the entire face of a sign including the advertising
surface and any framing, trim, or molding, but not including the supporting
structure. The sign area of mounted lettering or graphics shall be the
rectangle of smallest dimensions enclosing such lettering or graphics.
SIGN, GROUND — Shall mean any sign placed upon or supported by
the ground independent of any other structure and advertising only the
businesses or services located on the same lot.
SIGN, PROJECTING — Shall mean a sign mounted at right angles to the face
of the building.
SIGN, ROOF — Shall mean a sign mounted on the roof of a building.
SIGN, WALL — Shall mean a sign fastened parallel to the wall of a building
which does not project more than eight inches beyond the surface of the
wall.
SITE PLAN — Shall mean a representation of the proposed development,
redevelopment, expansion or improvement of one or more parcels of land
and/or buildings in accordance with the rules and procedures of the Kearny
Town Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance.
STANDARDS OF PERFORMANCE — Shall mean standards a. adopted by
ordinance regulating noise levels, glare, earthborne or sonic vibrations,
heat, electronic or atomic radiation, noxious odors, toxic matters, explosive
and inflammable matters, smoke and airborne particles, waste discharge,
screening of unsightly objects or conditions and such other similar matters
as may be reasonably required by the Town of Kearny, or b. required by
applicable Federal, State or Interstate law.
STORY — Shall mean that part of any building comprised between any floor
and the floor or roof next above.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive or other way; a. which is an existing State, County or
municipal roadway; or b. which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved
pursuant to law; or c. which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded
in the office of the County Recording Officer prior to the appointment of
a planning board and the grant of such board of the power to review
plats; and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
STORY, HALF — That portion of the uppermost story with a floor
to ceiling height of five feet or more, not exceeding 50% of legally
permitted lower floor. A minimum roof pitch of 5 on 12 is required.
a.
STORY, FIRST — Any above grade floor shall be counted as a story
including the garage space.
b.
§ 38-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-2.2
AO:875
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a combination of materials to form a safe
and stable construction for occupancy, use, or ornamentation, whether
installed on, above or below the surface of a parcel of land. Structures,
or parts thereof, may include and are not limited to buildings, stadiums,
reviewing stands, platforms, stagings, observation towers, radio towers,
satellite dish antennas, water tanks and towers, trestles, piers, wharves,
coal bins, container units, shelters, fences, steps, retaining walls, and
display signs.
SWIMMING POOL — Shall mean any structure having a depth greater than
two feet and a water surface area in excess of 150 square feet which is used
for swimming, bathing or wading purposes.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS — Shall mean the electrical or electronic
transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information
of the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the
information as sent and received.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT — Shall mean equipment, other
than customer premises equipment, used by a carrier to provide
telecommunications services, and includes software integral to such
equipment (including upgrades).
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE — Shall mean the offering of
telecommunications for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of
users as to be effectively available directly to the public, regardless of the
facilities used.
TOPOGRAPHY — Shall mean the surface features of an area of land.
TOWER — Shall mean a freestanding antenna support structure.
TOWNHOUSE — Shall mean a building designed for or occupied by no more
than one family or household and attached to other similar buildings or
structures by not more than two party walls extending from the foundation
to and through the roof. Furthermore, each such dwelling unit shall be
provided with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for the use of each
family or household of the townhouse. For the purpose of this chapter, a
townhouse may include a building or structure in fee simple, condominium,
cooperative or leasehold ownership or any combination thereof.
TRAILER — Shall mean (i) a structure on wheels, towed or hauled by
another vehicle and used for carrying materials, goods or objects, or (ii)
a structure used as a temporary construction office in connection with
construction projects.
TRUCK TERMINAL — Shall mean an establishment primarily engaged in
furnishing, hauling, or transfer services without long-term product or cargo
storage and where trucks load and unload products or cargo for
transshipment or reshipment without accessory consolidation, repacking or
value added services. A truck terminal may also include accessory areas for
the repair, service, maintenance, temporary storage, or parking of trucks.
§ 38-2.2 KEARNY CODE § 38-2.2
AO:876
USE — Shall mean the specific purpose for which land or building is
designed, arranged, intended or for which it is or may be occupied or
maintained.
VARIANCE — Shall mean the approving authority's authorized departure
from the literal requirements and terms of this chapter in accordance with
the procedures contained herein.
WAREHOUSE AND DISTRIBUTION FACILITY — Shall mean an
establishment primarily used for the (i) indoor long term storage and/or
distribution of goods, products or materials, or (ii) accessory consolidation,
repackaging and value-added services of or to goods, products or materials.
Such facility may include accessory areas for the repairs, service,
maintenance, temporary storage or parking of trucks.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS — Shall mean the transmission and
receipt of writing, signs, signals, pictures, and sounds of all kinds without
the aid of wire, cable, or other like connection between the points of origin
and reception of such transmission.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS — Shall mean the transmission and
receipt of writing, signs, signals, pictures, and sounds of all kinds without
the aid of wire, cable, or other like connection between the points of origin
and reception of such transmission.
YARD — Shall mean an open space, which lies between the principal or
accessory building or buildings and the nearest lot line and is unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward except as herein permitted.
ZONE LOT — See definition for lot.
ZONING BOARD — Shall mean the Board of Adjustment established under
this chapter.
ZONING MAP — Shall mean the Zoning Map of the Town of Kearny, New
Jersey, together with all amendments subsequently adopted.
ZONING PERMIT — Shall mean a document defined by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-7
and issued by the Zoning Official, which permits the use or erection,
YARD, FRONT — Shall mean an open space extending the full width of
the lot between a principal building and the front lot line, unoccupied
and unobstructed from the ground upward except as may be specified
elsewhere in this chapter. The depth of the front yard shall be measured
perpendicular to the front lot line.
a.
YARD, REAR — Shall mean an open, unoccupied space across the full
width of the lot and lying between the rear line of the lot and the
nearest line of the principal or accessory building. The depth of the rear
yard shall be measured perpendicular to the rear property line.
b.
YARD, SIDE — Shall mean an open, unoccupied space between the side
line of the lot and the nearest line of the principal or accessory building
and extending from the front to the rear yard. The width of the side
yard shall be measured perpendicular to the side line of the lot.
c.
§ 38-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-2.2
AO:877
construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, or installation of a
structure or building, and which acknowledges that such use, structure,
or building complies with the provisions of the municipal zoning ordinance
or variance duly authorized by a municipal agency pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-60 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
§ 38-3. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP.
§ 38-3.1. Districts Designated. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-3.100; Ord.
No. 6-27-90; Ord. No. 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1999-O-2 § 2; Ord. No.
1999-O-7 § 1; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-11; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-64]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Town of Kearny is hereby divided into
the following types of zone districts, differentiated according to use, area
and bulk regulations and to be designated as follows:
Zone
Designation
Zone Description
R-1 One-Family Residential
R-1M One-Family Residential Manor Zone
R-2 One and Two-Family Residential
R-2B One and Two-Family Residential/Hospital
R-3 Multi-Family Residential
C-1 Office
C-2 Neighborhood Business
C-3 Community Business
C-4 General Commercial
LI Limited Industrial
M Manufacturing
SKI-N South Kearny Industrial North
SKI-S South Kearny Industrial South
CEM Cemetery
PRD Planned Residential Development
CLH Conventional and Limited Income Housing
§ 38-3.2. Zoning Map. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-3.200; Ord. No.
6-27-90; Ord. No. 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1999-O-2 § 3; Ord. No.
1999-O-7 § 2; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-11; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-64; Ord. No.
2009-9 § 1; Ord. No. 2011-2]
The location and boundaries of said districts are hereby established on the
Zoning Map of the Town of Kearny initially dated October 1, 1997, and by
any amendments thereto and which map is made a part of this chapter.67
§ 38-2.2 KEARNY CODE § 38-3.2
AO:878
§ 38-3.3. Interpretation of Boundaries.
(Reserved)
a. Said Zoning Map shall be amended as recommended in the Town of
Kearny Master Plan Re-Examination Report adopted December 2, 1998
to separate the former SKM Zone into SKM-1 and SKM-2 as depicted in
Appendix D of the Re-Examination Report.
b. Said Zoning Map shall be amended as recommended in the Town of
Kearny Master Plan Re-Examination report adopted on May 7, 2003 to
delete the former SKM-1 and SKM-2 Zones and replace the SKM-1 Zone
with the new SKI-N Zone and the SKM-2 Zone with the new SKI-S Zone.
The location and boundaries of said districts are hereby established on
the attached map dated October 2004.
c. The boundaries of said R-1M Zone shall be the Belleville Turnpike to the
north, the existing R-1 Zone boundary line between Kearny Avenue and
Grand Place to the east, the northerly side of Stewart Avenue to the
south and the existing R-1 boundary line along Passaic Avenue to the
west.
d. The area along Hickory Street and Ivy Street and the area along Locust
Avenue and Lafayette Place, specifically described by Tax Block and Lot
as follows,
Block Lot
79 8-13, 14A, 14B, 15-17
80 1-6, 16, 17
82 6
83 4-15
222 1-6, 42-50
223 1-7, 38-49
224 1A
225 1A
239 2-5, 25, 35-63
240 1-46
241 14-16, 17A-17D, 18.01, 18.029, 19-40, 41A, 41B
are hereby rezoned from R-2 Zone to R-I Zone so as to conform with
the Master Plan revisions of December 3, 2008.
67.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map referred to herein may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 38-3.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-3.4
AO:879
§ 38-3.4. Designation of Zone Boundaries. [Ord. No. 10-14-87
§ 138.3.310]
The zone boundary lines are intended generally to follow the center lines
of streets; the center lines of railroad rights-of-way; existing lot lines;
the center lines of rivers, streams and other waterways; and municipal
boundary lines. When a district boundary line does not follow such a line,
its position shall be shown on the Zoning Map by a specific dimension
expressing its distance, in feet, from a street line or other boundary line as
indicated.
§ 38-3.5. Determination of Doubtful Lines. [Ord. No. 10-14-87
§ 138.3.320]
In cases of uncertainty or disagreement as to the true location of any
zone boundary line, the determination thereof shall lie with the Board of
Adjustment.
§ 38-4. DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
§ 38-4.1. Schedule of Regulations. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-4.100;
Ord. No. 6-27-90; Ord. No. 12-12-90; Ord. No. 1999-O-2 §§ 4 — 15;
Ord. No. 1999-O-7 §§ 3 — 5; Ord. No. 2002-O-78; Ord. No.
2003-(O)-23; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-11; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-64; Ord. No.
2005-(O)-09 § 3; Ord. No. 2007-(O)-17 § 1; Ord. No. 2008-(O)-04 § 1;
Ord. No. 2010-12 § 1]
The restrictions and controls intended to regulate development in each
district are set forth in Schedule I, District Use Regulations and Schedule
II, Area, Yard and Bulk Requirements68, which are supplemented by other
sections of this chapter.
§ 38-4.2. Application of Regulations. [Ord. No. 10-14-87
§ 138-4.200]
Except as hereinafter otherwise provided.
a. No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building or
structure shall be moved, altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any
land or building be designed, used or intended to be used for any
purpose or in any manner other than as specified among the uses
hereinafter listed as permitted in the district in which such building or
land is located.
b. No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed or structurally
altered to exceed in height the limit hereinafter designated for the
district in which such building is located.
68.Editor's Note: Schedule I, District Use Regulations and Schedule II, Area, Yard and Bulk
Requirements are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 38-3.4 KEARNY CODE § 38-4.2
AO:880
§ 38-4.3. General Use Restriction. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-4.300]
Any use which is not specifically designated as a principal permitted use, an
accessory use or a conditional use is specifically prohibited from that zone
district in the Town of Kearny.
§ 38-4.4. Temporary Quarters. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-4.00; Ord.
No. 5-12-82]
c. No building or structure shall be erected, no existing buildings or
structures shall be altered, enlarged or rebuilt, nor shall any open
space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any
manner, except in conformity to the yard, lot area and building location
regulations hereinafter designated for the district in which such
building or open space is located.
d. No yard or other open space provided about any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building,
and no yard or open space on one lot shall be considered as providing a
yard or open-space for a building on any other lot.
e. No minimum off-street parking area or loading or unloading area shall
be considered as providing off-street parking, loading or unloading for a
use or structure on any other lot or parcel other than the principal use
to which it is ancillary, except as provided herein.
a. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Zoning Ordinance and
specifically use regulations contained in Schedule I, District Use
Regulations, in the event a residential dwelling in a R-1, R-2 or R-3 Zone
District is substantially destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty
or an act of God, the owner/occupant of the dwelling upon application
to the Construction Officer may be permitted to locate temporary living
quarters on his or her property for a period not to exceed 90 days,
provided that in the opinion of the Construction Official the premises
are repairable and the repairs may be accomplished within a period of
90 days from the date of the damage. Under no circumstances shall any
more than one temporary living quarter be located on the property at
any one time.
b. No approval for temporary living quarters shall be granted unless the
applicant can display a valid special reason for the requested relief. The
following shall be considered valid special reasons for purposes of this
section:
1. Financial hardship;
2. Job residency requirement;
3. Enrollment of children in the local school system;
§ 38-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-4.4
AO:881
§ 38-4.5. Trailers and Other Storage Structures. [Ord. No. 10-14-87
§ 138-4.500; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-64]
§ 38-4.6. Sexually Oriented Businesses Prohibited in Certain
Zones.69 [Ord. No. 2007-(O)-68]
4. Protection of personal property remaining in the structure that
cannot otherwise be relocated; or
5. Relocation would jeopardize the aggrieved person or persons
everyday activities.
c. Approval for temporary living quarters shall be granted only when the
adjoining property owners to either side and to the rear of the subject
property give their written consent to the location of the temporary
living quarters.
d. All temporary living quarters must conform to the requirements of the
New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
a. The storage, parking or use of trucks, tractor, trailers, containers or any
similar structure for storage purposes on a permanent basis is hereby
prohibited in all districts enumerated in this zoning ordinance except
SKI-N where it may be permitted subject to site plan approval. For
purposes of this subsection, there shall be a rebuttable presumption
that a truck, tractor, trailer, container or any structure is used for
storage purposes on a permanent basis if such truck, tractor trailer,
container or structure remains on the same or similar location
continuously for more than seven days while containing goods, chattels
or merchandise of any kind.
b. The storage, parking or use of a house trailer, mobile home or office
trailer by any person or persons on a permanent basis is hereby
prohibited in all districts enumerated in this zoning ordinance. For
purposes of this subsection, there shall be a rebuttable presumption
that a house trailer, mobile home, or office trailer is used on a
permanent basis if such house trailer, mobile home, or office trailer
remains in the same or similar location continuously for more than
seven days.
Provided, however, that house trailers, mobile homes, or office trailers
used as offices for construction projects may be permitted on written
permit of the Construction Official for the duration of a particular
construction project for which the structure is used.
a. No sexually oriented business as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:33-12.2 and
N.J.S.A. 2C:34-6 may or shall be located in the land areas contained
within the zones presently designated as
69.Editor's Note: Former subsection 38-4.6, Storage of Containers, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2004-(O)-64, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance Nos. 2007-(O)-17 and 2008-(O)-04.
§ 38-4.4 KEARNY CODE § 38-4.6
AO:882
§ 38-5. SUPPLEMENTARY LOT, HEIGHT AND YARD REGULATIONS.
§ 38-5.1. Lot Regulations. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-5.100; Ord. No.
2004-(O)-12; Ord. No. 2005-(O)-09 § 2; Ord. No. 2018-12]
R-1, R-2, R-2B, R-3, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, LI, M, SKI S, CEM, PRD and
CLH or in any Redevelopment Area.
b. In addition to the restrictions imposed by N.J.S.A. 2C:34-7, no sexually
oriented business may or shall be located within 1,000 feet of any
location licensed for the retail sale or consumption of alcoholic
beverages.
c. The bulk standards applicable to Restaurants, Eating and Drinking
Establishments and Fast-Food Restaurants, set forth in Section 38-6,
Schedule IV70j of the Revised General Ordinances shall apply to
sexually oriented businesses.
a. Existing Zone Lots of Record. In any residential zone, only a one-family
dwelling may be erected on a nonconforming zone lot of official record
at the effective date of this chapter, as to minimum lot area; provided,
however, that no adjacent or adjoining vacant land exists or existed at
the time of the effective date of this chapter which would create a
conforming lot if all or part of the vacant land were combined with
subject lot. No lot or lots in single ownership hereafter shall be reduced
so as to create one or more nonconforming lots. The conversion of a
dwelling to three or more dwelling units on a lot of nonconforming area
shall be considered a variance under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.(5).
b. Lot Width. The minimum lot width of any lot shall be measured at the
front yard setback line as required for the district in which it is located.
In cases of irregularly shaped lots whose sides are not parallel, the
street frontage shall not be less than the 75% of the minimum lot width
required; provided, however, that the lot width as measured at the front
yard setback line shall be no less than the minimum lot width, as
specified in the Zoning Schedule, for the district in which the lot is
contained.
c. Corner Lots. At all street intersections involving Passaic Avenue,
Belgrove Drive, Kearny Avenue, Davis Avenue, Schuyler Avenue,
Midland Avenue, Bergen Avenue and Belleville Turnpike, no obstruction
exceeding 30 inches in height above the established grade of the street
at the property line, other than an existing building, post, column,
hedge or tree, shall be erected or maintained on any lot within the sight
triangle area bounded by the line drawn between points along such
street lot lines 25 feet distant from their intersection. The
determination of the front yard of a corner lot shall be at the option of
70.Editor's Note: Schedule VI may be found as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 38-4.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-5.1
AO:883
§ 38-5.2. Frontage Upon a Street. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-5.100;
Ord. No. 1999-O-2 §§ 16-17, 37]
the owner or developer and shall be so designed on all maps and official
records.
On a corner lot involving any one of the above mentioned major streets,
each story or part of a building, shall be set back from the side street a
minimum of 1/2 the required front setback or 15 feet in an R-1 or R-2
Zone and 10 feet in an R-3 Zone, whichever is greater. The provisions
of the sight triangle area, indicated in the preceding paragraph shall
prevail where there is a conflict with the provisions of this section.
All other corner lots in any R-1 Zone, shall have two front yards.
The minimum front yard setback on the shorter street frontage of the
property shall be 20 feet, or the prevailing setback of the neighborhood,
whichever is greater; and, the minimum front yard setback on the
longer street frontage of property shall be a minimum of eight feet,
unless otherwise provided in the preceding paragraph in 38-5.1c above.
All corner lots in the R-1M Zone shall have two front yards. The
minimum front yard setback shall be 20 feet or the prevailing setback of
the neighborhood, whichever is greater. The minimum lot frontage for
corner lots shall be 60 feet; the minimum lot area shall be 6,000 square
feet.
d. Through Lots. A through lot shall be considered as having two street
frontages, both of which shall be subject to the front yard requirements
of the Zoning Schedule of this chapter. For location purposes of
accessory uses and projections into the required yards only, such as
decks, sheds, patios, pools, and all other accessory uses and projections
into the required yards as defined under this Chapter, the yard opposite
of the dwelling's main ingress shall be considered the rear yard on
residential through lots.
e. Required Area or Space Cannot Be Reduced. The area or dimension of
any zone lot, yard, parking area, nonconforming use, or other space
shall not be reduced to less than the minimum required by this chapter;
and if already existing as less than the minimum required by this
chapter, the area or dimension may be continued and shall not be
further reduced.
a. Every principal building shall be built upon a lot with frontage upon an
improved and approved street in accordance with the street standards
established by the Town of Kearny.
b. Any property which contains access to one or more approved and
improved streets at its property line but does not contain sufficient
street frontage as required herein shall not be construed to be
landlocked. Where such conditions do exist or are created by virtue of a
subdivision, no building permit or occupancy permit shall be granted
§ 38-5.1 KEARNY CODE § 38-5.2
AO:884
§ 38-5.3. Yard Regulations. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-5.200; Ord. No.
1999-O-2 §§ 18 — 20; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-12; Ord. No. 2005-(O)-09
§ 2; Ord. No. 2005-(O)-42 § 6; Ord. No. 2012-11; Ord. No. 2012-19;
Ord. No. 2012-37]
unless and until the property contains the required amount of street
frontage as required herein.
c. (Reserved)
d. Lot Located in More Than One Zone. For any zone lot which is located
in more than one zone district, which district differs in character by
permitting residential, commercial or industrial uses, all yard, bulk and
other requirements shall be measured from the zone boundary line and
not the true lot line.
a. General.
1. Required courts or yards shall be open to the sky, unobstructed
except for the ordinary projection of parapets, skylights, window
sills, doorposts, rainwater leaders and ornamental features, which
may project not more than six inches into such yard or court. Roof
overhangs may extend into any required yard a distance not to
exceed 18 inches, unless the yards are in excess of eight feet, in
which case a roof overhang may extend a distance not to exceed
three feet.
2. In residential districts, an open porch, one story in height, may
project not more than eight feet into the required front yard, except
as provided in subsection 38-5.1c. In no distance shall an open
porch be located closer than 10 feet to a front lot line including any
steps thereto and in no case shall it extend further than five feet
beyond the majority of houses on the street.
b. Projection into Required Yards. Certain architectural features may
project into required yards as follows:
1. A cornice may project into the required front yard to an extent not
exceeding three feet or over a side yard, outer lot line court or a
rear yard to an extent not exceeding 1/4 of the width of such yard
or court, or to a distance of one foot in any case and to a maximum
distance of not over three feet.
Wall-mounted roofs over first floor front facade entryways may
project into the required front yard but not into the public rightof-
way provided such roofs cover no more area than a rectangle
extending four feet from the wall and having a width of no more
than six feet and provided such roofed entryways remain open and
not enclosed by screening or any other type of enclosure.
2. Ground-story bay windows, oriels or balconies may project not
more than three feet into any required side yard which has a width
§ 38-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-5.3
AO:885
of eight feet or more. No such projecting structure shall have a
width of greater than 12 feet. Uncovered steps and/or platforms
may be permitted in any side yard, provided they are no more than
three feet high and eight feet in length, and do not extend more
than three feet from the side wall, providing the remaining side
yard is not less than two feet. Chimneys may project not more than
three feet into any required side yard; provided, however, that such
chimneys in an R-1 District must be at least three feet from the side
lot line, and in R-2 and R-3 Districts, said chimneys must be at least
two feet from the side lot line.
(a) Residential structures. Exterior chimneys or vents must be
encased with either brick or other faced material compatible
with the existing exterior finish.
(b) Commercial structures. Exterior chimneys or vents which face
a public right-of-way or are in public view, must be encased
with either brick or other faced material compatible with the
existing exterior finish.
3. An open fire escape or balcony to a fire tower may project no more
than four feet into a required yard area.
4. Patios may be located in any side or rear yard, provided that they
are no closer than two feet to any property line.
5. Raised platforms including decks, swimming pool decks, and
uncovered porch platforms may be located in any side or rear yard
provided that such structure is not closer than three feet to any
property line. Such structures are not subject to lot coverage or
improved lot coverage requirements.
(a) Definitions.
BALCONY, EXTERIOR — Shall mean an exterior floor
projecting from and supported by a structure without
additional independent supports.
DECK — Shall mean all exterior floor supported on at least two
opposing sides by an adjacent structure, and/or posts, piers or
other independent supports.
PORCH — Shall mean a roofed open area, which may be
screened, usually attached to or part of and with direct access
to or from a building.
(b) Raised platforms and platforms surrounding aboveground
swimming pools may be located in any side or rear yard
provided that such structure is not closer than three feet from
any property line. Such structures are not subject to lot
coverage or imposed lot coverage requirements.
6. Decks may be allowed subject to the following conditions:
§ 38-5.3 KEARNY CODE § 38-5.3
AO:886
(a) Decks shall only be located in the side or rear yards of a
specific property.
(b) Decks shall be subject to the bulk yard requirements (side and
rear yard) of the zone in which they are located, however, a
deck may extend 10 feet into the rear yard setback.
(c) The deck structure shall be calculated into the improved lot
coverage requirements of the zone in which they are located to
the extent that the area of the deck (in addition to any patios)
exceeds 100 square feet.
(d) Second story decks may be allowed but may not be larger than
100 square feet.
7. Brick paver patios may be allowed subject to the following
conditions:
(a) Brick pavers shall be defined as blocks made from shale and/or
clay, which are kiln fired and manufactured in molds.
(b) Brick paver patio shall be subject to the bulk yard
requirements (side and rear yard) of the zone in which they are
located.
(c) The brick paver patio shall be calculated into the improved lot
coverage requirements of the zone in which they are located to
the extent that the area of the brick paver patio in the
aggregate (in addition to any deck structure) exceeds 100
square feet.
(d) The 100 square foot exemption listed within paragraph c shall
only be applicable if the brick paver patio is constructed atop a
stone or gravel base with the stone or gravel base being laid
directly atop undisturbed, permeable earth. Brick paver patios
which are constructed atop impervious surfaces such as
concrete, asphalt or plastic tarps shall not be considered
permeable and shall not be subject to the 100 square foot
exemption within paragraph b,7(c).
c. Front Yard Exception. Every lot in a residential district shall have a
front yard as required in Schedule II, Area, Yard and Bulk
Requirements71 except that within the same residential district where
the average front setback of existing buildings along the same side of
the street, within the same block, and within 200 feet of the subject lot
is greater than that in Schedule II, that average setback shall be
considered the minimum. The required building setback shall apply to
any story or part of any building except that cornices and eaves shall be
allowed to protrude up to two feet further than the main building wall.
71.Editor's Note: Schedule II, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 38-5.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-5.3
AO:887
The front yard setback in R-1 Zones shall be the prevailing setback of
the neighborhood. If the setback is greater than the minimum twentyfoot
front yard setback, the greater setback shall prevail. The front
yard setback in the R-1M Zone shall be the prevailing setback of the
neighborhood. If the length is greater than the minimum 20 feet front
yard setback, the greater setback shall prevail.
Where the front yard is not controlled by the preceding paragraph, no
principal residential building shall extend within the specified distance
from the front lot line indicated in Schedule II, Area, Yard and Bulk
Requirements, except that an uncovered porch may extend into a
required front yard as indicated herein.
d. Front Yard Requirements Affected by Official Map or Master Plan.
Where any lot fronts upon a street right-of-way which is proposed to be
widened as indicated on the Official Map of the Town of Kearny, or in
the adopted Master Plan of the Town of Kearny or by the Hudson
County Master Plan or Official Map, as provided by law, the front yard
or front side in such district shall be measured from such proposed
future right-of-way line.
e. Rear Yard Exception. When, at the time of the adoption of this chapter,
there is a lot of less than 100 feet depth, the rear yard may be reduced
one foot for every two feet of deficiency from the prescribed depth of
the rear yard, provided no part of any rear yard shall be less than 20
feet in depth.
f. Courts.
1. In any residential district, where permitted, the minimum width of
an inner court at its lowest level shall not be less than eight inches
per foot of height of the enclosing walls of such court measured
from the sills of the lowest story served by it, and the maximum
horizontal dimension of an inner court shall be not less than twice
its width; the least width of an outer court between the walls
thereof shall be at any given height not less than four inches per
foot of such height. The depth of an outer court shall not exceed
twice the width.
2. In any business or industrial district, where permitted, the
minimum width of an inner court at its lowest level shall be not less
than four inches per foot of height of the enclosing walls of such
court measured from the sills of the lowest story served by it; the
least width of an outer court on a lot line shall be at any given
height not less than three inches per foot of height above the lowest
level of such court. The depth of an outer court shall not exceed
twice its width.
g. Yard Requirements for Apartments in Commercial Zones.
1. Front Yard. For any building in a commercial zone used for
residential purposes, in whole or in part, a front yard setback shall
§ 38-5.3 KEARNY CODE § 38-5.3
AO:888
§ 38-5.4. Height Regulations. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-5.300; Ord.
No. 2010-24 § 2]
§ 38-5.5. Maximum Lot Coverage. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-5.400;
Ord. No. 2010-23 § 1]
The maximum lot coverage on each zone lot shall not be greater than is
permitted in the district where such buildings and structures are located
and shall include all porches, chimneys, extensions and accessory buildings.
The maximum building coverage on a minimum 5,000 square foot lot or
greater than the R-1 and R-2 Zones shall be 30% with accessory structures
not counted toward the maximum building coverage.
be provided which shall be equal to 1/2 the height of the building
or a minimum of 10 feet, whichever is greater.
2. Side Yard. If a business building is used for dwelling purposes
above the first floor, such residential part of the building as may be
more than two rooms deep shall be set back not less than four feet
from any side lot line.
3. Rear Yard. For any building in a commercial zone used for
residential purposes, in whole or in part, or for any story of a
building containing living or sleeping rooms, a rear yard shall be
required with a minimum depth of 20 feet, and its level shall be not
higher than the floor of the lowest story containing living quarters.
a. General Application. No building or structure shall have a greater
number of stories or greater number of feet than are permitted in the
district where such building is located.
b. Permitted Exceptions. Height limitations stipulated elsewhere in this
chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes,
monuments, chimneys, gas holders or water towers, smokestacks,
elevator towers and enclosures, flagpoles, fire towers, or water tanks,
steeples, (occupying in the aggregate less than 10% of the roof area
where they are located) television aerials, or to parapet walls, except
that no parapet wall may extend more than four feet above the limiting
height of the building. Mechanical appurtenances such as condensors,
exhaust fans, elevator housing and other similar equipment are exempt
from these height restrictions provided they do not extend more than
15 feet above the maximum height limitation and are suitably screened.
A mezzanine story shall also be considered to be a full story.
c. The maximum permitted height in the R1 Zone for one-family
residential use shall be 2.5 stories and 33 feet. The maximum permitted
height in the R2 Zone for one-family residential use shall be 2.5 stories
and 33 feet. The maximum permitted height in the R2 Zone for twofamily
residential use shall be three stories and 33 feet.
§ 38-5.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-5.5
AO:889
The maximum building coverage on lots greater than 3,500 square feet and
less than 5,000 square feet, the following lot coverage including accessory
structures within the maximum building coverage calculations shall be as
follows:
Lot Area Maximum Building Coverage
3,501 to 3,875 square feet 34%
3,876 to 4,250 square feet 33%
4,251 to 4,625 square feet 32%
4,626 to 4,999 square feet 31%
The maximum building coverage on lots of 3,500 square feet or less in the
R-1 and R-2 Zones shall remain 35% and shall include accessory structures
within the maximum building coverage calculations.
§ 38-5.6. Maximum Improved Lot Coverage. [Ord. 10-14-87
§ 138-5.500]
The maximum improved lot coverage shall not exceed the percentage
indicated in the Schedule of Area, Yard and Bulk Requirements72 herein for
each zone district designated.
§ 38-5.7. Number of Buildings Restricted. [Ord. No. 10-14-87
§ 138-5.600; Ord. No. 6-27-90]
There shall be not more than one principal building on each zone lot in any
residential district, except as provided in subsection 38-5.9 paragraphs h.,
k. and m.
§ 38-5.8. General Landscaping Requirements. [Ord. No. 10-14-87
§ 138-5.700; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-12; Ord. No. 2005-(O)-09 § 2; Ord.
No. 2010-26]
a. Enclosed Uses. Any enclosed use required by any Town Ordinance to be
landscaped shall provide a fence, or a visual screen as may be required
by the approving authority, designed to produce a dense cover
consisting of evergreen or evergreen type hedges or shrubs, spaced at
intervals of not more than six feet, located and maintained in good
condition within 10 feet of the property line.
b. Unenclosed Uses. Any use which is not conducted within a completely
enclosed building including but not limited to storage yards, lumber
and building materials yards, and parking lots, shall be entirely
enclosed by a fence as may be required by the approving authority. This
section shall not apply to nurseries, or to automobile or trailer sales
areas, except when abutting a residential zone.
72.Editor's Note: Schedule II, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 38-5.5 KEARNY CODE § 38-5.8
AO:890
§ 38-5.9. Grading of Lots. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-69 §§ 1.1 — 1.10]
c. Maintenance. Any fencing or landscaping installed in accordance with
this section shall be maintained in good order to achieve the objectives
of this section. Failure to maintain fencing or to replace dead or
diseased landscaping shall be considered a violation of this chapter.
d. Front Yards in the R-1M Zones. The front yard areas in the R-1M Zone
shall be landscaped with grass and/or other vegetative cover, shrubs
and/or trees to a minimum of 70% of the front yard area. The "front yard
area" is defined as the area between the front street line and the
building line across the full width of the lot. In addition, no trees located
on the street frontage shall be removed to provide driveway access.
e. Front Yards in R-2 Residential Zones. The front yard areas in R-2 Zones
shall be landscaped with grass and/or other vegetative cover, shrubs
and/or trees to a minimum of 45% of the front yard area. The "front yard
area" is defined for purposes of this section as the area between the
front street line and the building line across the full width of the lot. In
addition, no trees located on the street frontages shall be removed to
provide driveway access.
a. Title. This subsection shall be known as the Town of Kearny Lot Grading
Ordinance.
b. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to control and regulate the
indiscriminate or excessive removal of soil thereby creating drainage
issues, stormwater runoff, soil erosion large-scale clear-cutting and
destruction of trees and to control, regulate and prevent conditions
which cause an increase in stormwater run-off, sedimentation, soil
erosion, air or noise pollution, or impair the ambiance or physical
appearance of a neighborhood. The regulations contained in this
subsection are designed to limit such adverse impact while not
interfering with the right of a town property owner to appropriately
remove trees in accordance with the regulations as set forth
hereinbelow.
c. Governed Acts. No person may alter, remove or otherwise disturb land
or soil on any lot or property within the Town of Kearny, except in
accordance with the terms and conditions of this subsection.
d. Zoning Grading Permit Required. No person directly or indirectly shall
alter, remove or otherwise disturb land or soil on any lot or property
without having obtained a zoning grading permit as follows:
1. Permit Required Prior to Land Disturbance or Construction. No
land area shall be developed by any person such that:
(a) The rate of stormwater runoff occurring at the area is
increased over what occurs there under existing conditions.
(b) The drainage of adjacent areas is adversely affected.
§ 38-5.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-5.9
AO:891
(c) Soil erosion during and after development is increased over
what naturally occurs there under existing conditions.
(d) Soil absorption and groundwater recharge capacity of the area
is decreased below what occurs there under existing
conditions.
(e) The natural drainage pattern of the area is significantly
altered.
Unless the Town Engineer has first approved a lot grading and
soil erosion and sediment control plan for the proposed activity
and the Construction Code Office has issued a zoning grading
permit to allow such activity to proceed.
2. Exemptions from Requirement.
(a) Any development which has received site plan or subdivision
approval from the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment shall
be exempt from the requirements of paragraph d,1 of this
section; provided, however, that individual lots for one or twofamily
dwellings included within any approved subdivision
shall not be exempt by this paragraph d, 2 (a).
(b) Provided that there are no environmentally sensitive areas,
such as but not limited to, steep slopes, wetlands, streams or
bodies of water located in the area to be graded or disturbed
and further provided that, in the opinion of the Town Engineer,
the proposed land disturbance will not create a soil erosion
problem, then the following exemptions may be granted by the
Construction Code Enforcement Official:
(1) Land disturbance of less than 15% of total lot area.
(2) Land disturbance for the purpose of constructing an
addition less than 350 square feet to an existing single- or
two-family dwelling.
Any proposed land disturbance exempted by the
provisions of paragraphs d, 2 (a) and/or d, 2 (b) (1) or (2),
shall not be required to obtain a zoning grading permit.
3. Grading Plan Preparation and Contents. The lot grading and soil
erosion control plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer
licensed by the State of New Jersey. The plan must detail how the
requirements of paragraph d, 1 will be met. If the site currently has
a drainage problem as the result of previous development, the plan
should propose a method to address the existing conditions. The
Town Engineer will review the plan to determine if the
improvement is feasible and warranted. Two copies of the plan
shall be submitted to the Construction Code Office together with
two copies of an application for a zoning grading permit and the fee
§ 38-5.9 KEARNY CODE § 38-5.9
AO:892
required by paragraph, 5 of this subsection. The lot grading and
soil erosion and sediment control plan shall contain the following
information:
(a) Date.
(b) Layout of proposed buildings and structures.
(c) North arrow; scale; block and lot number of the subject
property (or properties); name and address of record owner;
name address, license number and seal of the person
preparing the plan.
(d) Complete lot boundary line information based on a current
survey prepared by a New Jersey licensed land surveyor.
(e) Building setback lines, lines of existing streets, easements
affecting the property and any areas dedicated to public use.
(f) Location of existing buildings and structures, if any, including
walls, fences, culverts and bridges. Spot elevations as to all
such structures shall be provided. Structures to be removed
shall be indicated by dashed lines.
(g) Location of all existing and proposed storm drainage
structures. The information shall include proposed methods of
controlling on-site stormwater, and may include grading, use of
underground leaders to stormwater systems or dry wells, and
other similar or related methods.
(h) Existing contours at two-foot intervals where slopes are less
than 10% and five-foot intervals where slopes are 10% or
greater. Existing contours shall be shown by dashed lines.
(i) Proposed contours with similar intervals. Proposed contours
shall be shown by solid lines. All changes in grade proposed on
site or adjacent to the building must be delineated on the
Proposed Contour Plan.
(j) Location of existing rock outcroppings, high points,
watercourses, depressions, ponds, marshes, wooded areas and
other significant natural features.
(k) Proposed use of land, buildings and other structures, including
driveways, roads, curbs, sidewalks and other paved areas.
(l) Existing and proposed utility locations.
(m) Landscaping plans showing existing vegetation to remain and
all areas to be seeded or planted. Size and type of proposed
trees and shrubs shall be indicated. All trees eight inches DBH
or greater shall be shown.
§ 38-5.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-5.9
AO:893
(n) Disturbance fencing shall be provided around the limits of all
areas of disturbance.
(o) Silt fencing and/or hay bales shall be provided downstream of
all areas of all areas of disturbance.
(p) Such other information as may be required by the Town
Engineer in order to determine that the requirements of this
section have been met.
(q) Narrative describing the existing conditions and any proposed
improvements as a result of the change in grade.
4. Time for Action. The Town Engineer shall review and approve,
conditionally approve or deny the lot grading permit application
within 30 days of the date on which a complete application is
submitted. Otherwise, the applications for a grading permit shall
be deemed to be approved.
5. Fee. Each applicant for a zoning grading permit under this
subsection shall submit a review fee payable to the Town of Kearny
in the amount of $200 for the review by the Town Engineer and a
$25 fee for the issuance of the permit.
e. General Requirements. Since considerable soil erosion can take place
during land disturbance, development plans shall contain proposed soil
erosion and sediment control measures. The measures shall be
incorporated into the final plan and final construction drawings. Soil
erosion and sediment control measures shall conform to the Standards
and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control. The
measurers shall apply to all features of the constructions site, including
street and utility installations as well as to the protection of individual
lots. Measurers shall also be instituted to prevent or control soil erosion
and sedimentation during the various stages of development.
f. Guaranties. Improvements or such other measures on an approved lot
grading plan that may be required subsequent to the start of
construction or site development work may be deferred until such
appropriate time as when required. The Town Engineer shall provide
for the posting of performance guaranties and maintenance bonds in
the same manner as provided in this ordinance. For drainage (i.e.,
piping) catch basins.
g. Review and Approval of Plan; Copies of Decision. If required, the Town
Engineer shall refer soil erosion and sediment control portion of the
application to the Hudson County Soil Conservation District or such
other local, County, State or Federal agency as may be particularly
qualified to review said plan, and no approval of the Town Engineer
shall be given until after receipt and recommendations thereof. Such
review and approval shall be made within a period of 30 days of
submission of a complete application unless, by mutual agreement in
writing between the municipality and the applicant, this period is
§ 38-5.9 KEARNY CODE § 38-5.9
AO:894
§ 38-6. SUPPLEMENTARY USE REGULATIONS.
§ 38-6.1. Regulations Governing Certain Permitted Uses. [Ord. No.
10-14-87 § 138-6.100; Ord. No. 6-27-90; Ord. No. 12-12-90; Ord. No.
4-24-91; Ord. No. 1999-O-2 §§ 22 — 25; Ord. No. 2006-(O)-55A § 1]
extended for an additional 30 days. Failure of the municipality to make
a decision within such period of such extension thereof shall constitute
certification. The applicant shall be provided with written notice of such
decision by the Town Engineer or other authorized municipal agent.
A copy of such decision, including name of applicant, site location by
street address and block and lot number, and proposed land use shall be
sent to the Hudson County Soil Conservation District. The municipality
shall also make available such other information as may be required by
the District.
h. Maintenance. Individuals or developers carrying out soil erosion and
sediment control measures under this subsection, and all subsequent
owners of property on which such measurers have been installed, shall
adequately maintain all permanent soil erosion control measures,
devices and planting in effective working condition for a period of two
years after completion of the approved plan implementation. The Town
Engineer shall give the applicant upon request a certificate indicating
the date on which the measurers called for in the approved plan were
completed.
i. Enforcement. The requirements of this subsection shall be enforced by
the Construction Code Enforcement Department, which shall inspect or
require adequate inspection of the work. If the Construction Code
Enforcement Department finds any existing conditions not as stated in
any application, he may refuse to approve further work, and shall notify
the Construction Code Official in writing, of the reasons for refusal, and
may additionally require necessary engineering measures to be
promptly installed and may seek other penalties as provided in Chapter
1, Section 1-5, plus all applicable assessments, surcharges and court
costs.
j. Maintenance Guaranties. Pursuant to the provisions of paragraph e of
this subsection, the Town may require a maintenance guaranty in favor
of the Town of Kearny in an amount not to exceed 15% of the estimated
cost of improvements called for by the lot grading plan, as the total cost
thereof shall be estimated by the Town Engineer. Said maintenance
guaranty shall run for a period of two years and said guaranty shall
provide for the proper repair and/or replacement of any such
improvements during said period of two years. The said two-year period
shall run from the date of the issuance of the first certificate of
occupancy for the last home in such development as shown on the
preliminary plat, or the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy
for a site plan.
§ 38-5.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.1
AO:895
a. Automobile Sales, New and Used. The open display or storage for sale
of used or new motor vehicles shall be screened in accordance with the
requirements of subsection 38-5.10.
In addition, the uses shall be subject to the requirements of the special
ordinance of the Town of Kearny licensing and regulating the
businesses.
b. Carpet and Rug Cleaning Establishments and Dry Cleaning
Establishments. Carpet and rug cleaning establishments and dry
cleaning establishments, where permitted, shall meet the following
requirements:
1. Not more than five mechanics or skilled workers are employed on
the premises, except as hereinafter specified.
2. That no mechanical power exceeding five rated horsepower is
utilized.
3. That no steam pressure exceeds 80 pounds per square inch gauge
pressure, and
4. The major portion of the products manufactured or treated is to be
sold at retail on the premises or the service is performed primarily
for residents of the locality.
5. Only the ground floor or an equivalent area shall be used for such
purposes.
c. Cemeteries. Any property used as a cemetery shall be provided with an
entrance on a street or road which shall have a pavement width of not
less than 20 feet, with ingress and egress so designated as to minimize
traffic congestion, and a minimum six-foot high fence or evergreen or
evergreen-type hedge or shrubs at intervals of not more than six feet, or
a minimum of 10 feet of permanently maintained planting strip on all
property lines abutting any R District or residential street. No
internment shall take place closer than 15 feet to any street right-ofway
line. In the event a wider street right-of-way line is designated on
the Town Official Map or Master Plan, the requirements shall be
measured from the proposed realignment or widened alignment as
indicated on the Official Map or Master Plan.
d. Churches and Other Places of Worship. Churches, synagogues and
other places of worship shall be governed by the following regulations:
1. Area, bulk and yard requirements:
(a) Minimum Lot Area: 20,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum Lot Width: 100 feet.
(c) Minimum Front Yard: 20 feet.
(d) Minimum Side Yard: 7 feet each.
§ 38-6.1 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.1
AO:896
(e) Minimum Rear Yard: 20 feet.
(f) Maximum Lot Coverage: 50%.
(g) Maximum Improved Lot Coverage: 90%.
2. Any church facility which maintains a school accredited by the
State of New Jersey for elementary or high school grades shall also
provide, in addition to the minimum lot area standards for the
church, synagogue or other place of worship, a minimum lot area
as approved by the New Jersey State Board of Education.
e. Community Buildings, Clubs, Social Halls, Lodges, Fraternal
Organizations and Similar Uses.
1. All buildings shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from a side or
rear property line and a minimum of 20 feet for a front yard or the
minimum front yard setback in the district in which it is located,
whichever is greater.
2. In R-Districts, where permitted, there may be included retail sales
for members and their guests only.
f. Commercial and Public Parking in Commercial and Industrial Uses.
Commercial and public parking facilities used for the storage of
automobiles by the hour, day, week or month shall be subject to the
following criteria and standards:
1. Any entrance or exit shall be located at least 50 feet from the
intersection of any street lines.
2. All interior roadways and parking berths shall be paved with a dust
proof surface.
3. Landscaping shall be required as provided in the Kearny Town
Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance, to screen the parking lot from
abutting or adjacent residential areas and to maintain the
character of the neighborhood.
4. No public garage or commercial parking lot shall have an entrance
or exit connected with a public street at a point closer than 200
feet, measured along the street line on the same or opposite side of
the street, to a main entrance of a public or private school, public
library, church, theater, hospital, fire station, playground,
orphanage or children's home housing children under 16 years of
age, or other public gathering place, or to any street entrance to
such buildings or public gathering places.
5. No part of any vehicle entrance to or exit from any public garage or
commercial parking lot shall be closer than 50 feet to the boundary
line of any residential district.
§ 38-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.1
AO:897
6. No part of any public garage shall have a gasoline or oil pump, car
lift or other service appliance used to serve or supply motor
vehicles erected within 25 feet of any boundary line of any
residential district.
7. No part of any public garage shall be used for auto body repair or
painting.
g. Extraction or Excavation Operation. The extraction or excavation of
soil, sand, gravel, rock, and other surface or sub-surface materials and/
or the processing of same shall meet the following requirements:
1. Performance Standards. The performance standards of the Town
and New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection shall
apply to the excavation and extraction of natural resources. The
application shall also comply with standards of the New Jersey Soil
Conservation Service.
2. Structural Maintenance. All buildings and structures shall be
maintained in an adequate and safe condition at all times.
3. Protective Fencing. The approving authority shall require
protective fencing or other means of protection at the site of an
excavation.
4. Rehabilitation. All land which has been excavated must be
rehabilitated in accordance with standards set within one year
after the termination of operations; at the expense of the operator.
It is further provided that where an excavation operation has lasted
longer than one year, rehabilitation of land in accordance with
standards set must be begun and completed within one year's time.
The Town may require a performance bond or some other financial
guarantee that the conditions of this chapter shall be satisfied.
(a) All excavations must be either made to a water-producing
depth, or graded and back filled.
(b) Excavations made to a water-producing depth shall be properly
sloped to the water line, with banks sodded or surfaced with
soil of an equal quality to adjacent land area topsoil; such
topsoil required under this section shall be planted with trees,
shrubs, legumes, or grasses.
(c) Excavations not made to a water-producing depth must be
traded or backfilled with non-noxious, nonflammable,
noncombustible solid material and in a topographic character
which will result in substantial conformity to adjacent lands.
Such grading or backfilling shall be designed to minimize
erosion and shall be surfaced with a soil equal in quality to that
of adjacent land area and planted with trees, shrubs, legumes,
or grasses.
§ 38-6.1 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.1
AO:898
All buildings and structures used in such operations shall be
dismantled and removed by and at the expense of the operator
within one year following termination of the operations.
5. Landscaping. The provisions of subsection 38-5.10 shall also apply.
6. Soil Mining Ordinance. In addition, all requirements of the soil
mining ordinance shall be complied with. In the event these
subsections are inconsistent with this ordinance, the more
restrictive code shall apply.
h. Garden Apartments and Multiple-Family Dwellings. In addition to the
area, bulk and yard requirements indicated in Schedule II, Area, Yard
and Bulk Requirements73, the following requirements are also
applicable for garden apartments and multiple-family dwellings.
1. Garden Apartments.
(a) Density requirements. The maximum number of dwelling units
per acre for garden apartments shall be determined by
Schedule III herein.74
(b) Maximum number of dwelling units per grouping. Each garden
apartment building shall not contain more than 12 dwelling
units, and in attached buildings not more than 36 dwelling
units, with no portion of the building below the first story used
for dwelling purposes, except that a basement where the floor
is not more than three feet below grade may contain living
quarters for the building superintendent and his family.
The maximum length of any garden apartment building shall
not exceed 200 feet. The building design shall not be
inaccessible by emergency vehicles.
(c) Courts. Where a court is provided, it shall have dimensions the
minimum of which shall be 30 feet.
(d) Recreation space. There shall be provided on the site such
developmental area or areas of not less than 100 square feet of
recreation space for each dwelling unit but in no case shall
there be less than 2,000 square feet devoted to the joint
recreational use of the residents thereof. Such recreation
space shall be appropriately located in other than a front yard
and shall be required to be developed with passive and/or
active recreational facilities.
2. Multiple-Family Dwelling.
73.Editor's Note: Schedule II, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
74.Editor's Note: Schedule III may be found as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 38-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.1
AO:899
(a) Yard requirements. For multiple-family dwellings in an R-3
zone, each side yard shall have a minimum depth as noted in
Schedule II, Area, Yard and Bulk Requirements75, or a side
yard equal to 1/3 the height of the building wall, whichever is
greater but in no case shall the side yard be less than 10 feet.
(b) Density requirements. The maximum number of dwelling units
per acre for multiple-family dwellings shall be determined by
Schedule IV herein.76
3. Standards applicable to garden apartments and multiple-family
dwellings.
(a) Distances between buildings. The minimum distance between
any two buildings on the same lot having heights of 2 1/2
stories or less shall not be less than 35 feet. The minimum
distance between any two buildings on the same lot where at
least one of the buildings has a height of more than 2 1/2
stories shall not be less than 45 feet.
(b) General landscaping. Any unenclosed use or area may be
required by the approving authority to be landscaped and
provision, when deemed necessary, shall also be made for
landscaping in accordance with subsection 38-5.10.
i. Newspaper or Job Printing. Newspaper or job printing operations shall
be permitted in specified commercial zones subject to the same
provisions enumerated in paragraph b except not more than 10 skilled
workers or 10 rated horsepower shall be permitted.
j. Restaurants, Eating and Drinking Establishments and Fast-Food
Restaurants.
1. General. Any building or structure designed, used or intended for
use as a restaurant or an eating or drinking establishment shall
prohibit the sale or consumption of food or beverage within any
designated parking area or open space outside of the confines of an
enclosed structure on the site, except for designated patio or
terrace areas.
2. Fast-Food Restaurants. Any building or structure designed, used,
or intended for use as a fast-food restaurant shall meet the
following requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area (square feet) 40,000.
(b) Minimum lot width (feet) 175.
(c) Minimum front yard (feet) 50.
75.Editor's Note: Schedule II, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
76.Editor's Note: Schedule IV may be found as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 38-6.1 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.1
AO:900
(d) Minimum side yard.
One (feet) 25.
Both (feet) 50.
(e) Minimum rear yard (feet) 50.
(f) Maximum lot coverage (percent) 15.
(g) Maximum improved lot coverage percent 75.
k. Townhouse Requirements. The development of townhouses whether in
a fee or other form of ownership shall comply with the additional
requirements that are herein noted.
1. No building group shall exceed six dwelling units or 160 feet,
whichever is the lesser.
2. The front building wall shall be minimally offset by five feet at least
for every two dwelling units.
3. The side yard setback for an end dwelling unit shall be 10 feet. The
side yard space between two townhouse structures shall be no less
than 20 feet.
4. Each townhouse dwelling shall minimally provide one enclosed
parking space.
l. (Reserved)
m. Planned Residential Developments.
1. No Planned Residential Development may be established on a tract
of less than seven acres in size.
2. Planned Residential Developments may include townhouses,
duplex townhouses and apartments, provided that no more than
10% of the total units shall be apartments. In Planned Residential
Developments townhouse units may be attached to apartment units
by not more than two party walls extending from the foundation to
and through the roof. No back-to-back apartment structures shall
be permitted in Planned Residential Development Districts, nor
shall more than two apartment units be permitted between party
walls.
3. The gross density of Planned Residential Developments shall not
exceed 18.27 units per acre.
4. A minimum building setback of 30 feet shall be provided from any
public street right-of-way line and a minimum building setback of
20 feet from any other property line. No portion of any parking
area, aisle or driveway shall be permitted within 15 feet of a
property line. A landscaped buffer area at least 15 feet in width
§ 38-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.1
AO:901
shall be provided within all tract perimeter setback areas. Along
and generally parallel to adjoining public streets such landscaped
buffers shall also include a berm not less than five feet in height
measured from the unadjusted grade. Any roof overhang or eave
not exceeding two feet shall be permitted to encroach into the
required perimeter setbacks. Decks or patios may extend into the
required perimeter setbacks other than along an adjoining public
street, provided the floor elevation is not more than two feet above
the finished grade measured at the front edge of the deck or patio,
and provided that no portion of such decks or patios are within 15
feet of a property line.
5. No building within the Planned Residential Development shall
exceed a height of 35 feet measured from the average finished
grade around the base of a building to the mean height of the gable
or main roof slope.
6. A minimum of 10 feet shall be provided between a building and the
curb of an internal private street.
7. A minimum of five feet shall be provided between a building and an
off-street parking area except where such space is provided within
a driveway or stacked parking space.
8. All internal private streets shall be a minimum of 24 feet in width
measured from curb to curb. All alleyways shall be a minimum of 20
feet in width.
9. No building shall exceed 190 feet in length. A minimum offset of
two feet shall be provided in the front facade, for at least every 50
feet in length.
10. The following minimum distance between buildings shall be
provided.77
(a) Front to front: 60 feet.
(b) Front to rear: 60 feet.
(c) Front to side: 35 feet.
(d) Rear to rear: 45 feet.
(e) Rear to side: 35 feet.
(f) Side to side: 25 feet.
In such cases where a pergola, strium or other structure
physically connects two buildings and provides a breezeway
and private entranceway to the side of a building, such side-to-
77.Note: The rear of the building shall be that side from which vehicular access is provided
or which contains enclosed garages or which is closest to the parking area or driveway
provided for that building.
§ 38-6.1 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.1
AO:902
side distance may be reduced to 15 feet, provided the overall
length of the two buildings and the intervening spaces does not
exceed 200 feet in length.
11. The following minimum number of parking spaces per dwelling unit
shall be provided:
Apartments Townhouses and Duplex
Townhouses
1 bedroom N/A 1.8
2 bedroom 1.8 2.1
3 bedroom N/A 2.4
12. All parking spaces within enclosed garages shall be counted for the
purposes of meeting required parking on-site. All driveway spaces
which are a minimum of nine feet wide by 20 feet in length shall
also be counted as one space towards meeting the required parking
on-site. All other parking spaces other than driveway spaces shall
be nine feet wide by 18 feet in length, provided an overhang of two
feet is provided, otherwise the required dimension shall be nine
feet wide by 20 feet in length. The provisions of subsection 38-7.6e
shall not apply to Planned Residential Developments.
13. A minimum recreation area of 30 square feet per unit shall be set
aside for recreation. Such recreation area or areas shall provide for
active recreation such as play equipment or tot lots, and passive
recreation such as sitting areas. However, there shall be at least
one tot lot provided on-site. Such recreation areas may be provided
in one or more areas, provided that each is no less than 1,600
square feet in size.
14. No sidewalks shall be required. However, walkways which shall not
consist of macadam, shall be provided to facilitate pedestrian
movement on-site.
15. Mountable curbs shall be provided along all internal private
streets.
16. No concrete block or asphalt shingle shall be permitted as a finish
material for any building, except that asphalt shingle may be used
for roofs. In Planned Residential Developments, all structures shall
have the appearance of attached townhouse units.
17. All open spaces not covered by impervious surfaces shall be
planted with grass or landscaping material.
18. The developer of a Planned Residential Development shall be
required to either provide 20% of the total units in the development
for families of low and moderate income or to contribute to the
Affordable Housing Trust Fund a cash payment of $12,000 per unit
for 20% of the total units in the development, in lieu of not being
§ 38-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.1
AO:903
required to provide units affordable to low and moderate income
families on-site.
Where a developer chooses to provide low and moderate income
units on-site, the units shall be built in accordance with the
following schedule:
Minimum Percentage of Low
and Moderate Income Units
Completed
Percentage of Market
Housing Units Completed
0 25
10 25 + 1 unit
50 50
75 75
100 90
100
Where a developer chooses to provide an in-lieu-of-cash payment,
1/3 of the total payment due shall be payable upon the issuance of
the first building permit with the balance to be paid pro rata on the
issuance of the certificates of occupancy for the remaining units.
Payment shall be simultaneous to the issuance of the building
permit and certificates of occupancy.
n. CLH Conventional and Limited Income Housing. District. The CLH
Zone is designed for and permits conventional residential development
in combination with limited income housing (LIH) as well as accessory
uses and conditional uses as permitted and regulated in the R-1 One-
Family Residential Zone, CLH developments all meet the following
criteria.
1. Minimum Lot Area. No CLH development shall be established on a
lot with an area of less than three acres.
2. Intensity of Development. The maximum gross density of any tract
inclusive of conventional housing and LIH units shall not exceed 14
dwelling units per acre, provided, that any development in the CLH
Zone shall provide for LIH at the rate of 2.8 dwelling units per acre.
3. Housing Types. Conventional and limited income housing may
consist of townhouses, duplex townhouses and apartments
arranged and sited in a fashion approved by the Planning Board.
4. Required Conditions. The following requirements must be complied
with in the CLH Conventional and Limited Income Housing District.
(a) Setbacks. A minimum building setback of 30 feet shall be
provided from any street right-of-way or other property line.
No portion of any parking area, parking aisle, driveway or
§ 38-6.1 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.1
AO:904
internal roadway other than street access ramp shall be
permitted within 15 feet of any street right-of-way or other
property line. A landscaped buffer area at least 15 feet in width
shall be provided within all perimeter setback areas. Such
landscaped buffers may, at the discretion of the Planning Board
also be required to include a berm not less than five feet in
height measured from the unadjusted grade.
(b) Building height. No building shall exceed a height of 40 feet
measured from the average finished grade around the base of
the building to the mean height of the gable or main roof slope.
(c) Distances. A minimum distance of 15 feet shall be maintained
between any building and the curbline of an internal private
roadway. A minimum distance of 10 feet shall be maintained
between any building and an off-street parking area other than
a driveway accessing an individual enclosed garage.
Distances between buildings shall be maintained in the
following manner:
Front-to-front perimeter
wall
60 feet
Front-to-rear perimeter
wall
60 feet
Rear-to-rear perimeter
wall
60 feet
Front-to-side perimeter
wall
40 feet
Rear-to-side perimeter
wall
40 feet
Side-to-side perimeter
wall
30 feet
(d) Roadways and driveways. All internal private roadways shall
have a width of at least 24 feet measured between curbs.
Single driveways and double driveways accessing individual
garages shall have widths of not less than 11 feet or 22 feet
respectively. Internal private roadways parking areas and
driveways shall be curbed along their entire lengths.
(e) Parking. The minimum number of off-street parking spaces
provided shall be according to the following schedule:
Unit Size Apartments Townhouses and
Duplex Townhouses
1 bedroom 1.5 spaces 1.8 spaces
2 bedroom 1.8 spaces 2.1 spaces
§ 38-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.1
AO:905
Unit Size Apartments Townhouses and
Duplex Townhouses
3 bedroom 2.0 spaces 2.4 spaces
4 bedroom or
larger
2.2 spaces 2.6 spaces
All parking spaces provided within enclosed garages may be
counted for the purpose of satisfying off-street parking
requirements. Single or double driveways accessing
individual garages with lengths of at least 25 feet measured
between the curbline of a private internal roadway and an
individual garage may also be counted as single or double
parking spaces respectively, for the purpose of meeting offstreet
parking requirements.
Each off-street parking space, other than within a driveway,
shall be a suitably improved rectangular area of not less than
180 square feet, shall be a minimum of nine feet in width
measured perpendicular to the axis of the length, and shall
have a minimum depth of 20 feet. Whenever a parking space
abuts along its length an obstruction more than six inches
high the minimum width of the parking space shall be 12 feet.
All parking spaces shall be provided with adequate means of
ingress and egress which shall be kept open and unobstructed
at all times and which shall be designed to provide surface
driveways or aisles to meet the following minimum standards:
Parking Plan Aisle Width
Parallel parking on 1 side only (1
way)
12 feet
Parallel parking on 1 side only (2
way)
24 feet
30° angle parking (aisle one-way) 11 feet
30° angle parking (aisle two-way) 24 feet
45° angle parking (aisle one-way) 13 feet
45° angle parking (aisle two-way) 24 feet
60° angle parking (aisle one-way) 18 feet
60° angle parking (aisle two-way) 24 feet
90° angle parking (aisle one or twoway)
24 feet
If approved by the Planning Board, two feet of the 20 feet
minimum length requirement may be satisfied by vehicular
overhang over a landscaped area which is protected by
curbing.
§ 38-6.1 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.1
AO:906
(f) Recreation and landscaped areas. Suitably improved
recreation areas totaling at least 50 square feet per dwelling
unit shall be provided within the site. Such recreation areas
may be sited at one or more locations provided that no such
area shall encroach into a required perimeter buffer area and
that at least one such recreation area measures not less than
2,000 square feet. All open spaces not covered by impervious
surfaces shall be planted with lawn and landscape material
according to a plan approved by the Planning Board.
(g) Rooms and minimum floor areas. Any room other than living
room, dining room, kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, utility
room, foyer or hallway shall be construed as a bedroom, and
every unit shall have at least one bedroom. At least 50% of the
residential units shall have more than one bedroom, provided,
however, that at least 10% of the residential units shall have
more than two bedrooms. Minimum floor areas shall be as
follows: one bedroom unit, 540 square feet; two bedroom units,
750 square feet; three bedroom units, 900 square feet. The
bedroom mix for the low income and the moderate income
household units shall be substantially similar.
(h) Facilities. Each residential unit shall contain, as a minimum, a
separate living room, a separate bedroom, a separate bath,
storage area, utilities, a separate kitchen, which kitchen
facility shall be located separate and apart from other rooms in
the unit with the exception of the dining room.
(i) Architecture and construction. The architecture employed
shall be aesthetically congruous with the surrounding area as
approved by the Planning Board. All buildings shall be
constructed in accordance with the State Uniform
Construction Code and shall comply with all other applicable
municipal or State requirements.
(1) No building shall exceed 180 feet in length. A minimum
offset of two feet shall be provided in the front and rear
perimeter wall for at least every 50 feet in length.
(2) All exteriors of perimeter walls of dwelling structures shall
be of wood, brick, stone or other accepted durable
material, provided, however, that asbestos shingle or
cinder block as an exterior finish is prohibited.
(3) The exterior of any accessory structures shall harmonize
architecturally with and be constructed of materials of a
like character to those used in principal structures.
5. All sales or rentals of LIH units shall be in accordance with the
eligibility and other requirements and regulations contained in this
chapter.
§ 38-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.1
AO:907
6. Required LIH shall be constructed concurrently and in proportion
with the conventional units built. To assure compliance with this
requirement, after the issuance of certificates of occupancy for
25% of the conventional housing units, the following schedule shall
be complied with:
Minimum Percentage of Low
and Moderate Income Units
Complete
Percentage of Conventional
Housing Units Complete
0 25
10 25 + 1 unit
50 50
75 75
100 90
100
Nothing contained herein shall preclude the applicant from
construction LIH units prior to the construction of conventional
units as provided in the foregoing schedule.
At every stage of the development not less than 50% of the LIH
units shall be made available exclusively to low income
households.
7. Notwithstanding requirements of this or any other ordinance of the
Town of Kearny concerning fees, the Town of Kearny shall waive
the following fees otherwise due in connection with LIH portions of
a development:
(a) Subdivision and/or site plan application fees as applicable;
(b) Construction permit fees, except State and third party fees not
waived;
(c) Fees for certificates of occupancy; and
(d) Any utility connection fees otherwise due to the Town of
Kearny.
8. Prior to the approval of any development in the CLH Zone, the
Planning Board shall have approved development plans verifying
compliance with the purposes of this section and all the
requirements established in this chapter. The information
submitted in this regard shall include but not be limited to:
(a) Environmental impact study;
(b) All property boundary, topographic and soil information and
other applicable details required in connection with
preliminary plats;
§ 38-6.1 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.1
AO:908
(c) Building floor plans and elevations for all structures;
(d) Area lighting data, provisions for trash, garbage and refuse
disposal, landscaping plans and utility information;
(e) Deed restrictions, covenants or other suitable instruments
designed to implement plans and requirements as well as in
connection with eligibility for purchase and rental of
conventional and LIH to be provided as part of the
development.
o. All medical marijuana facilities are subject to the following: [Added
6-23-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-12]
1. All medical marijuana uses shall be duly licensed by the State of
New Jersey in accordance with the CUMMA, its implementing
rules, and/or any successor legislation.
2. All facilities must maintain a secure, closed, clean environment in
the room where marijuana is to be stored, in order to prevent
outside contamination and prevent the inadvertent and/or
unauthorized removal of marijuana from the facility. All facilities
must provide shower and locker room facilities for employees to
ensure the provision of a clean environment.
3. All facilities must provide at least one state-certified security officer
(or more if required by the state) at all times the facility is open to
the public. At the time of application for this use, the applicant
must provide an affidavit indicating intention to comply with this
provision.
4. All facilities must be equipped with security cameras covering
exterior parking and loading areas, all points of ingress and egress,
portions of the building open to the public or used for the storage of
marijuana.
5. All facilities shall install, maintain in good working order, and
operate a safety and security alarm system that includes a battery
backup or generator system in the event of power outage.
6. The outside areas of the premises and its perimeter shall be well lit
in accordance with the following specific standards:
(a) A minimum of 3.0 footcandles of illumination shall be
maintained at all building entrances.
(b) A minimum of 1.0 footcandle of illumination shall be
maintained throughout the property.
7. No medical marijuana dispensary shall be located within the
following distances from the specified land uses listed below:
§ 38-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.1
AO:909
§ 38-6.2. Accessory Uses in Residential Zones. [Ord. No. 10-14-87
§ 138-6.200; Ord. No. 6-8-83; Ord. No. 6-22-83; Ord. No. 1999-O-2
§§ 33, 34, 38; Ord. No. 2005-(O)-42 § 5]
(a) Two hundred feet from primary and secondary schools (K-12)
including vocational programs, playgrounds, parks, statelicensed
day-care facilities.
(b) Two hundred feet from adult and juvenile correctional
facilities, college or university, either public or private, halfway
house or correctional facility, group homes serving persons
aged 18 and under, a halfway house, transitional housing and
state-licensed substance use treatment facility.
(c) No medical marijuana dispensary shall be located within a
drug-free school zone.
(d) No medical marijuana dispensary shall be located within a twomile
radius of another medical marijuana facility in Kearny or a
neighboring municipality.
8. All medical marijuana dispensaries shall comply with the following
signage rules:
(a) External signage shall be limited to black text on a white
background.
(b) One wall-mounted sign per building facade shall be permitted,
not to exceed 20 square feet in area.
(c) Signage shall not be illuminated at any time.
(d) Signage shall not display advertisements for marijuana or a
brand name except for purposes of identifying the building by
the permitted name.
(e) The price of marijuana shall not be advertised.
a. Accessory structures which are not attached to a principal structure
may be erected in a required side yard setback or within the rear yard,
except on the street side of a corner lot provided that:
1. Accessory structures shall not be located closer than three feet to
any lot line.
2. No accessory structure is located closer to the street right-of-way
than the required front yard setback of the principal structure.
Subsections 38-5.1c and 38-5.3d shall also apply to all accessory
structures hereunder.
3. Portable sheds having no foundations and with a footprint of less
than 100 square feet in area shall not be counted as contributing to
impervious lot coverage or lot coverage provided such a shed is
§ 38-6.1 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.2
AO:910
located in the rear or side yard, is set back at least three feet from
the closest property line, and there is no more than one portable
shed.
b. Attached Accessory Structures in Residential Districts. When an
accessory structure is attached to the principal building, it shall comply
in all respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable to the
principal building.
c. Permanent Swimming Pools.
1. Inground or aboveground swimming pools accessory to a
residential use shall be erected on the same zone lot as the
principal structure. Said pools may be erected in the side or rear
yard of the zone lot. Inground swimming pools shall be located no
closer than six feet to a side or rear property line. A minimum of a
two-foot buffer shall exist between the property line and the pool
improved area. The wall of an aboveground swimming pool and any
associated decking shall be located no closer than three feet to a
side or rear yard line. Such pools and associated decking shall not
be counted as contributing to improved lot coverage. Where a pool
is located on a corner lot, the fencing closest to the right-of-way
and along the rear property line shall be solid so as to provide a
visual screen.
d. Residential Signs. Signs permitted within residential districts shall be
in accordance with subsection 38-6.8.
e. Home Occupations. Home occupations shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. Such use is clearly accessory to the principal use of the structure.
2. Such home occupation is conducted by the resident of the premises
or member of his immediate family residing on the premises.
3. Such home occupation shall not use more than 1/3 of the total floor
area of the dwelling unit or 750 square feet, whichever is less.
4. Not more than one nonresident employee may be permitted.
5. Such use shall be conducted solely within the principal structure.
6. One sign, not exceeding seven inches by 18 inches, shall be
permitted indicating the name and home occupation of the
occupant.
7. There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building
or premises which would alter its residential character.
8. No use shall generate traffic, parking, noise, dust, vibration, smell,
smoke, glare, electrical interference, fire hazard, or any other
§ 38-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.2
AO:911
§ 38-6.3. Accessory Uses in Nonresidential Zone. [Ord. No. 10-14-87
§ 138-6.220; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-64; Ord. No. 2007-(O)-17 § 1; Ord.
No. 2008-(O)-04 § 1]
hazard or nuisance to any greater or more frequent extent than
what normally occurs in the applicable zoning district.
9. Not more than three customers or clients shall be present at the
same time.
10. Teaching occupations of a tutoring nature shall be permitted
provided that there shall be no more than three pupils in
attendance at the same time.
11. Such uses shall not result in the outside storage or display of any
materials.
12. The use shall be only in a single family or two family dwelling.
13. Where the general public is to be received, off-street parking
spaces shall be provided in addition to required spaces for the
residential use according to the following schedule:
Total floor area up to 500 square feet:
One additional space
Total floor area more than 500 square feet:
Two additional spaces
Permitted home occupations shall not in any event be deemed
to include barber shops, beauty parlors, massage parlors, tattoo
parlors, clinics, child day care centers (except family day care
homes as permitted in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5b.), day nurseries,
dancing schools, ceramic kilns, real estate offices, auto repair (or
auto repossession), the sale or repair of firearms, restaurants,
animal hospitals, fortune telling, palmists, limousine services, or
repair shops except for the repair of electrical appliances, cameras
or other small items.
f. Fences. Fences permitted in residential districts shall be in accordance
with subsection 38-6.9.
a. In any nonresidential district, no accessory structure or use shall be
located closer to any lot line than five feet.
b. In any nonresidential district, the aggregate area covered by accessory
structures shall not exceed 25% of the rear yard.
c. In any nonresidential district, all accessory structures shall be located
no less than 10 feet from the side or rear of the principal or main
building.
§ 38-6.2 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.3
AO:912
§ 38-6.4. Temporary Uses and Structures. [Ord. No. 2015-2]
d. In any nonresidential district, no accessory structure shall be located
closer to the street right-of-way line than the required front yard
setback of the principal structure. The requirements of subsections
38-5.1c and 38-5.3d shall also apply to all accessory structures
hereunder.
e. When an accessory structure is attached to the principal building in all
nonresidential districts, it shall comply in all respects with the
requirements of this chapter applicable to the principal buildings.
f. No portion of an accessory structure in any nonresidential district shall
be used for living quarters.
g. Signs identifying or advertising a use conducted on the premises, a
canopy or a marquee, shall be subject to subsection 38-6.8.
h. The open display or storage for sale of used or new motor vehicles shall
be subject to the requirements of the Town of Kearny licensing and
regulating such business.
i. The open storage of machinery or contractors' equipment as a
permitted principal use shall be prohibited in all C Districts except as
may be authorized by the Board of Adjustment by a temporary permit
not exceeding 60 days.
j. Fences in any nonresidential district shall be subject to the regulations
in subsection 38-6.9.
k. All operations, activities and storage (except off-street parking
including trucks, tractors, trailers or similar vehicles and unloading/
loading, accessory lumberyards and home improvement centers), shall
be conducted in completely enclosed buildings.
a. Vestibules and storm enclosures as permitted by Section 3204.4 of the
International Building Code (2009 N.J. Edition) shall, by permit, be
allowed to encroach into the public right-of-way in the Town under the
following conditions.
b. The vestibules and enclosures shall not be erected for a period of time
exceeding seven months in any one year and shall not encroach more
than three feet or more than one-fourth the width of the sidewalk
beyond the street lot line.
c. Temporary entrance awnings must have a minimum clearance of seven
feet to the lowest portion of the hood or awning where supported on
removable steel or other approved non combustible support.
d. Permits shall be obtained by application to the Zoning Officer.
e. A new permit shall be required each year.
§ 38-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.5
AO:913
§ 38-6.5. (Reserved)
§ 38-6.6. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-6.300; Ord. No.
1999-O-2 §§ 26 — 28, 39; Ord. No. 2002-O-78; Ord. No. 2003-(O)-23;
Ord. No. 2004-(O)-64; Ord. No. 2007-(O)-06 § 1; Ord. No.
2007-(O)-17 § 1; Ord. No. 2008-(O)-04 § 1; Ord. No. 2008-(O)-14 § 2]
a. Conditional uses as enumerated in Schedule I shall be permitted only
upon authorization by the approving authority, provided that such uses
shall be found by the approving authority to comply with the following
requirements as set forth in this chapter.
1. That the use is a conditional use as set forth in Schedule I78 thereof.
2. That the use is so designed, located and proposed to be operated
that the public health, safety, welfare and convenience will be
protected.
3. That the use will not cause substantial injury to the value of other
property in the neighborhood where it is to be located.
4. That the use will be compatible with adjoining development and the
proposed character of the zone district where it is to be located.
5. That adequate landscaping and screening are provided as required
by Town Ordinance.
6. That adequate off-street parking and loading are provided and
ingress and egress is so designed as to cause minimum
interference with traffic on abutting streets.
7. That the use conforms with all applicable regulations governing the
district where located.
b. Animal Hospitals and Kennels. Animal hospitals and kennels shall be
located no closer than 50 feet to any residential zone line. Such
facilities shall be maintained in an enclosed structure and shall be of
soundproof construction and so operated as to produce no
objectionable odors at the zone lot boundary line. Open kennels,
exercise pens or runways shall not be located closer than 100 feet to
any property line and shall be subject to noise and odor controls.
c. Automobile Washing Establishments. All automobile washing
establishments shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Minimum Area Requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area 30,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot width 100 feet.
78.Editor's Note: Schedule I, referred to herein, may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 38-6.5 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.6
AO:914
2. Minimum Yard Requirements:
(a) Front yard 40 feet.
(b) Side yards.
(1) (a) One 30 feet.
(2) (b) Both 60 feet.
(c) Rear yard 60 feet.
3. Maximum Bulk Requirements:
(a) Maximum building height 30 feet.
(b) Maximum lot coverage 40 feet.
(c) Maximum improved lot coverage 85 feet.
4. Location. Such establishments shall not be located closer than 100
feet to any residential zone boundary line, school, hospital, nursing
home or other similar institutional or public use.
5. Off-Street Parking. Such establishments shall provide a reservoir
parking area equal in number to seven times the maximum capacity
of the laundry for automobiles awaiting entrance to the premises
and 1 1/2 times the maximum capacity of the laundry for
automobiles beyond the exit end of the equipment so situated as to
be usable for hand-finishing of the washing process and which shall
be no closer than 20 feet to any street right-of-way line. "Maximum
capacity" in this instance shall mean the greatest possible number
of automobiles undergoing some phase of laundering at the same
time, which shall be determined by dividing the equipment line by
20 feet.
6. Landscaping. Such establishments shall comply in all respects with
the landscaping and buffer zone requirements for side and rear
yards as established in subsection 38-5.10.
d. (Reserved)
e. Clubs, Lodges, Social and Community Center Buildings.
1. All buildings shall be a minimum of 10 feet from any side property
line and shall meet all other setback requirements of the district in
which it is located.
2. Retail sales may be included for members and their guests only.
3. On-site parking shall be provided in the amount of at least one
space for each three persons based on the maximum occupancy
permitted by the Uniform Construction Code in the largest
assembly area.
§ 38-6.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.6
AO:915
f. Essential Services.
1. Enclosed or Permanent Structures.
(a) Public utility services. Such uses shall include electric
substations, transformers, switches and auxiliary apparatus
serving a distribution area, and water pumping station in R
Districts and shall be subject to the following regulations:
(1) Such facility shall not be located on a residential street,
unless no other site is available, and be so located as to
draw a minimum of vehicular traffic to and through such
street.
(2) The location, design and operation of such facility may not
adversely affect the character of the surrounding
residential area.
(3) Adequate fences, barriers and other safety devices shall be
provided, and shall be landscaped in accordance with
subsection 38-5.10.
2. Open Uses and Structures.
(a) Such uses shall be limited to the erection, construction,
alteration or maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or
other governmental agencies, of underground or overhead
electrical, gas, water transmission of distribution systems or
collection, communication supply or disposal systems,
including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits,
cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals,
hydrants and other similar equipment and accessories in
connection therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing
of adequate services by such public utilities or municipal or
other governmental agencies or for the public health, health or
general welfare, but not including buildings. Open essential
services shall not include any human or animal fecal matter or
material.
(b) Landscaping requirements established in subsection 38-5.8
shall be adhered to.
g. Mixed Residential Uses.
1. The commercial use shall be in combination with dwellings for one
or two families or in combination with multiple-family dwellings for
not more than 12 families.
2. The residential uses shall front upon an existing street or have
direct access to the street uninterrupted by structures or off-street
parking areas.
3. Business uses shall be limited to the following:
§ 38-6.6 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.6
AO:916
(a) Retail stores where goods are sold or services rendered and
where nothing is fabricated, manufactured, converted or
altered except for such retail trade.
(b) Financial institutions.
(c) A central telephone exchange and accessory business uses.
(d) Business and professional offices.
(e) Restaurants and lunch counters, except fast-food restaurants.
(f) Funeral homes and funeral parlors.
h. Outdoor Storage Areas. Such uses, where permitted, shall not abut
existing residential development, a residential street or any R District
and the operation thereof shall be governed by the following provisions:
1. Inflammable and Explosive Substances. All inflammable or
explosive liquids, solids, or gases shall be stored in appropriate
containers as regulated in the Town Fire Prevention Code.
2. Fencing and Landscaping. All outdoor storage facilities shall be
enclosed by a fence or wall adequate to conceal such facilities and
the contents thereof from adjacent property and subject to the
provisions of subsection 38-5.10.
3. Deposit of Wastes. No material or waste which might cause fumes
or dust or which might constitute a fire hazard or which may be
edible by or otherwise be attractive to animals or insects and shall
be stored outdoors only in closed containers.
i. Outdoor Uses. All operations, activities and storage shall be conducted
within completely enclosed buildings in both the SKI-N and SKI-S
zones, except that the outdoor storage of containers, off-street parking
including trucks, tractors, trailers or similar vehicles and unloading/
loading, accessory lumber yards and home improvement centers may
be permitted in the SKI-N Zone only and only if they shall comply with
the following requirements:
1. There shall be a ten-foot wide landscaped buffer along all property
lines;
2. All uses shall be subject to subsection 38-6.6h.;
3. All uses shall be paved and curbed in accordance with the Design
Standard as set forth in Section 36-12.
j. Service Stations.
1. Location of Exits and Entrances. No gas station, or vehicular repair
service shop shall be located within 200 feet measured along the
street line on the same or opposite side of the street of the
following uses:
§ 38-6.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.6
AO:917
Public or private schools, playgrounds, churches, theaters, fire
stations, hospitals, public libraries, orphanage or children's home
housing children under 16 years of age, or other public gathering
place or to any street entrance to such buildings or public
gathering place.
Vehicular access to the above uses shall not be closer to the
intersection of any two street lot lines than 50 feet, nor shall any
such use be located within 25 feet of any boundary line of any R
District.
2. Location of Appliances and Buildings. Service stations shall have
their gasoline pumps, including other service facilities, set back at
least 15 feet from any street line and their buildings set back at
least 30 feet from any street line. This provision does not apply to
gasoline pumps and other service facilities within public garages.
3. Landscaping Requirements. The provisions of subsection 38-5.10
shall also be complied with.
4. Proximity to Other Service Stations. A service station shall not be
located within 1,000 feet of another service station.
5. Lot Size. The minimum lot size for all service stations shall be
10,000 square feet. The least dimensions shall be 100 feet by 100
feet.
6. Type of Construction. All buildings constructed for use in
connection with such station shall be of masonry construction. Any
grease pits or hoists shall be contained within the area of the
building.
7. Type of Repairs. Repair services shall be limited to mechanical
repairs and shall not include auto body repair work or painting.
8. As an accessory use, no automobile service station shall contain
more than two vehicles offered for sale at any one time and in no
case shall such vehicles occupy unpaved portions of the property
nor shall such vehicles occupy space needed to comply with the
minimum required amount of on-site parking for the principal use.
k. Warehouses, Commercial and Industrial. A commercial or industrial
warehouse shall be subject to the following provisions in regard to
items stored in bulk:
1. The storage in bulk of hazardous chemical, including, but not
limited to, flammable solids, as defined in the Town of Kearny Fire
Prevention Code of the Town of Kearny, shall be safeguarded with
such protective facilities as public safety requires.
2. The Construction Official, on the advice of the Chief of the Bureau
of Combustibles, may require the separation or isolation of such
substances from other storage facilities, dwellings, places of
§ 38-6.6 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.6
AO:918
assembly, educational occupancies, railroads and public highways,
when the quantity stored constitutes a material hazard to the
surrounding area. Limitations on storage quantities shall be
considered with regard to proximity to these exposures to all zone
districts.
3. Oxidizing materials that have a severe fire hazard and which are
likely to deflagrate on exposure to fire, shock or friction, but which
are not likely to detonate shall be segregated or isolated in storage.
Segregation shall be by walls having a fire-resistance rating of not
less than two hours. Automatic sprinklers shall be provided where
the building is not adequately isolated.
l. Private Day School Operated for Profit. Except for pre-school nursery
facilities, a private day school operated for profit shall meet all of the
construction and safety requirements of the New Jersey Department of
Education, whether or not the facility comes under the jurisdiction of
the Department. A private day school shall minimally provide a land
area equal to three acres plus one acre for each and every 100 students
in attendance. Parking requirements established in the Kearny
Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance shall be complied with.
m. Abandoned Vehicles. The storage of unregistered and/or unlicensed
motor vehicles shall be prohibited in all districts except in connection
with state licensed auto dealerships and scrap metal dealers which
possess a valid Certificate of Occupancy from the Town of Kearny.
n. Wireless Telecommunications Equipment.
1. Exemptions of Applicability. The provisions of this subchapter shall
not apply to the following:
(a) Any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under 70
feet in height and is owned and operated only by a federally
licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively
to receive transmissions;
(b) Preexisting towers or antennas shall not be required to meet
the requirements of this paragraph, except that in the case of
enlargement, structural modification or addition to any
existing tower or antenna facility which shall result in an
increase of 10% or more in tower height or facility floor area
the provisions of this ordinance shall apply; and
(c) The provisions of this subsection shall not govern any parabolic
satellite antennas.
2. Overall Comprehensive Plan.
(a) Any applicant to the Town for approval to erect a wireless
telecommunications antenna, in addition to all other
information required by this ordinance, shall provide to the
§ 38-6.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.6
AO:919
approving authority substantial evidence that the proposed
location of the proposed antenna(s), and any proposed
supporting tower and/or ancillary cabinets or structures
enclosing related electronic equipment, have been planned to
result in the lowest number of tower locations within the Town
and the least possible impact on community aesthetics.
(b) The applicant shall provide an overall comprehensive plan
indicating how it intends to provide full service throughout the
Town and, to the greatest extent reasonably possible, shall
indicate how its plan specifically relates to and is coordinated
with the needs of all other providers of wireless
telecommunications services within and around the
municipality.
(c) The overall comprehensive plan shall indicate the following:
(1) The mapped location and written description of all existing
antennas and existing and approved supporting structures
within one mile of the subject site;
(2) The mapped location and written description of all existing
or approved water towers and existing telephone or
electric towers within one mile of the subject site;
(3) How the proposed location of the proposed antenna(s)
specifically relates to the suitability or unsuitability of such
existing structures to be utilized to provide the intended
wireless communication;
(4) How the proposed location of the proposed antenna(s)
specifically relates to the anticipated need for additional
antennas and supporting structures within and near the
Town by the application and by other providers of wireless
communications services within the Town;
(5) How the proposed location of the proposed antenna(s)
specifically relates to the overall objective of providing full
wireless communication services within the Town while, at
the same time, limiting the number of supporting towers to
the fewest possible through the use of co-location, through
the use of alternate technologies which do not require the
use of towers, or through the use of existing structures;
and
(6) How the proposed location of the proposed antenna(s)
specifically relates to the objective of minimizing the
impact of the antennas, accessory equipment, and
supporting structures on residences, streetscapes, and
view corridors throughout the municipality.
§ 38-6.6 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.6
AO:920
3. Location Priorities. Based upon the "Overall Comprehensive Plan"
submitted by the applicant, if the Town determines the proposed
antenna(s) are needed for the provision of full wireless
telecommunications services within the Town, utilizing the fewest
number of towers as reasonably possible and locating on existing
structures where reasonably possible, the following priority
schedule shall apply:
(a) Wireless telecommunication antennas shall be permitted as
principal uses on existing structures at the following
prioritized locations:
(1) The first priority location shall be the co-location of an
antenna on an existing tower with the SKM79 Zone;
(2) The second priority location shall be the location of an
antenna on an existing building within the SKM80 Zone.
(3) Co-location on a tower shall be required for no less than
three carriers and a letter of intent by the applicant to
meet the co-location requirement shall be provided to the
approving authority; and
(4) All of the separation distance, area, setback, height, and
design criteria requirements listed herein shall be met.
(b) Wireless telecommunications antennas shall be permitted as
accessory uses on existing structures at the following
prioritized locations:
(1) The third priority location shall be the co-location of an
antenna on an existing tower within the M Zone;
(2) The fourth priority location shall be the location of an
antenna on an existing building within the M Zone;
(3) The fifth priority location shall be the co-location of an
antenna on an existing tower within the LI Zone;
(4) The sixth priority location shall be the location of an
antenna on an existing building within the LI Zone;
(5) Co-location on a tower shall be required for no less than
three carriers and a letter of intent by the applicant to
meet the co-location requirement shall be provided to the
approving authority; and
79.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2003-(O)-23 deleted the SKM-1 and SKM-2 Zones and added
the SKI-N and SKI-S Zones. Pursuant to the direction of the Town, the reference
contained herein will be amended by a subsequent ordinance.
80.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2003-(O)-23 deleted the SKM-1 and SKM-2 Zones and added
the SKI-N and SKI-S Zones. Pursuant to the direction of the Town, the reference
contained herein will be amended by a subsequent ordinance.
§ 38-6.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.6
AO:921
(6) All of the separation distance, area, setback, height, and
design criteria requirements listed herein shall be met.
(c) Wireless telecommunications antennas shall be permitted as
conditional uses on existing structures at the following
prioritized locations:
(1) The location of an antenna on an existing building within
the C-4 Zone shall be considered seventh in the list of
priority locations;
(2) The location of an antenna on an existing building within
the C-3 Zone shall be considered eighth in the list of
priority locations;
(3) The location of an antenna on an existing building within
the C-2 Zone shall be considered ninth in the list of priority
locations;
(4) The location of an antenna on an existing building within
the C-1 Zone shall be considered tenth in the list of priority
locations;
(5) The location of an antenna on an existing building within
the Redevelopment Zone shall be considered eleventh in
the list of priority locations;
(6) The location of antenna on an existing building within the
R-3 Zone shall be considered twelfth in the list of priority
locations;
(d) New wireless telecommunications towers, along with the
antennas and equipment facilities associated with such new
towers, shall be permitted as principal uses in the following
prioritized locations:
(1) The location of a new tower within the SKM81 Zone shall
be considered thirteenth in the list of priority locations;
(2) Co-location on a tower shall be required for no less than
three carriers and a letter of intent by the applicant to
meet the co-location requirement shall be provided to the
approving authority; and
(3) All of the separation distance, area, setback, height, and
design criteria requirements listed herein shall be met.
(e) New wireless telecommunications towers, along with the
antennas and equipment facilities associated with such new
81.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2003-(O)-23 deleted the SKM-1 and SKM-2 Zones and added
the SKI-N and SKI-S Zones. Pursuant to the direction of the Town, the reference
contained herein will be amended by a subsequent ordinance.
§ 38-6.6 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.6
AO:922
towers, shall be permitted as accessory uses in the following
prioritized locations:
(1) The location of a new tower within the M Zone shall be
considered 14th in the list of priority locations;
(2) The location of a new tower within the LI Zone shall be
considered 15th in the list of priority locations;
(3) Co-location on a tower shall be required for no less than
three carriers and a letter of intent by the applicant to
meet the co-location requirement shall be provided to the
approving authority; and
(4) All of the separation distance, area, setback, height, and
design criteria requirements listed herein shall be met.
(f) No wireless telecommunications antennas shall be permitted
on any billboard.
4. Separation Distance Requirements. The following separation
distance requirements shall apply:
(a) If the proposed antenna(s) will be attached to an existing
building, the following separation distance requirements shall
apply:
(1) Minimum distance between facilities in residential
districts or a residential portion of a duly adopted
redevelopment area: 500 feet;
(2) Minimum distance between facilities located in
commercial districts: 300 feet;
(3) Minimum distance between facilities located in industrial
or manufacturing districts: 200 feet.
(b) If the proposed antenna(s) will be attached to an existing
wireless telecommunications tower or similar structure within
an industrial district, the following separation distance
requirements shall apply:
(1) Minimum distance from any residential district line: 750
feet;
(2) Minimum distance between facilities: 750 feet.
(c) If the proposed antenna(s) will be supported by a new wireless
telecommunications tower:
(1) Minimum distance from any residential district line: 1,000
feet;
(2) Minimum distance between facilities: 1,500 feet.
§ 38-6.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.6
AO:923
5. Area and Setback Requirements.
(a) If the proposed antenna(s) are to be attached to an existing
building or an existing or approved tower or structure, no land
area shall be required in addition to the land area upon which
the existing structure is situated; or
(b) If the proposed antenna(s) are to be supported by a new
wireless telecommunications tower:
(1) The proposed antenna(s) and proposed supporting tower
and ancillary related electronic equipment shall be located
on a land area equal to or larger than 1/3 the minimum lot
area specified for the District;
(2) The minimum required land area shall either be a separate
undeveloped lot or a leased portion of an already
developed lot;
(3) The proposed antenna(s) and proposed supporting tower
and ancillary related electronic equipment and any
approved building housing the electronic equipment and
any approved camouflaging of the tower shall be the only
land uses located on the proposed tower site, whether a
separate lot or a leased portion of a lot; and
(4) Excepting for any access driveway into the property, any
required landscaping, and any underground utility lines
reviewed and approved by the approving authority as part
of the site plan submission, no building structure and/or
disturbance of land shall be permitted within 100 feet from
any street line, from any other existing or proposed
property line, or from any "lease line," provided that if a
tower will exceed 100 feet in height, the tower shall be set
back from any street line and from any other existing or
proposed property line a distance equal to or greater than
the height of the tower, except that, in any case the tower
shall be required to be set back a minimum distance of
only 100 feet from any line demarcating the leased
premises.
6. Maximum Height.
(a) The maximum height of any proposed antenna extending above
any existing building or existing structure shall be the
minimum height necessary for the proposed installation to
satisfactorily operate;
(b) The height of any proposed new supporting tower shall not
exceed 150 feet unless it can be demonstrated by the
applicant, to the satisfaction of the approving authority, that a
higher height is necessary for the proposed installation of the
§ 38-6.6 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.6
AO:924
antenna(s) to satisfactorily operate and is necessary for the colocation
of at least three other carriers on the tower; and
(c) The maximum height of any proposed rooftop equipment
cabinet shall be the height of the tallest accessory rooftop
structure such as a stair or elevator housing, provided that no
equipment cabinet shall be located on the rooftop of any
building less than 60 feet in height.
7. Design Criteria. All applications for wireless telecommunications
antennas shall adhere to the following design criteria:
(a) For location on an existing building or structure:
(1) Minor site plan application to the approving authority shall
be required.
(2) To the greatest extent possible, any antenna(s) located on
an existing building shall be surface-mounted on the
building facade at the roofline or along the exterior
parapet wall so as to reasonably blend in with the
architectural features of the building.
(3) Antenna(s) and supporting electrical and mechanical
equipment shall be constructed of materials and styles
consistent with surrounding street and building design
and shall be of a color that matches, as closely as possible,
the background color of the facade on which it is mounted
or so as to make the antenna(s) and related equipment as
visually unobtrusive as possible.
(4) All ancillary electronic and mechanical equipment shall be
housed either within an enclosed area inside the existing
building or on the rooftop of the building, provided:
[a] The height of the rooftop equipment facilities shall not
exceed the height of the tallest accessory rooftop
structure such as a stair or elevator housing nor more
than 250 square feet in area and shall be fully
enclosed in a cabinet which shall be constructed of a
material and color which will match those of the
existing rooftop accessory structures as closely as
possible; and
[b] Documentation by a qualified expert that any existing
structure will have sufficient structural integrity to
support the proposed antennas and ancillary
equipment shall be provided to the approving
authority.
(5) Any additional public utility lines and/or cables deemed
necessary for the operating of the proposed antenna
§ 38-6.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.6
AO:925
facility shall be located underground. The applicant shall
provide documentation to the approving authority as to
the necessity of the additional lines, including a detailed
schematic of specific location(s) and area(s) to be
disturbed in order to accomplish the installation of the
lines and/or cables. Applicant shall be responsible for
compliance with any and all applicable Federal, State, or
local regulations, including the specific provisions of the
Town's road opening permit requirements.
(6) No signage shall be permitted that is visible from adjacent
properties or from the public right-of-way.
(b) For a new tower:
(1) Preliminary and final site plan applications shall be
required for any proposed new wireless
telecommunications tower.
(2) Any proposed new tower shall be a monopole unless the
applicant can demonstrate, and the approving authority
agrees, that a different type of pole is necessary for the colocation
of additional antennas on the tower.
(3) Unless otherwise required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) or the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC), all tower designs shall be integrated
with the surrounding street and building design and shall
be either constructed of a neutral colored material or
painted a neutral color so as to reduce the visual
obtrusiveness. All applicable FAA or FCC standards
regarding color materials that may apply to the proposed
tower shall be provided to the approving authority.
(4) No lighting is permitted on a tower except lighting that is
specifically required by the FAA and any such required
lighting shall be focused and shielded, to the greatest
extent possible, so as not to project toward adjacent
nearby properties. All applicable FAA standards regarding
lighting that may apply to the proposed towers shall be
provided to the approving authority.
(5) All ancillary electronic and other equipment shall be
located within a building or encircled structure which
structure shall meet the following design criteria:
[a] Each provider or wireless telecommunications
services located on the site may have a maximum of
one cabinet enclosing required electronic equipment,
which cabinet shall not exceed 15 feet in height nor
more than 250 square feet in area. All such cabinets
shall be located within a building which shall not
§ 38-6.6 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.6
AO:926
exceed 1 1/2 stories and 20 feet in height nor 1,000
gross square feet in area.
[b] The building shall use materials, textures, and colors
that together with required screening and
landscaping shall cause it to blend into the natural
setting and surroundings, to the greatest extent
possible.
[c] Provision for co-location of equipment shall be
incorporated into the design of the building/structure.
[d] No electronic equipment shall be designed in such a
way as to interfere with any public safety
communication.
[e] All equipment shall be automated so that, to the
greatest extent possible, the need for on-site
maintenance and associated vehicular trips to and
from the site will be minimized.
[f] Lighting shall be limited to a single light at the
entrance to the building which shall be focused
downward.
(6) Landscaping shall be provided between the tower and also
between any building or structure used to house ancillary
equipment and any public street or residential dwelling
unit or residential zoning district in accordance with the
following:
[a] Required landscaping shall consist of sufficient
density of evergreen planting to effectively screen the
view of the tower's base and, in addition, sufficient
other plantings which may consist of a combination of
shrubs and deciduous trees to screen the tower and
enhance the appearance of, to the maximum extent
reasonably possible, from any surrounding residential
properties and from any public street.
[b] Any newly planted evergreen tree shall be at least
eight feet high at the time of planting and any newly
planted deciduous trees shall be a minimum caliper of
3.5 inches at the time of planting.
[c] No signage shall be permitted except "warning" and/
or equipment information signs as deemed necessary
or as required by State and/or Federal regulatory
agencies for safety purposes and are specifically
approved by the approving authority.
§ 38-6.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.6
AO:927
(7) Minimal off-street parking shall be permitted as needed to
provide maintenance at the site and as specifically
approved by the approving authority.
(8) No antenna shall be located on any tower in order to
provide noncellular telephone service; such service shall
be provided via existing telephone lines if available to the
site or by the underground extension of telephone lines to
the site if necessary.
(9) Any new tower shall be located behind existing buildings
and/or natural topographic elevations in order to screen
the tower's base from being visible from adjacent
properties and from any street right-of-way; to the
greatest extent possible, no new tower shall be visible
from a public street in any residential district.
(10) Towers shall be encircled by security fencing consisting of
eight feet high one-inch chain link nonclimable mesh
which shall be fully screened by the required landscaping.
(11) Documentation by a qualified expert that any existing
structure will have sufficient structural integrity to
support the proposed antennas and ancillary equipment
shall be provided to the approving authority.
8. Radio Frequency Emissions.
(a) Applicants shall provide current FCC information concerning
wireless telecommunications equipment and Radio Frequency
(RF) emission standards to the approving authority. Upon
documentation by a qualified expert, proposed wireless
telecommunications projects which meet the current FCC
standards shall not be conditioned or denied on the basis of RF
impact.
(b) If the FCC adopts a superseding emission standard, such new
standard shall be controlling and become effective as directed
in the FCC rulemaking. In such event, the applicant shall,
within 45 days of the superseding emission standard's effective
date, submit to the approving authority documentation of
compliance with the superseding emission standard. Failure to
submit such documentation shall result in a declaration by the
approving authority that the equipment is no longer operative
and the removal provisions of paragraph nine of this paragraph
n shall apply.
9. Removal of Abandoned/Obsolete and FCC Noncompliant Antennas
and Towers.
(a) Any wireless telecommunications antenna facility not used for
its intended and approved purpose for a period of one year
§ 38-6.6 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.6
AO:928
shall be considered no longer operative and shall be removed
by the responsible party within 60 days thereof.
10. Inventory of Sites.
(a) Existing sites. All current owners, lessors, lessees, franchisors,
franchisees, licensors and licensees of wireless
telecommunication towers, antennas, equipment shelters,
appurtenances thereto, and/or real property used in
connection therewith, which are located within the Town, shall
provide to the Zoning Officer, within 90 days of the adoption of
this amended paragraph n., a complete inventory of all such
wireless telecommunication towers, antennas, equipment
shelters, appurtenances thereto, and/or real property used in
connection therewith. A revised and updated complete
inventory shall be provided to the Zoning Officer every two
years from the date of the previously submitted complete
inventory. The complete inventory shall include the following
information:
(1) Name and address of owner, lessor, lessee, franchisor,
licensor or licensee; and
(2) Location and full description of its wireless
telecommunication tower(s), antenna(s), equipment
shelter(s), appurtenances thereto, and/or real property
used in connection therewith;
(3) The Zoning Officer may request additional information as
he or she deems necessary to reasonably comply with the
purpose and provisions of this amended paragraph n.
(b) Pending and future sites. The foregoing provisions of
paragraph 10 shall apply to currently pending applications and
new applications relative to wireless telecommunication
towers, antennas, equipment shelters, appurtenances thereto,
and/or real property used in connection therewith, to the
extent such pending or new applicant has legal interest in an
already existing site.
o. Containers. Container storage is only permitted within the SKI-N
District and subject to the following conditions:
1. Containers shall not be stacked more than two containers high.
2. There shall be a minimum ten-foot wide landscaped buffer along all
property lines. Buffer shall contain a combination of deciduous and
evergreen trees and shrubs and berming necessary to visually
screen the proposed use upon installation. At installation, plant
material shall be sized a minimum of:
(a) Deciduous trees three inch caliper.
§ 38-6.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.6
AO:929
§ 38-6.7. Prohibited Uses. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-6.400; Ord. No.
10-28-81; Ord. No. 1999-O-2 § 36; Ord. No. 2003-(O)-14]
(b) Evergreen trees six feet in height, B&B.
(c) Deciduous and evergreen shrubbery five-gallon container or 36
inch B&B.
(d) Preference shall be given to native species.
(e) No plant prohibited within the NJMC shall be permitted.
3. Wetland plantings shall conform to most recent adopted Landscape
and Open Space Guidelines established by the New Jersey
Meadowlands Commission.
a. Uses Prohibited in all Zones. No building or premises shall be used for
any purpose that is noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of
odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise or vibration or that is dangerous to the
public health or safety; nor shall any building or premises be used for
any of the following specified purposes, except for industrial research
or laboratory purposes.
1. Acetylene gas manufacture for commercial purposes;
2. Ammonia, chlorine or bleaching powder manufacturing;
3. Arsenal;
4. Asphalt manufacturing or refining, where it is the principal
function of the plant;
5. Blast furnace for steel making, not including cupola or converter
furnaces used in foundations and in which no wood is used as fuel;
6. Boiler shops, structural steel fabricating shops, locomotive shops
and railway repair shops. Metalworking shops operating pneumatic
or electric reciprocating hammers or chisels within 100 feet of any
boundary line of the property and outside of any masonry building;
7. Carbon lampblack, shoeblacking, graphite or stove polish
manufacture;
8. Celluloid and other cellulose products' manufacture, storage and
processing of nitrocellulose scrap but excluding colloid-treated
fabrics;
9. Coal-tar products' manufacture;
10. Coke ovens;
11. Creosote treatment or manufacture;
12. Distillation of coal, wood or bones;
§ 38-6.6 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.7
AO:930
13. Electroplating shops, except those having artificial ventilating
systems constructed and operated in accordance with the rules of
the State Department of Labor;
14. Explosives, fireworks or match manufacture, assembly or storage
in bulk, as principal or accessory uses including such uses which
are for industrial research or laboratory purposes;
15. Fat rendering;
16. Forge shop;
17. Gas storage in bulk;
18. Glue, size or gelatin manufacture or processes involving recovery
from fish or animal offal;
19. Glue, size or gelatin manufacture or processes involving recovering
from fish or animal offal;
20. Hazardous waste storage;
21. Incineration, reduction or dumping of offal, garbage or refuse,
except where controlled by the municipality;
22. A junkyard for the storage of abandoned automobiles or other
scrap material;
23. Lime, gypsum, cement, plaster or plaster of paris manufacture;
24. Linoleum manufacture;
25. Oil storage in quantities exceeding 100 gallons, except where the
oil is consumed on the premises and has a specific gravity
corresponding to a Baume density of not over 36° and is stored in
tanks located not less than 20 feet from any of the boundary lines of
the property;
26. Ore reduction or the smelting of iron, copper, tin, zinc or lead;
27. Paint, oil, varnish, turpentine, shellac or enamel manufacture
where it is the principal function of the plant;
28. Perfume and extract manufacture;
29. Petroleum refining;
30. Printing-ink manufacture;
31. Pyroxylin plastic manufacture or the manufacture of articles
therefrom, but excluding colloid-treated fabrics.
32. Radium extraction;
33. Raw or green salted hides or skins, their storage, coloring, curing,
dressing or tanning;
§ 38-6.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.7
AO:931
34. Rubber caoutchouc or gutta-percha manufacture from crude or
scrap material;
35. Sandpaper and emery cloth manufacture;
36. Sauerkraut manufacture;
37. Sausage manufacture;
38. Sewage disposal plant, except where owned and operated by the
Town of Kearny;
39. Slaughtering of animals;
40. Soap, soda or washing compound manufacture;
41. Starch, glucose or dextrin manufacture;
42. Stockyards;
43. Sulfurous, sulfuric, nitric or hydrochloric acid manufacture;
44. Tallow, grease, lard or candle manufacture or refining;
45. Tar distillation or the manufacture of dyes;
46. The storage of any radioactive material or substance, except when
used in connection with medical diagnosis or treatment;
47. Wool pulling or scouring;
48. Yeast manufacture;
49. Disposal or storage of human effluent;
50. Disposal or storage of industrial wastes;
51. Nuclear powered generating facilities;
52. All medical marijuana facilities, except for medical marijuana
dispensaries as permitted in the SKI-N Zone; [Added 6-23-2020
by Ord. No. 2020-12]
53. The cultivation, growing, extraction, manufacturing, processing,
laboratory testing, labeling, dispensing, warehousing, distribution
and selling of recreational marijuana and/or associated
paraphernalia are expressly prohibited uses/activities within all
zones of the Town of Kearny. [Added 6-23-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-12]
b. Additional Uses Prohibited in All Zones. No building or premises shall
be used for any of the following specified purposes:
1. The housing of persons who are civilly committed pursuant to the
Sexually Violent Predator Act (N.J.S.A. 30:4-27).
§ 38-6.7 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.8
AO:932
§ 38-6.8. Signs and Awnings. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-6.500; Ord.
No. 6-27-90; Ord. No. 1999-O-2 §§ 21, 35; Ord. No. 2000-0-28 §§ 1 —
8; Ord. No. 2003-(O)-22; Ord. No. 2003-(O)-34 §§ 1 — 3; Ord. No.
2005-(O)-32]
a. No sign, billboard, advertising, device, banner, canopy or marquee shall
be altered, relocated or erected in any Residential District, except signs
of not more than 50 square feet in area to advertise sale of land upon
which they are erected or the sale of buildings to which they are
attached, and builders', architects' and engineers' signs erected on the
site of construction during the course of a construction operation. Such
signs shall be removed within 30 days after the sale of the land or
buildings or the completion of the construction operation.
b. Permitted Signs in Residential Districts. Signs identifying schools,
colleges, churches, hospitals, and other similar public institutions, and
Planned Residential Developments (provided that paragraph 2 of this
subsection shall not be applicable to Planned Residential
Developments), are permitted in Residential Districts, provided that:
1. The height of any ground sign shall not exceed six feet and the sign
area shall not exceed 16 square feet on each side. Not more than
one such sign shall be placed along any street on which such
property fronts. The base of such signs need not be constructed
entirely upon but shall be appropriately landscaped.
2. Not more than two wall signs may be located on the front building
facades of any structures on the lot. The area of each sign shall not
exceed 24 square feet.
3. Signs designating entrances or exits to or from parking areas shall
be permitted not to exceed two square feet in area.
c. Additional explanation of what is meant by sign area: 1) For any sign
painted upon or applied/attached to the building, the area considered to
include all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs and symbols,
together with the background of a different color than the natural or
primary color of the building; 2) Where the sign consist of individual
letters or symbols attached to or painted on a building, awning or wall
the area shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle or other
geometric shape that encompasses all of the letters, designs or
symbols; 3) Only one side of a double faced sign will be counted in
computing the area of that sign.
Any question you may have can be answered by calling the
Construction Code Department at 201-955-7880, located at 402 Kearny
Avenue, Kearny, NJ 07032.
d. Signs, billboards, advertising devices, canopies and marquees shall be
erected and maintained to insure public safety by the owner or lessee of
the premises upon which they may be erected. No sign, billboard or
§ 38-6.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.8
AO:933
advertising device shall cover any part of the window, obstruct any exit
or be fastened in any manner to any part of a fire escape.
e. Construction and Location of Signs.
1. Wood signs shall be constructed of seasoned lumber not less than
3/4 of an inch in thickness, battened across the backs to insure
rigidity.
2. Metal signs shall be constructed with frame made of iron or steel
angles, channels and other necessary iron or steel shapes of
sufficient sizes and weights, covered on the exterior with sheet
metal of not less than 26 U.S. Gauge.
3. Supports for signs, billboards or advertising devices erected upon
the ground may be constructed of wood or metal and shall be of
sufficient size and number, extended at least three feet into the
ground, braced and secured in a manner approved by the
Construction Official.
4. Supports of signs, billboards or advertising devices attached to or
erected upon buildings or structures shall be constructed of iron or
steel angles not less than 1/4 of an inch in thickness, of sufficient
size and number, braced and secured to the building or structure in
a manner approved by the Construction Official. The use of chain is
prohibited.
5. Signs, billboards or advertising devices erected upon the ground,
and flat signs not over 30 inches in width attached to buildings or
other structures may be constructed of wood. All other signs,
billboards or advertising devices, except banners, shall be
constructed entirely of metal. Raised wood letters may be attached
to metal signs.
6. Signs, billboards or advertising devices erected upon the ground
shall be located not less than five feet from the street property line
upon which they face, except that on a corner of two streets they
shall be located not less than 10 feet from each property line,
subject to subsection 38-5.1c herein.
7. Except for signs authorized by a governmental agency, no
freestanding permanent or temporary signs shall encroach upon
any public right-of-way or any public property.
f. Projecting Signs. Projecting signs are to be made out of wood, komatex
(rigid plastic), or framed aluminum. No internally illuminated signs are
allowed. Signs are not permitted to be located less than nine feet above
the sidewalk and shall not exceed 10 square feet in area. Two copies of
color to-scale sketches with the location of the projected sign on the
building, along with letter sizes, must accompany the permit
application.
§ 38-6.8 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.8
AO:934
1. Projecting signs or advertising devices erected at right angles to
the face of the building or structure shall be not more than 16
inches in thickness, including the overall dimensions of raised or
applied letters or other ornament or attachment. Such signs or
advertising devices shall not be higher than the building or
structure upon which they are erected, except that on one story
buildings they may extend five feet above the roof of the building.
Not more than one projecting sign shall be permitted for each
business use.
2. Projecting signs or advertising devices shall be erected not less
than nine feet above the surface of the ground and shall project not
more than 4 1/2 feet from the face of the building or structure and
in no case to within three feet of the curbline, and shall not be
erected nearer to an interior property line than a distance equal to
the greatest projection.
3. Flat signs of metal of any dimensions, reinforced by wood or metal
frames, may be erected on any business building occupying space
below, between or above windows, provided such signs do not
project more than eight inches at any point beyond the walls or
extend above the roof of the building to which they are attached;
and further provided that such signs shall not be less than seven
feet six inches above the surface of the ground. Wood letters and
decorated wood mouldings may be attached to the face of such
metal signs.
4. In C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-4 Districts, total sign area of wall signs shall
not exceed 10% of the first floor front building facade area and in
any event shall not exceed 100 square feet. Buildings on a corner
lot or with a side building wall exposed to public view may include
each building facade as a separate frontage.
g. Signs Erected Upon the Ground and Roof.
1. Signs, billboards or advertising devices erected upon the ground
shall not be more than 16 feet high above the surface of the ground
at any point and shall be constructed entirely open for a height of at
least three feet above the surface of the ground, except that open
lattice work may be placed in such openings.
2. Roof signs shall not be permitted in any district.
3. Ground Signs. Maximum sign area for a ground sign shall not be
more than 30 square feet on each side. Not more than one ground
sign permitted on any lot except for corner lots which may be
permitted one ground sign on each frontage. Retail centers,
industrial parks or office centers with five or more separate uses
may erect a ground sign totaling not more than 100 square feet in
area and set back not less than 20 feet from the street property
line.
§ 38-6.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.8
AO:935
h. Canopies, Marquees and Temporary Banners.
1. Canopies may be erected and maintained across the sidewalk to
within 18 inches of the curbline, in a manner so as not to interfere
with normal sidewalk traffic, and shall be constructed with iron or
steel framework covered with canvas or other suitable material,
anchored to the ground and to the building or structure from which
they may extend, in a manner approved by the Construction
Official. Such applications shall first be approved by the Mayor and
Council of the Town of Kearny, New Jersey before approval by the
Construction Official.
2. Marquee and marquee signs and similar structures shall be of
fireproof construction, erected not less than 10 feet above the
sidewalk and not less than 18 inches from the curbline. Such
applications shall first be approved by the Mayor and Council of the
Town of Kearny, New Jersey, before approval by the Construction
Official.
3. Temporary banners may be erected, maintained and suspended
across a street or streets when properly attached to the buildings
or other supports on either side of the street, and in no case less
than 20 feet above the surface of the street. The application shall
be accompanied by the consent of the owners of the buildings to
which the supports are to be attached, and no permit shall be
issued for a greater period of time than 60 days. Such applications
shall first be approved by the Mayor and Council of the Town of
Kearny, New Jersey, before approval by the Construction Official.
i. Flashing, Animated or Confusing Signs and Devices.
1. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance, any
advertising, or commercially used sign or device located in whole
or in part within 100 feet of the right-of-way of any street and which
sign contains lights which move, flash, blink, fluctuate, animate or
rotate, or which contains any light or lights, whether flashing or
not, similar in color and size, color and shape or color and
arrangement to any traffic control device or emergency vehicle
light is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is prohibited.
Signs giving public service information such as time, date,
temperature, weather or similar information intermittently with
low-intensity lights which are not similar in any respect to traffic
control devices or emergency lights are not prohibited after the
effective date of this section. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to install, cause to be installed, operate,
maintain or modify any sign or device prohibited by this section as
a nuisance, and each day such nuisance is maintained shall be a
separate offense.
2. Any provision of paragraph 1 above to the contrary
notwithstanding, the prohibitions herein contained shall not apply
§ 38-6.8 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.8
AO:936
to any sign already erected and attached to any building on the
effective date hereof.
j. Administration.
1. Permit Required. Except as heretofore mentioned, no sign,
billboard, fence, advertising device, banner, canopy or marquee
shall be altered, relocated or erected upon the ground or upon or
above any building or structure in the Town of Kearny, New Jersey,
without having first obtained and paid for a permit from the
Construction Official of the Town of Kearny, New Jersey.
2. Permit Applications. Applications for permits shall be made on
forms furnished by the Construction Official, together with two sets
of drawings showing the construction and supports of such sign,
billboard, fence, advertising device, banner, canopy or marquee,
and a plot plan or diagram showing the proposed location.
Applications for electrical signs, billboards or advertising devices
shall be accompanied with an acknowledgment of application for
certificate of inspection and approval by the electrical subcode
official.
3. The fee for a permit to alter, relocate or erect any sign, billboard,
advertising device, banner, canopy or marquee shall be in
accordance with the Fee Ordinance of the Town of Kearny.
k. Signs in the C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-4 Districts.
1. Any sign hereafter erected, displayed or repaired, except as
permitted under subsection 38-8.2, within the C-1, C-2, C-3 or C-4
Zone Districts shall conform to the provisions of this paragraph and
any other ordinance or regulation of the Town of Kearny and shall
not be erected, displayed or replaced without the issuance first of a
zoning and sign permit by the Construction Official along with the
payment of the required fees. Applications for permits shall be
submitted to the Construction Official of the Town of Kearny in
accordance with subsection 38-6.8j and shall include (i) an
accurately scaled, prepared drawing of the proposed sign and
supporting frame, construction, size of letters, details and
illumination and (ii) a scaled drawing or photograph of the building
for which the sign is proposed, with the location of the sign
accurately indicated. Two sets of these drawings must accompany
the application. Applications for permits shall be made on forms
furnished by the Construction Department located at 402 Kearny
Avenue, Kearny, NJ 07032. The Construction Official shall consult
with the UEZ coordinator before issuing the permit.
2. Definitions. As used in this paragraph, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
§ 38-6.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.8
AO:937
AWNING — Shall mean a flexible covering constructed out of
acrylic canvas (Sunbrella brand or similar) over a rigid or fixed
canopy-like frame that is affixed to a building wall and must be of a
shape and color that compliments the architecture of the building.
AWNING SIGN — Shall mean a sign applied directly to a flexible
covering over a rigid or fixed canopy-like frame that is affixed to a
building wall. An awning sign shall be considered as a sign which
projects perpendicularly from a building wall for purposes of this
paragraph.
BUSINESS DISTRICT — Shall mean the area of the Town of Kearny
located within the C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-4 Zone Districts as shown on
the official Zoning Map.
GROUND SIGN — Shall mean a freestanding sign permanently
affixed, anchored or secured to the ground. They must be made out
of wood, framed aluminum or any other solid traditional material.
PORTABLE SIGN — Shall mean a freestanding sign not
permanently affixed, anchored or secured to the ground. Portable
signs include sandwich signs and blackboards.
PROJECTING SIGNS — Shall mean any signs made out of wood,
komatex (rigid plastic), or framed aluminum which shall be
prohibited at height less than nine feet above the sidewalk and may
not exceed 10 square feet in area.
SIGN — Shall mean any structure, light, letter work, model,
banner, pennant, insignia, trade flag or representation or any other
device used to advertise, inform or attract the attention of the
public and which is designed to be seen from outside a building,
excluding window displays of merchandise and informational
material incidental to the display or sale of merchandise.
SIGN AREA — Shall mean:
For a sign painted upon or applied/attached to a building,
the area is considered to include all lettering, wording and
accompanying designs and symbols, together with the
background of a different color than the natural or primary
color of the building.
a.
Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols
attached to or painted on a building, awning or wall, the area
shall be considered to be that of the smallest rectangle or other
geometric shape that encompasses all of the letters, designs or
symbols.
b.
Only one side of a double-faced sign will be counted in
computing the area of that sign.
c.
The area of a flat, irregularly shaped sign shall be the smallest
plane geometric figure that will wholly contain it.
d.
§ 38-6.8 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.8
AO:938
WALL SIGNS — Shall mean nonilluminated signs that can be made
out of wood, komatex (rigid plastic), or framed aluminum.
WINDOW SIGN — Shall mean any sign temporarily or permanently
affixed to the glass of a window or door of a business or that is
visible through a window or door and placed on a regular basis
within three feet of the glass.
3. All signs in the Business District shall comply with the following
regulations:
(a) No sign shall be backlighted. Signs (including wall signs,
awning signs, window signs and portable signs) may only be
indirectly illuminated so that such light source is properly
shielded from residences and streets.
(b) No sign shall be lighted with flashing lights.
(c) Signs which project perpendicularly from a building wall are
prohibited unless such sign (i) does not exceed 10 square feet,
(ii) the lowest portion of which is a minimum of nine feet above
the sidewalk and (iii) is not internally illuminated.
(d) Neon. Only two pieces of neon are allowed per establishment
and shall be no more than four square feet per piece. No
flashing neon is allowed. No neon borders are allowed. Neon is
considered part of the allowable 10% of the first floor front
square footage sign area. Two color to-scale sketches with the
location of the neon must accompany the sign application.
(e) Neon channel or reverse neon channel letters are letters that
are made from metal formed letters that house rows of neon
inside the letters that are then covered with plastic faces. In
the case of reverse neon channel letters the fact and sides of
the letters are made out of metal mounted up off the wall and
the neon halo of light stream out the back of the letters onto
the facade of the building. The total sign are for neon channel
and reverse neon channel letters follows the same guidelines
as for wall signs which is not to exceed 10% of the first floor
front building facade area and in any event may not exceed 100
square feet. Two copies of a color to-scale sketch of the
placement of the letters on the building must accompany the
sign application. Buildings on a corner lot may erect an
additional sign for each business establishment or use in that
building.
(f) Individually formed letters are nonilluminated plastic or metal
individual letter or logos mounted on a wall with stainless steel
studs. The sign area for individual formed letters is the same as
for wall signs which is not to exceed 10% of the first floor front
facade area and in any event shall not exceed 100 square feet.
Buildings on a corner lot may erect an additional sign for each
§ 38-6.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.8
AO:939
business establishment or use located in that building. Two
copies of a color to-scale sketch of the placement of the letters
on the building must accompany the sign application.
(g) Window lettering is only allowed using pressure sensitive vinyl
and is considered part of the allowable 10% of the first floor
front square footage sign area. No window may be painted
except for seasonal displays. Two color to-scale sketches of the
placement of the lettering must accompany the permit
application.
4. Wall signs nonilluminated signs that can be made out of wood,
komatex (rigid plastic), or framed aluminum. Two copies of color toscale
sketches must accompany the sign application. Letter sizes
must be shown on the sketch. Wall signs are permitted on each
building wall that faces a street in the business district, subject to
the following limitations and requirements:
(a) Not more than one wall sign shall be permitted for each
business establishment or use located in the building except
that on corner properties an additional sign may be erected on
the side of the building for each business establishment or use
located in that building.
(b) No wall sign shall extend farther than six inches from the face
of the building wall to which it is attached except that an
awning sign may extend up to three feet from the facade of the
building to which it is attached.
(c) The height of any sign shall not exceed 2 1/2 feet or 20% of the
height of the building wall to which it is attached, whichever is
less. In no event may the Sign Area of any sign exceed 10% of
the area of the building wall to which it is attached.
(d) (Reserved)
(e) No sign shall be affixed upon a building or structure in any
manner which disfigures, damages or conceals any window
opening, door or significant architectural feature or detail of
said building or structure.
(f) (Reserved)
(g) On a sign with horizontal format attached to a building, the
maximum allowable height for lettering shall not be more than
80% of the height of the sign.
5. (a) Temporary banner or Coroplast signs may be displayed
temporarily to advertise a grand opening, sale or relocation of
a business for a period not to exceed 45 days. They shall be
limited to a size of 15 square feet. A temporary banner or
coroplast permit must be secured before installing.
§ 38-6.8 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.8
AO:940
(b) Except as provided for in paragraph k,5(a), coroplast or paper
signs may be displayed temporarily for a period of not to
exceed seven days. The display of Coroplast or paper signs
shall not exceed the greater of five square feet or 5% of each of
the total footage of each windowpane. A permit shall not be
required for installation.
6. Portable signs that inform the public of sales or events may be
displayed temporarily on a public sidewalk, subject to the following
limitations and requirements:
(a) The sign does not exceed an area of four square feet and a
height of four feet.
(b) The sign is on display only during hours that the retail
establishment conducting the sale or event is open for
business.
(c) The sign is located within three feet of the property line of the
retail establishment conducting the sale or event.
(d) The application for a permit shall include an indemnification
agreement pursuant to which the applicant shall agree to
forever defend, protect, indemnify and save harmless the Town
of Kearny, its officers, agents and employees from any and all
claims, causes of action, injuries, losses, damages, expenses,
fees and costs arising out of such portable sign.
(e) Only one sign per establishment is allowed.
7. Ground signs shall mean any freestanding sign permanently fixed,
anchored or secured to the ground in the Business District and are
subject to the following limitations and requirements:
(a) Sign must be made out of wood, framed aluminum or any other
solid traditional materials.
(b) Sign may not exceed 30 square feet on each side.
(c) Sign height is not to exceed 16 feet.
(d) Sign must be set back at least five feet from the property line.
(e) Only one sign shall be permitted per lot.
(f) Sign may not be internally illuminated, but may be externally
illuminated by either ornamental incandescent fixtures
mounted to the sign structure or by ground fixtures.
(g) Two copies of a color to-scale sketch of the sign and the
placement of it on the property must accompany the permit at
the time of application. Letter sizes must be indicated on the
sketch.
§ 38-6.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.8
AO:941
§ 38-6.9. Fences and Walls. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-6.600; Ord. No.
1999-O-2 § 29; Ord. No. 2018-3]
8. Political nonprofit or not-for-profit organization signs and
temporary contractors signs shall be of temporary construction and
the signs shall not remain displayed for longer than 30 days during
any six-month period.
9. Awnings. The installation of awnings is encouraged. The awning
may be stationary or retractable. The size of the awning is
regulated by Kearny Construction Code Enforcement Department
and requires a zoning permit and construction permit to be
installed. Two copies of a to-scale sketch of the awning on the
building must accompany the permit at the time of application.
Awning shall be subject to the following limitations and
restrictions:
(a) Awning must be made out of acrylic canvas (Sunbrella brand or
similar) and should be a shape and color that compliments the
architecture of the building.
(b) No vinyl awnings are permitted.
(c) No back-lit awnings are permitted.
(d) Lettering is restricted to the vertical flap of the awning, which
shall not exceed eight inches in height.
(e) Permission to encroach over town property with the awning
must be sought and obtained from the Kearny Governing Body
prior to making application for permit. Requests for approval
to encroach must be in writing and submitted before the
second Tuesday of the month to: Mayor and Town Council, 402
Kearny Avenue, Kearny NJ 07032.
a. No fence or wall located to the rear of the minimum required front yard
shall be erected more than six feet in height and shall be erected within
the property lines, except that a height of eight feet shall be permitted
in such side or rear yard areas along those property lines where a
residential use abuts a nonresidential use.
b. The maximum height of a fence or wall shall not exceed 48 inches in the
required front yard of a residential district or in a side yard adjacent to
the street line of a corner lot. All fences and walls in the required front
yard of residential districts or in the side yard of a corner lot shall be at
least 50% open.
c. No fence, wall, or other visual barrier shall be so located that it
obstructs the vision of a motor vehicle driver approaching any street or
driveway intersection. All fences shall meet the requirements of
subsection 38-5.1c where applicable.
§ 38-6.8 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.9
AO:942
§ 38-6.10. Planned Developments. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-6.700;
Ord. No. 12-12-90; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-64]
d. The finished side of any fence or wall shall be oriented to the outside of
the lot.
e. On through lots, as defined under this chapter, where a residential use
abuts a non-residential use and the building rear of the residential use
borders the non-residential use, a fence or wall not exceeding six feet is
permitted along those property lines where a residential use abuts a
non-residential use.
a. General. Prior to approval of any planned development, the Planning
Board shall find as required by N.J.S.A. 50:55D-45, the following facts
and conclusions:
1. That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to
the zoning standards applicable to the planned development.
2. That the proposals of maintenance and the amount, location and
purpose of the common open space are adequate.
3. That provision through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation and
visual enjoyment are adequate.
4. That the proposed planned development will not have an
unreasonably adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed
to be established.
5. In the case of a proposed development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents,
occupants and owners of the proposed development in the total
completion of the development are adequate.
b. Planned Commercial Development Groups.
1. Purpose. Planned commercial development groups shall be
permitted in certain locations and under specific conditions to
accommodate commercial or office uses or both and other uses
incidental to the predominant use as hereinafter permitted.
2. Required Area. The minimum contiguous size for planned
commercial development groups shall be as follows:
C-3 and C-4 District: One acre
SKM District: Five acres
§ 38-6.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.10
AO:943
3. Development Plan. The planned commercial development group
shall be developed according to a plan as a single entity containing
one or more structures with appurtenant common areas. The
development plan shall demonstrate a coordinated treatment of
building location, orientation and relationship; vehicular access,
parking, pedestrian access and emergency access; landscaping,
lighting and open space areas; and facility management, security
and operations.
4. Permitted Uses. Permitted uses shall be as follows:
(a) C-3 Community Business District: Any principal and accessory
uses permitted in the C-3 District other than residential uses
and under the same conditions as prescribed therein.
(b) C-4 General Business District: Principal and accessory uses
permitted in the C-4 District other than residential uses and
under the same conditions as prescribed therein.
(c) SKI-N South Kearny Industrial-North and SKI-S South Kearny
Industrial-South Districts:
(1) Principal uses:
Bank and other financial institutions;
Department store;
Dry goods, clothing and variety store but not including
outlet sales;
Food store;
Furniture store;
Hotel and conference facilities;
Movie theater;
Offices, business and professional;
Restaurants;
Fast food restaurants if developed as part of a shopping
center building but which shall not include drive through
service.
(2) Accessory uses: Any accessory uses permitted in the C-3
District other than residential uses and under the same
conditions as prescribed therein.
(3) Other incidental uses: In the SKM82 District, industrial
uses permitted in the LI District may be permitted as part
of a planned commercial development group, provided
however that such use shall be incidental to the
§ 38-6.10 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.10
AO:944
predominant use and shall conform to all other
requirements of this chapter.
(4) Conditional uses: Any conditional uses permitted in the
SKI-N and SKI-S zone under the same conditions
prescribed therein.
5. Bulk Regulations. Planned commercial developments shall conform
to the following bulk regulations:
(a) Height regulations shall be the same as the height regulations
in the SKM83 Zone.
(b) Improved lot coverage regulations shall be the same as the
improved lot coverage regulations in the SKM84 Zone.
c. Planned Industrial Development Groups.
1. Purpose. Planned industrial development groups shall be permitted
in certain locations and under specific conditions to accommodate
industrial uses in single planned development.
2. Required Area. The minimum contiguous size for planned industrial
development shall be 10 acres.
3. Development Plan. The planned industrial development group shall
be developed according to a plan as a single entity containing one
or more structures with appurtenant common areas. The
redevelopment plan shall demonstrate a coordinated treatment of
building location, orientation and relationship; vehicular access,
parking, pedestrian access and emergency access; landscaping,
lighting and open space areas; and facilities management, security
and operations.
4. Permitted Uses and Bulk Regulations. Permitted uses and bulk
regulations shall be the same as the district in which the planned
industrial development group is located.
d. Limited Income Housing.
1. Conditions. Limited income housing (LIH) as required by and
regulated in this chapter shall meet the following conditions:
(a) LIH units within each such development in the CLH Zone shall
be made available exclusively to limited income households at
82.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2003-(O)-23 deleted the SKM-1 and SKM-2 Zones and added
the SKI-N and SKI-S Zones. At the direction of the Town, the reference contained herein
will be amended in a subsequent ordinance.
83.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2003-(O)-23 deleted the SKM-1 and SKM-2 Zones and added
the SKI-N and SKI-S Zones. At the direction of the Town, the reference contained herein
will be amended in a subsequent ordinance.
84.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2003-(O)-23 deleted the SKM-1 and SKM-2 Zones and added
the SKI-N and SKI-S Zones. At the direction of the Town, the reference contained herein
will be amended in a subsequent ordinance.
§ 38-6.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.10
AO:945
the ratio of not less than 50% low income households nor more
than 50% moderate income households.
(b) For purposes of this section, a lot income household is one
having a total income which is not more than 50% of the
median household income adjusted for household size in the
Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area (SMSA), Newark, New
Jersey Housing Region, as established by the United States
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for the
purpose of administering the Federal Housing Assistance
Payments Program (Section 8) or by other generally accepted
Federal or New Jersey data base. The aforesaid percentage
may be amended from time to time as provided in this section.
For purposes of this section, a moderate income household
is one having a total income which is not less than 50% nor
more than 80% of the median household income adjusted for
household size in the Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area
(SMSA), Newark, New Jersey Housing Region, as established
by the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) for the purpose of administering the
Federal Housing Assistance Payments Program (Section 8) or
by other generally accepted Federal or New Jersey data base.
The aforesaid percentages may be amended from time to time
as provided in this section.
(c) Occupancy of LIH units constructed under the provisions of
this section shall be limited to low and moderate income
households as defined in this section and shall be affordable to
such households as follows:
(1) In establishing affordability of a unit of a given number of
bedrooms, such units must be affordable to household
sizes as set forth below.
1 bedroom unit 2 person household
2 bedroom unit 3 person household
3 bedroom unit 5 person household
(2) In the case of LIH units offered for sale, each unit shall be
affordable to a household earning no more than 80% of the
ceiling income for that household, by household size and
income category, spending not more than 28% of its gross
household income for the sum of the mortgage, based on:
(i) a 10% down payment and realistically available
mortgage interest rates; (ii) property taxes as currently
levied in the Town of Kearny; (iii) insurance; and (iv)
homeowners' association fees, if any. The proposed prices
of LIH units to be offered for sale, and the calculation by
which those prices have been determined, shall be
§ 38-6.10 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.10
AO:946
submitted for approval by the applicant as a part of
application for preliminary site plan approval.
(3) In the case of LIH units offered for rent, they shall be
rented for no more than 30% of the gross household
income of the low or moderate income household, the
rental to be inclusive of all services, maintenance and
utilities. In the event that any utility or other charges are
paid directly by the tenant, the maximum rental of 30%
shall represent the sum of the contract rent and all such
utility or other charges. Rents shall be set individually for
each tenant on the basis of individually verified household
income.
(d) Sale or rental of LIH units shall be on the basis of income and
residency of applying eligible households. Where the number
of applicants exceed the number of LIH units available, the
sale or rental of such units shall be in accordance with the date
of application submitted, with earlier applicants being given
preference over later applicants. The distribution of available
LIH units shall be consistent with the proportion of income
categories as provided in paragraph d, 1(a) above.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained herein,
indigenous limited household applicants within the respective
low or moderate income categories shall be given preference
at all times over non-indigenous limited income household
applicants within the same category.
(e) All applicants for the purchase or rental of LIH units shall meet
the income qualifications established in this section at the time
the application is filed and shall be qualified at the time of
taking title or occupancy.
(f) All tenants of rented LIH units shall be required to give proof of
continued income qualifications on the first and each
subsequent anniversary date of taking occupancy. A household
that ceases to meet the qualifications as a low income
household but does meet the qualifications of a moderate
income household may continue to occupy the unit, and the
next moderate income unit to become available which is owned
by the same owner as the unit changing from low to moderate
income occupancy shall be rented to a low income household.
Any tenant household having an income which on the first or
any subsequent anniversary date of taking occupancy exceeds
125% of the current maximum income limitation for a
moderate income household shall be required to vacate the
rented unit upon nine months' written notice. Upon the
issuance of the written notice to vacate, the limitation of rental
charges as set forth in this section shall cease to apply and
until the subject unit is vacated the owner shall be entitled to
an increase in rent, provided that the increase does not exceed
§ 38-6.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.10
AO:947
30% of the amount by which the tenant's income exceeds the
current maximum income limitation for a moderate income
household. In the implementation of this paragraph, income
limitations shall be adjusted for household size.
(g) Any developer submitting an application for development
which includes LIH units shall submit a plan for resale or
rental controls to insure that the LIH units remain affordable to
low and moderate income households for at least 30 years.
Such plan shall contain all of those provisions set forth in this
section, as well as conform to any regulations or guidelines
adopted by the Town of Kearny or any governmental agency or
nonprofit entity delegated this authority by the Town of Kearny.
(1) Any plan for controlling the resale of LIH units shall permit
the owner of such units, upon resale, to sell that unit for:
i. The original sales price plus the original sales price
multiplied by 75% of the percentage increase in the
Consumer Price Index between the date of initial
purchase and the date of resale.
ii. Reimbursement for documented monetary outlays
made for reasonable property improvements and
iii. Reasonable costs incurred in selling unit.
(2) Any such plan shall provide that the low income units upon
resale may be sold only to low income households, and the
moderate income units to either low or moderate income
purchasers; provided, however, that the administering
agency may establish reasonable provisions for waiver of
this condition on a case by case basis in the event it finds
that a particular unit may not feasibly be sold subject to
this condition. In the event that the administering agency
grants such a waiver, it may provide that the unit be sold at
the formula price, and that the resale controls remain in
effect for any subsequent sales of the unit.
(3) The Town of Kearny may administer these controls
directly, or may enter into an agreement with a nonprofit
corporation or other governmental entity, or may permit
the developer to administer these controls, either directly
or through a nonprofit entity established by the developer,
but in no event may the Town of Kearny require the
developer to administer these controls as a condition of
approval nor may the resale controls be ad-ministered
merely by the existence of a deed restriction on the
property.
(4) Resale controls shall be embodied in a deed restriction on
the property that shall be submitted by the developer at
§ 38-6.10 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.10
AO:948
the time of preliminary site plan approval, and shall be
subject to approval by the Town Attorney and by the
administering agency. All deed restrictions shall be
consistent with all of the provisions of this section, and
with any regulations or guidelines adopted by the
administering agency.
(5) Any LIH unit offered as a rental unit shall continue to be
offered as a rental unit for at least 15 years. After 15 years,
they may be converted to condominium or cooperative
occupancy, but must be sold at prices affordable to
moderate income households, as defined herein, occupied
by low or moderate income households, and subject to
such resale controls as may be necessary to insure that the
units will continue to be affordable to moderate income
households for the remainder of the thirty-year period
commencing with the issuance of certificates of occupancy
on the last LIH unit in that development.
(6) The administering agency, subject to review by the Town at
the option of the Council, shall adopt such regulations and
guidelines as may be necessary to carry out the provisions
of paragraph (g) through (g)(6).
(h) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the Town
of Kearny shall have the right to purchase, either directly or
through a governmental agency or authority or through
corporation under contract with the Town, any or all LIH units
constructed in any development. Such right must be exercised
by written notice to the developer within 30 days after the
issuance of a construction permit or permits for the unit or
units involved. Notice shall be mailed by certified mail return
receipt requested, to the developer at the address of the
developer set forth in the application for construction permit,
and the notice shall become effective upon mailing.
The purchase price for any unit shall be the agreed upon
estimated highest price at which the unit could be sold to a
qualified low or moderate income purchaser, as the case may
be.
Closing of title on the purchase of any unit or units shall
take place within 30 days after the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the unit or units.
2. Administration. Except as to the provisions of paragraph (g) above,
the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this
paragraph as they pertain to LIH units shall be undertaken and
performed by the Town Administrator, unless the Town Council
shall by resolution designate a governmental agency or nonprofit
entity to undertake and perform responsibilities.
§ 38-6.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.10
AO:949
§ 38-6.11. Newsracks. [Ord. No. 2006-(O)-19 §§ 1 — 10]
3. Periodic Review for Modification of Standards. The standards
established in this section for qualification as a low income
household, a moderate income household and the rental allowed to
be charged for occupancy of LIH units shall be reviewed
periodically by the Town Council which shall, from time to time,
adopt such amendments to this section as are required to assure
that such standards conform to the applicable decisional and
statutory law of New Jersey. In the event that the standards
established by this section are so amended hereafter, such
amended standards shall apply to any LIH units which have been
constructed pursuant to this section and which are in existence at
the time that such standards are so amended.
a. Findings, Purpose and Intent.
1. The uncontrolled placement of newsracks in public rights-of-way
presents an inconvenience and danger to the health, safety and
welfare of persons using such public rights-of-way, including
pedestrians, persons entering and leaving vehicles and buildings,
and persons performing essential utility, traffic control and
emergency services.
2. The uncontrolled placement of newsracks is also detrimental to the
aesthetic characteristics of the Town and unsightly newsracks
located in the public rights-of-way constitute public nuisances and
cause visual blight.
3. It is the purpose and intent of this section, in the interest of public
safety, aesthetics and the general welfare of the Town, to
reasonably regulate the placement, maintenance and operation of
newsracks within the Town of Kearny.
b. Definitions. As used herein, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — Shall mean the person, corporation, employee or
agent who places and maintains or operates a newsrack in a public
right of way as herein defined.
DRIVEWAY — Shall mean that surface, whether improved or not, over
and by which ingress and egress is made by private or public property
or by which vehicles move from private or public property onto a street.
NEWSPAPER, NEWS PERIODICALS, NEWS MAGAZINE — Shall mean
any newspaper, periodical or magazine of general circulation as defined
by general law; any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office
Department of the United States, in accordance with Federal statute or
regulation; and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording
officer, as provided by general law.
§ 38-6.10 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.11
AO:950
NEWSRACK — Shall mean any self-service or coin-operated box,
container, storage unit or other dispenser erected, installed, maintained
or operated for the display, distribution and/or sale of newspapers,
circulars, pamphlets, news periodicals, magazines, or other similar
publications.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean a street, sidewalk or roadway.
ROADWAY — Shall mean that portion of a street improved, designated
or ordinarily used for vehicle travel.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean any public surface or area provided for the
use of pedestrians, including the area between the curb of any street
and the sidewalk, or, if there is no sidewalk, the area between the edge
of the street and the property line adjacent thereto.
STREET — Shall mean all that area dedicated to public use for public
street purposes and shall include but not be limited to roadways,
parkways, alleys and sidewalks.
c. Compliance and Permit Required.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or distributor
to erect, place, maintain or operate a newsrack on any public rightof-
way within the Town of Kearny, without first having obtained a
permit from the Zoning Official. The permit shall specify the exact
location of each newsrack. One permit may be issued to include any
number of newsracks and shall be signed by the applicant.
2. An application for such permit shall be made, in writing, to the
office of the Zoning Official of the Town of Kearny upon such form
as shall be provided and shall contain the name and address of the
applicant and the proposed specific location of said newsrack or
newsracks and shall be signed by the applicant. The application
must be accompanied by a color sketch or color drawing, to scale,
and specifications of the proposed newsrack depicting compliance
with the requirements for dimensions, color and lettering, and the
application shall be signed by the applicant.
3. If the applicant meets all the requirements of the provisions of this
section, the permit shall be issued within 10 business days.
4. If the application is denied, the Zoning Official, within 10 business
days and by regular mail, shall set forth in writing the reasons for
the denial. For each requested location, the Zoning Official shall
have an additional two business days to act.
5. Such denial by the Zoning Official may be appealed within 30 days
to the Construction Board of Appeals who shall render a decision
within 30 days.
d. Conditions for Permit; Fee; Term; Liability Insurance.
§ 38-6.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.11
AO:951
1. Permits may be issued for the installation of a newsrack or
newsracks, but such newsrack or newsracks and the installation,
use or maintenance thereof shall be conditioned upon compliance
with the provisions of this section.
2. The application for a permit shall require the payment of an
application fee of $100.
3. There shall be a registration fee of $50 per newsrack payable after
the time the application for a permit is approved.
4. The permit shall be valid for a period of one year, on a fiscal-year
basis, commencing on January 1, and shall be renewable on
January of the subsequent year. Permits shall be renewable
pursuant to the procedure for original applications, upon payment
of the $50 registration fee per newsrack which shall be used to
defray the cost of inspection. The registration fee shall be prorated
if the permit issued is effective subsequent to January 1.
5. No permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless the
applicant and any other persons, organizations, firms or
corporations on whose behalf the application is made for filing such
application do represent, stipulate, contract and agree that they
will jointly and severally defend, indemnify and hold the Town of
Kearny harmless against liability for any and all claims for damage
to property or injury to or death of persons arising out of or
resulting from the issuance of the permit or the control,
maintenance or ownership of the newsracks permitted.
6. No permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless the
applicant shall file with the Zoning Officer an insurance policy or
policies of a company duly licensed to transact business under the
insurance laws of this State, with coverage limits of at least
$100,000 per person and $1,000,000 per accident, insuring against
loss from liability imposed by law upon the distributor for damages
on account of bodily injury or death suffered, and in the sum of
$50,000 against loss on account of property damage suffered by
any person or persons as a result of an accident occurring by
reason of the ownership, control or maintenance of a newsrack,
and no permit shall continue effective unless such insurance shall
remain in full force and effect, during the entire term of the permit.
Such insurance policy shall provide for the payment of any final
judgment recovered by any person on account of the ownership,
maintenance and control of such newsrack, or any fault in respect
thereto, and shall be for the benefit of any person suffering loss,
damage or injury as aforesaid.
Each insurance policy shall provide that neither the distributor, nor
its insurer, shall have any right to subrogation against the Town of
Kearny. Each insurance policy shall provide primary coverage for
any and all losses and shall be drafted so as to protect all parties.
§ 38-6.11 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.11
AO:952
The distributor shall have the Town of Kearny added as an
additional insured on the insurance policies required by this
subsection.
e. Maintenance; Installation.
1. Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon or over any
public sidewalk, roadway or street and which is so permitted in a
location under the terms of this section shall comply with the
following standards;
2. No newsrack shall exceed 49 inches in height, 20 inches in width or
18 inches in depth. Newsracks shall be manufactured of sturdy
metal housing, using 12 gauge sheet metal or better, finished with a
prime coat and baked powder coat finish.
3. Newsracks shall be green with white lettering, but lettering shall
not exceed three inches in height and shall not cover more than
10% of the surface area of the newsrack.
4. Notwithstanding any provision in this subsection to the contrary,
any newsrack located in a streetscape design area shall conform to
the aesthetic characteristics of the streetscape plan.
5. No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity
purposes other than those dealing with the display, sale or
purchase of the news materials sold therein.
6. Each newsrack wherein a consideration is charged for the
dispensing of its product shall be equipped with a coin-return
mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an
immediate refund in the event that he is unable to receive the
publication paid for. The coin-return mechanism shall be
maintained in good working order.
7. Each newsrack shall have affixed to it, in a readily visible place so
as to be seen by anyone using the newsrack, a notice setting for the
name and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a
working telephone service to report a malfunction or to secure a
refund in the event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism
or to give the notices provided for in this section.
8. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition
and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be serviced and
maintained so that:
(a) It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked
paint in the visible painted areas thereof.
(b) It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible
unpainted metal areas thereon.
§ 38-6.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.11
AO:953
(c) The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which
the publications therein are viewed are unbroken and
reasonably free of cracks, dents or blemishes and
discolorations.
(d) The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof, if any, are
reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading.
(e) The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly
misshapen.
(f) It is free from all graffiti.
9. It shall be unlawful for any person or place to maintain any
publication or material in newsracks which is obscene as defined by
the United States Supreme Court and/or as set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:34-2 or -3 or which exposes to public view any pictorial material
which depicts or appears to depict nudity or offensive sexually
explicit material.
10. Each newsrack shall be maintained to prevent the newspapers or
magazines from being scattered about the area.
11. Each newsrack not located on an existing sidewalk or other hard
surface area shall be placed on a precast concrete base.
Installation, maintenance and removal of the base shall be the
responsibility of the distributor.
f. Location and Placement.
1. No newsrack shall be placed or permitted except in conformity with
the provisions of this section and upon permit application to the
office of the Zoning Official. Any newsrack which rests in whole or
in part upon or on any portion of a public street or sidewalk or
projects onto, into or over any part of a public street or sidewalk
shall be located in accordance with the provisions of the following:
(a) No newsrack shall be used or maintained which projects onto,
into or over any part of the roadway of any public street or
which rests wholly or in part upon or over any portion of the
roadway of any public street.
(b) No newsrack shall be permitted to rest upon, in or over any
public street or sidewalk when such installation, use or
maintenance:
(1) Endangers the safety of persons or property.
(2) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(3) Unreasonably interferes with access to or exit from any
legally parked vehicle.
§ 38-6.11 KEARNY CODE § 38-6.11
AO:954
(4) Unreasonably interferes with the ingress or egress from
any residence or place of business.
(5) Unreasonably interferes with the use of traffic signs or
signals, hydrants or mailboxes permitted at or near said
location.
(6) Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the operation of
any bus stop.
(c) A newsrack or newsracks shall be placed or otherwise secured
so as to prevent their being blown down or around the public
street or sidewalk but shall not be chained or otherwise
secured to any traffic or street signs, signals, hydrants, trees or
mailboxes.
(d) No newsracks shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
(1) Within three feet of any marked crosswalk or handicap
curb ramp.
(2) Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police box
or other emergency facility.
(3) Within 18 inches of a curb.
(4) At any location whereby the clear space for the
passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet.
(5) Within 10 feet of any standby or sprinkler connection or
related safety or fire equipment.
(6) Within five feet of any building, showroom or display
window, unless written permission from the owner is
secured and same is submitted with the application.
(7) At any location whereby the clear space for the
passageway for pedestrians is reduced by the newsrack to
less than six feet.
(8) Within three feet of or on any public area improved with
lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees or landscaping.
(9) Within 300 feet of any other newsrack containing the same
issue or edition of the same publication.
(10) In front of a single-family or two-family residence.
(11) In any district other than the C1, C2 and C3 zones.
(12) To cause a sight line obstruction at any intersection or
driveway.
(13)No newsracks shall be permitted in any location zoned as
residential.
§ 38-6.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-6.11
AO:955
(14)No more than two newsracks may be placed adjacent to
each other at any location that complies with this
subsection. After a newsrack, or pair of newsracks, is
permitted for a specific location, no additional newsracks
shall be placed less than one city block from the permitted
newsrack.
g. Abandonment/Removal of Newsracks.
1. In the event that a newsrack remains empty for a period of 10
continuous days or does not contain the publication specified in the
application therefor within 96 hours after the release of the current
issue, the Zoning Official may deem the newsrack abandoned and
may, after having given 30 days' written notice to the applicant to
remedy the problem specified in said written notice, remove the
newsrack from the public right-of-way and/or impound said
newsrack.
2. In the event that a newsrack does not confirm to any of the
provisions of this subsection, the Zoning Official may deem the
newsrack a nonconforming newsrack and may, after giving 30 days'
written notice to the applicant to remedy the problem specified in
said written notice, remove the newsrack and all supporting
structures from the public right-of-way or impound said newsrack.
Newsracks that do not contain proper owner/operator
identification permanently attached thereto may be removed by the
Town at any time without notice.
3. Storage after Removal. For any newsrack that is removed or
impounded in accordance with this section and then stored by the
Town, the Township shall charge a storage fee of $25 per day.
h. Violations and Penalties. In addition to all enforcement procedures
provided herein, any violation of the provisions of this subsection shall
be subject to prosecution as a violation and, upon conviction, shall
subject the violator to a penalty of not less than $100 nor more than
$500, to confinement of not more than 90 days in jail, or both Each day
that a violation of this section continues after due notice from the office
of the Zoning Official to the violator shall be deemed a separate and
distinct violation for each separate newsrack.
i. Suspension or Revocation of Permit. In addition to the penalties
provided herein, it shall be within the power and discretion of the
Zoning Official to suspend or revoke a permit for continued or repeated
violations or infractions of any provision of this subsection, or of any
rule, direction or regulation of the Zoning Official. Suspension or
revocation of a permit shall be mandatory for the third violation of this
subsection.
j. Permits Not to Be Assigned. The permits issued pursuant to this
subsection shall not be assigned or transferred.
§ 38-6.11 KEARNY CODE § 38-7
AO:956
§ 38-7. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
§ 38-7.1. Off-Street Parking and Loading Spaces Required. [Ord.
No. 10-14-87 § 138-7.100]
In all districts, in connection with every industrial, business, institutional,
recreational or residential or any other use, there shall be provided, at the
time any building or structure is erected or is enlarged or increased in
capacity, off-street parking and loading spaces for automobiles and other
vehicles in accordance with the requirements set forth in the Land
Subdivision and Site Plan Review Ordinance of the Town of Kearny. Such
facilities shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. In cases where site plan approval is not required, the standards
herein shall prevail.
§ 38-7.2. Joint Facilities. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-7.200]
Off-street parking and loading facilities for separate uses may be provided
jointly if the total number of spaces so provided is not less than the sum
of the separate requirements for each use and provided that all regulations
governing the location of accessory spaces in relation to the use served
are adhered to. Further, no accessory space or portion thereof shall serve
as a required space for more than one use unless otherwise approved as
provided in the Land Subdivision and Site Plan Review Ordinance.
§ 38-7.3. Maintenance of Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas.
[Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-7.300]
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private off-street parking
or loading area shall be maintained in good condition, free of hazards
and deterioration. All pavement, areas, sidewalks, curbs, drainage facilities,
lighting, bumpers, guardrails, markings, signs, landscaping and other
improvements shall be maintained in workable, safe and good condition.
§ 38-7.4. Off-Site Parking Facilities. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-7.400]
All permitted and required accessory off-street parking spaces open or
enclosed, shall be located on the same zone lot as the use to which such
spaces are accessory, except that such spaces may be provided elsewhere
within a radius of no greater distance than 400 feet from the lot, and further
provided that the required spaces are provided off the site in accordance
with the provisions set forth herein or in the Land Subdivision and Site Plan
Ordinance. Such spaces shall be in the same ownership as the use to which
they are accessory and shall be subject to deed restrictions filed in the office
of the County Clerk in Hudson County, binding the owner and his heirs and/
or assigns to maintain the required number of spaces available throughout
the life of such use, and such spaces shall conform to all regulations of the
district in which they are located.
§ 38-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-7.5
AO:957
§ 38-7.5. Off-Street Parking for One and Two-Family Dwellings.
[Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-7.500; Ord. No. 2004-(O)-12; Ord. No.
2005-(O)-09 § 4; Ord. No. 2005-(O)-42 § 4]
§ 38-7.6. Private Garages in Residential Zones. [Ord. No. 10-14-87
§ 138-7.600; Ord. No. 1999-O-2 §§ 30, 40]
A private garage permitted as an accessory use in a residential district shall
be subject to the following special provisions:
a. Except as provided for in the following paragraph b below, every one
family and two family dwelling, and any dwelling converted from a one
family to a two family dwelling, shall be required to provide a minimum
of one off-street parking space for each dwelling unit.
b. Off-Street Parking for All Residential Uses. Off-street parking
requirements shall be in accordance with the Residential Site
Improvement Standards, New Jersey Administrative Code, Title 5,
Chapter 21 et seq.
c. Any existing one or two family dwelling, except townhouses, shall be
permitted to park operable automobiles in the side or rear yard area,
without an enclosed structure, provided there is no adverse effect to the
property or abutting properties and subject to subsection 38-7.7.
a. A private garage for not more than two motor vehicles shall not be over
14 feet in height measured to the peak of a sloped roof and not over 10
feet in height measured to the highest point of a flat roof and shall not
be erected within less than 25 feet of the front of the street line. On a
corner lot, no part of a garage shall be nearer the side street line than
the side yard dimensions permitted for the said corner lot. If a private
garage accessory to a residential building is made part of the principal
building, the requirements of this subsection shall not apply.
The maximum height of a garage shall be one story in height. Maximum
dimensions for a one-car garage is 10 feet by 20 feet and maximum
dimension for a two-car garage is 20 feet by 20 feet.
b. Space for not more than one noncommercial motor vehicle may be
leased in a private garage in the R-1 District, and space for not more
than two non-commercial motor vehicles may be leased in a private
garage for not more than three motor vehicles in an R-2 and R-3
District.
c. Upon mutual agreement between property owners, party-wall garages
may be built across a common lot line. Otherwise, a private garage for
not more than three motor vehicles shall be everywhere distant at least
three feet from any side or rear lot line, except that if it extends to
within less than 70 feet of the front street line, it shall be at least 10 feet
distant from a side lot line which adjoins a lot in any residential district.
In the case of a corner lot, it shall be at least eight feet distant from the
rear lot line.
§ 38-7.5 KEARNY CODE § 38-7.6
AO:958
d. A group of garages in the form of a motor court permitted as an
accessory use to a garden-type apartment dwelling for four or more but
not over 12 family units shall not be located nearer the front street line
than the principal building nor within less than four feet of any side or
rear lot line.
e. Garage spaces where provided shall be used only by the owners,
tenants, or guests, except as noted in paragraph b and in the following
alternative ways:
1. Within the building.
2. Beneath any part of the side or rear yards or courts except within
10 feet of any lot line, provided no portion of the roof of such
garage, except parapets, extends higher than the level of the first
floor beams of the principal building and such roof is so designed as
to be used for an open terrace or part of the yard.
3. In a separate building, above the ground on the same lot, provided
no part of such building is less than four feet distant from any side
or rear lot line.
4. No permit shall be issued for the erection or construction of a
depressed garage, attached to a residence, as an accessory use, in
a residential zone if any portion of the garage (excepting the
foundation) is less than one foot above the street level of the lot
upon which the garage is to be erected or constructed; provided,
however, that the aforementioned prohibition shall be inapplicable
where the entrance to a garage attached to a residence faces away
from the public street upon which the dwelling faces, if the
elevation of the land behind the garage entrance and further away
from the public street is lower than the elevation of the land at the
entrance to the aforementioned garage.
f. Within any residential district, no garage built into a basement or
terrace shall project in any part of a front yard by more than four feet.
g. Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, a private
garage in a residential district, lawfully in existence on December 29,
1952, may be rebuilt or repaired and may also be extended by the
addition of not more than three feet to its length, which extension may
be in the front or in the rear, provided such extension is only to the first
floor of the building.
h. Private garages which are accessory uses customarily incidental to the
principal permitted uses and are located on the same lot, may include a
private garage for not more than three motor vehicles. Except as
provided herein, such accessory uses shall not include any use
customarily carried on as a gainful business or industry nor the erection
or maintenance of any advertising sign except as herein specified,
provided, however, that the parking of a commercial vehicle under a
§ 38-7.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-7.6
AO:959
§ 38-7.7. Off-Street Parking for Certain Dwellings. [Ord. No.
10-14-87 § 138-7.700; Ord. No. 1999-O-2 § 31; Ord. No. 2000-0-17;
Ord. No. 2004-(O)-12]
Off-street parking spaces with a paved or graveled surface and roadway
connecting with the street may be substituted for all or part of the private
garage space required for dwellings under subsection 38-7.5 or 38-7.6e,
provided such parking space is in the side or rear yard and is not less
than three feet distant from any side or rear lot line with the intervening
space appropriately buffered by landscaping. Access to such side or rear
yard parking.85 The maximum driveway width and curb width of a driveway
located between the building line and street line in the R-1M Zone shall be
10 feet. Such parking space shall be used only by tenants of the principal
building or buildings and temporarily by guests of such tenants. Where such
parking is provided in the rear yard, no more than 33% of the rear yard shall
consist of impervious surfaces including such parking areas, except that a
maximum of 60% impervious coverage in the rear yard shall be permitted
with lots having a width of 25 feet or less. In no case shall the improved lot
coverage for the entire lot exceed the maximum permitted in Schedule I.86
Additional parking may be permitted on the paved driveway leading to
such parking spaces, or to a garage. Such additional parking is intended to
alleviate on-street parking congestion with the least impact on aesthetic and
environmental concerns. This additional parking alone does not fulfill the
off-street parking requirements mandated in other sections of this chapter.
§ 38-7.8. Paving of Front Yard Areas. [Ord. No. 1999-O-2 § 32]
(Reserved)
§ 38-7.9. Driveway Construction. [Ord. No. 2004-(O)-70 § 2; Ord. No.
2005-(O)-09 § 4]
This subsection shall be known as the Town of Kearny "Driveway
Construction" Ordinance.
rated capacity of one ton shall not constitute a prohibited use under this
section.
i. Private garages accessory to garden apartment dwellings and multiplefamily
residences may be grouped in motor courts enclosed on all sides
except for necessary driveway entrances, but shall provide storage for
not more than two motor vehicles for each family dwelling unit on the
premises. Garages or off-street parking spaces shall be provided as
accessory uses to garden and multiple-family residences in accordance
with the provisions of the Subdivision and Site Plan Ordinance.
85.Editor's Note: Amended at the direction of the Town and in accordance with instruction of
Ordinance No. 2004-(O)-12. This sentence will be amended in a subsequent ordinance.
86.Editor's Note: The schedule referred to herein may be found as an attachment to this
chapter.
§ 38-7.6 KEARNY CODE § 38-7.9
AO:960
a. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the community, to further the safe and
orderly layout of driveways that enter onto Town streets or roads.
b. Definitions. See subsection 38-2.2, Definitions.
c. Permit Required. No person or entity shall establish, construct, modify,
or rework a driveway from a private property line to a public roadway
without first filing a zoning permit application form and receiving a
zoning permit from the Kearny Construction Code Enforcement
Department.
d. Application Requirements and Procedures.
1. Application Form. Applications for zoning permits shall be made on
a form approved by the Construction Code Official and are
available at the Kearny Construction Code Enforcement Office.
2. Application Procedures. A completed zoning application form shall
be filed with the Construction Code Enforcement Department along
with the required application fee and attachments, including the
following:
(a) A scale drawing of the property parcel, to include all buildings
or structures existing and any proposed buildings or structures
the applicant intends to add to the parcel. The drawing shall
include the proposed or existing driveway location. Distances
from the existing property lines to the centerline of the
driveway shall be dimensioned to establish the driveway
location. The width of the driveway at the edge of the roadway
will be dimensioned, and the proposed driveway slope shall be
provided.
(b) A copy of a Hudson/Essex County Soils Conservation District
approval, if applicable.
3. Application Review. The Construction Code Official shall review the
completed application and shall approve or deny stating reasons
for any denial.
4. Permit Period. The zoning permit shall be effective for 12 months
from the date of issuance. If the driveway is not completed within
the permit period, the permit is deemed expired and a new
application must be submitted for approval.
5. Driveway Inspection. The applicant shall notify the Construction
Code Enforcement Office within five working days from the
completion of construction or improvement of the driveway. The
Building Inspector shall conduct an inspection of the driveway to
ensure full compliance with all provisions of this section and terms
of the permit.
§ 38-7.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-7.9
AO:961
6. Building Permits. The Building Inspector shall determine whether
the driveway must be completed prior to commencing construction
of any buildings or structures on the parcel and may condition any
building permit on completion of the driveway for the following
reasons:
(a) Construction activities are reasonably likely to cause the
tracking of soil, gravel vegetation or other material onto the
public street or roadway.
(b) Construction of the driveway is necessary to allow for the safe
and efficient access of construction vehicles entering or
leaving the construction site.
7. Application Fee. The fee for each zoning permit shall be $25 plus a
$50 inspection fee. There shall be no inspection fee required for the
resurfacing or patching of a lawfully existing driveway with the
same or similar material as currently exists, providing that there is
no expansion of the driveway area and that the existing curb cut
remains unchanged.
8. Town Authority Preserved. The Town of Kearny, notwithstanding
the issuance of any permit under this subsection or construction of
any driveway, reserves the right to make any changes, additions,
repairs or relocation of any part of a driveway within the dedicated
right of way at any time, including but not limited to, in connection
with the relocation, construction, widening and maintaining the
street or road or right of way, without compensating the owner of
such private driveway of the damages to or destruction of such
private driveway.
e. Driveway Location, Design and Construction Requirements.
1. General Requirements. The location, design and construction of
driveways shall be in accordance with the following:
(a) General Design. Driveways shall not provide direct ingress or
egress to or from any street intersection, and shall not
encroach upon or occupy areas of the street right-of-way
required for effective traffic control. A driveway shall be
located a minimum of 40 feet from the intersecting centerlines
of streets or roadways, or a maximum distance from the
intersecting centerlines to the driveway that can be achieved
to provide access to an existing lot. A driveway shall be so
located and constructed that vehicles approaching or using it
shall have adequate sight distance along the street or road.
Driveway approaches shall be at least 10 feet apart and shall
be placed wherever possible as not to interfere with utilities in
place.
(b) Number. Not more than one driveway shall be permitted to
serve an individual residential property. Preexisting
§ 38-7.9 KEARNY CODE § 38-7.9
AO:962
commercial or light industrial uses situated within any
residential zone shall be limited to not more than one driveway.
No two adjoining parcels shall be served by two or more
driveways on adjoining properties, which share a single access
point onto a Town street or road.
(c) Drainage. The surface of the driveway connecting with the
street or road shall be sloped to preclude an extraordinary or
inordinate amount of surface water drainage from flowing onto
the street or roadbed. No driveway apron shall extend out into
the street or road further than the edge of the street or road or
face of the curb. All driveway entrances and approaches shall
be so constructed that they shall not interfere with the
drainage of the street or road or any existing structure in the
right-of-way.
(d) Relocation of Utilities. Any costs of relocating utility structure
or facilities shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
(e) Removal of Trees Prohibited. No existing trees within the rightof-
way shall be altered, removed or otherwise damaged to
accommodate the location of any driveway.
(f) Variances. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may vary any of
the above requirements where the peculiar nature of the
property or the design of the street or road may make the rigid
adherence to the above requirements impossible or
impracticable.
2. Special Requirements for Residential Driveways.
(a) Width of driveway. A residential driveway shall be no greater
than:
(1) For a one-family dwelling 10 feet wide.
(2) For a two-dwelling 14 feet wide.
At the edge of the pavement of the street/road or curbline.
In all R-1 Zones, the width limitation at the edge of the
pavement of the street/road or curbline as provided herein
shall not be exceeded for the entire length of that portion
of the driveway located between the street/road or
curbline and the front line of the principal structure or
dwelling.
(b) Angular placement prohibited. The centerline of the driveway
between the property line and the curb must be at a right angle
to the edge of the pavement of the street or roadway or
curbline of the lot it serves. The centerline of the driveway may
not be parallel to the propertyline of the lot it serves. The
Construction Code Official may grant special permission for a
§ 38-7.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-7.9
AO:963
driveway to be at an angle other than a right angle to the
street, only if the owner demonstrates a legitimate need and
there exists no reasonable alternative to safe ingress and
egress to or from the property or to preserve existing mature
tree growth on the lot or within the row. Preexisting,
nonconforming driveways, lawfully existing at the time of
adoption of paragraph e,2(b) Angular placement, of this
subsection87 may be continued upon the lot of the building or
structure served by said driveway unless the nonconformity is
abandoned for a period of one year or more.
3. Prohibited Driveways.
(a) No driveway shall be located within the sight triangle. At
roadway intersections a driveway shall not provide direct
ingress or egress to or from the roadway intersection area and
shall not occupy areas of the roadway deemed necessary by the
Town for effective traffic control.
(b) Joint or common driveways serving two separate adjoining
parcels or properties by way of a single access point in a street
or road shall be prohibited.
4. Construction/Reconstruction of Curbs. When construction of a
driveway requires the removal of a curb the same shall be replaced
and restored with equivalent acceptable material per Town
standards. (See Chapter 23, Sections 23-17 and 23-18 of these
Revised General Ordinances). Curb returns shall be provided or
restored in a neat and acceptable manner.
5. Maintenance Responsibility. The property owner is responsible for
maintaining the driveway approach in such a manner necessary to
permit free and unobstructed flow of water. The Town of Kearny
does not assume any responsibility for repair or replacement of
concrete or decorative pavement, decorative endwalls/headwalls,
the removal or clearance of snow and/or ice, upon any portion of a
driveway within the Town of Kearny right-of-way.
f. Enforcement. The Construction Code Enforcement Department may
post a stop-work order if a driveway or other permitted construction or
any part thereof is being installed contrary to the terms of this
subsection or without a permit.
g. Penalties. Any person who constructs or modifies any driveway without
a permit as required by this subsection shall be subject to a fine of
$250, plus all applicable assessments, surcharges and court costs. Any
person who shall construct or modify a driveway in violation of any
other provision of this subsection, shall, unless the violation is
corrected within 30 days of the date of the written notice from the
87.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2004-(O)-70, codified herein as subsection 38-7.9 was
adopted December 7, 2004.
§ 38-7.9 KEARNY CODE § 38-7.9
AO:964
§ 38-8. NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES AND
UNDERSIZED STRUCTURES.
§ 38-8.1. Continuation of Use. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-8.100]
A use, building or structure which is lawfully in existence at the effective
date of the chapter and shall be made nonconforming at the passage of this
chapter or any applicable amendment thereto may be continued, except as
otherwise provided herein.
§ 38-8.2. Regulation of Nonconforming Uses. [Ord. No. 10-14-87
§ 138-8.200]
No existing use, building or premises devoted to a nonconforming use shall
be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, substituted or structurally altered,
except when changed to a conforming use or when required to do so by law
and as follows:
§ 38-8.3. Termination of Nonconforming Uses. [Ord. No. 10-14-87
§ 138-8.300; Ord. No. 8-8-82]
Construction Code Enforcement Department, be subject to the
penalties as provided for in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, plus all applicable
assessments, surcharges and court costs. Each day that any violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense. An unlawful driveway
constitutes a public nuisance and may be subject to abatement by any
applicable procedure.
a. Any nonconforming structure or use damaged to less than 80% of its
previous existing area may be restored, reconstructed or used as
before, provided the area of such use, building or structure shall not
exceed the area which existed prior to such damage nor increase the
intensity of use. The Board of Adjustment shall determine the time
period in which complete restoration shall take place.
b. Repairs. Normal maintenance and repair of a structure containing a
nonconforming use is permitted, provided that it does not extend the
area or volume of space occupied by the nonconforming use and does
not increase the number of dwelling units or increase the intensity of
use.
c. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a
safe or lawful condition any part of any building or structure declared
unsafe or unlawful by the Construction Official or other authorized
State or Town official.
a. Abandonment. The change of a nonconforming use to a more restricted,
or conforming use for any period of time shall be considered an
abandonment thereof, and such nonconforming use shall not thereafter
be revived.
§ 38-7.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-8.3
AO:965
§ 38-8.4. Exceptions to Nonconforming Uses and Structures and
Undersized Structures. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-8.400]
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Zoning Ordinance and
particularly the provisions of Article VIII hereof, any building or structure
located in a R-1, R-2 or R-3 zone presently used for residential purposes and
lawfully in existence at the effective date of this chapter or one year prior
thereto, may be rebuilt in the event of damage, destruction, or intentional
demolition without obtaining a variance provided the dimensions of the
structure are substantially identical to the dimensions of the damaged,
destroyed or demolished structure.
§ 38-9. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
§ 38-9.1. Construction Official/Zoning Officer. [Ord. No. 10-14-87
§ 138-9.100; Ord. No. 2002-O-8 § 1]
There is created hereby the full-time position of Construction Official/
Zoning Officer.
b. Partial Destruction. When 80% or more of the existing area of a
nonconforming structure is destroyed by fire or other casualty or an act
of God, the use of such structure as a nonconforming use shall
thereafter be terminated.
c. Nonconforming Buildings Lawfully Under Construction. Any
nonconforming building or structure lawfully under construction on the
effective date of this chapter, pursuant to plans filed with the
Construction Official and approved by him and all other municipal
boards and agencies as required under law, may be completed and may
be used for the nonconforming use for which it was designed, to the
same extent as if such building had been completed and been in use at
the effective date of this chapter, provided that such building or
structure shall be completed within one year after the effective date
thereof.
d. Nonconforming Billboards. A nonconforming billboard which is
damaged by elements to such an extent that its supporting members
are broken shall be deemed to have been destroyed and shall not be
reconstructed.
a. Duties, Power and Authority. The Construction Official/Zoning Officer
shall have the chief administrative responsibility for administering and
enforcing the provisions of Chapter 35, 36 and 38, other applicable
State, County and local construction and zoning laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, and the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code as it
applies to the Town. He shall issue zoning permits, construction permits
and certificates of occupancy. He shall examine the working plans of
proposed buildings and shall conduct field work to ensure compliance
with construction and zoning requirements. He shall examine all
applications for permits and issue permits for the construction,
§ 38-8.3 KEARNY CODE § 38-9.1
AO:966
§ 38-9.2. Building Permits. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-9.200]
alteration, enlargement and occupancy of all uses which are in
accordance with the aforesaid requirements. He shall also issue
permits for those applications which require a variance from the
requirements of Chapters 35, 36 and 38 or which require site plan
or subdivision approval, but only upon written order of the Board
of Adjustment or the Planning Board, as the case may be. He shall
also record and file and safely keep all applications for permits, with
accompanying plans and documents, and make reports to the Mayor
and Council.
b. Compensation. The salary for the position shall be as set forth in the
salary ordinance of the Town for Construction Official.
c. References. All references now in the General Ordinances to
"Construction Official" or to "Zoning Officer" shall be read to mean
Construction Official/Zoning Officer.
a. Purpose. To ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, no
person shall erect, alter or convert any structure or building or part
thereof or alter the use of any land subsequent to the adoption of this
chapter, until a building permit has been issued by the Construction
Official.
b. Issuance of Permit. Any building permit issued under this section shall
be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance. Unless a
certificate of occupancy as hereinafter provided is issued for the
structure covered by the permit within one year, the permit shall
automatically lapse; application may, however, be made for renewal of
the permit for a one-year period. One copy of the building permit shall
be kept conspicuously on the premises affected and protected from the
weather whenever construction work is being performed thereon. No
owner, contractor, workman or other person shall perform any building
operations of any kind unless a building permit covering such operation
has been displayed as required by this chapter, nor shall anyone
perform building operations of any kind after notification of the
revocation of the building permit.
c. Denial of Permit. When the Construction Official is not satisfied that the
applicant's proposed development will meet the requirements of this
chapter, he shall refuse to issue a building permit and the applicant may
appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment as prescribed by law.
d. Revocation of Permit. If it shall appear, at any time, to the Construction
Official that the application or accompanying plan is in any respect false
or misleading, or that work is being done on the premises differing from
that called for in the applications filed with him under existing laws or
ordinances, he may forthwith revoke the building permit, whereupon it
shall be the duty of the person holding the same to surrender it and all
copies thereof to the Construction Official. After the building permit has
§ 38-9.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-9.2
AO:967
§ 38-9.3. Certificate of Occupancy. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-9.300;
Ord. No. 4-12-94; Ord. No. 2003-(O)-10 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No.
2003-(O)-11; Ord. No. 2003-(O)-32 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2005-(O)-42
§§ 2, 3]
been revoked, the Construction Official may, in his discretion, before
issuing the new building permit, require the applicant to file an
indemnity bond in favor of the Town of Kearny with sufficient surety
conditioned for compliance with this chapter and all laws and
ordinances then in force, and in a sum sufficient to cover the cost of
removing the building or structure if it does not comply.
a. For New Uses.
1. It shall be unlawful to use or permit the use of any building or
premises or part thereof, hereafter erected or converted, altered or
changed from one use to another use, wholly or partly, until a
certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Construction
Official. Such certificate shall show that such building or premises
or part thereof and the proposed use thereof are in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the
Construction Official to issue a certificate of occupancy within 10
days after a request for the same shall be filed in his office by any
owner, after having determined that the building and the proposed
use thereof conform to all the requirements herein set forth.
2. Compliance with Other Ordinances. No certificate of occupancy
shall be issued unless the applicant first obtains a zoning permit for
that property from the Zoning Official. Further, a certificate of
occupancy shall not be issued until the Construction Official
determines that all applicable codes and ordinances administered
and enforced by any of the following names, department(s) or
agencies have been complied with:
(a) The Board of Health.
(b) The Town Engineer.
(c) The Fire Department.
(d) The Police Department.
(e) The Planning Board.
(f) The Board of Adjustment.
(g) The Recreation Commission.
(h) The Department of Public Works.
(i) The Governing Body.
(j) The County Planning Board.
§ 38-9.2 KEARNY CODE § 38-9.3
AO:968
(k) Any other applicable department, board or agency, by the
Municipal, County, State, Federal, or interstate government
agency.
b. Existing Residential Uses — Certificate of Continued Occupancy.
1. Upon the transfer of title to any property located within the
boundaries of the Town of Kearny, it shall be unlawful for any owner
to occupy or permit the occupancy of that property without first
obtaining a certificate of continued occupancy. This section does
not apply to property transfers by inheritance. No certificate of
continued occupancy shall be issued unless the applicant first
obtains a zoning permit for the specific property.
When any R-3 and R-5 (use groups) (pertains to one- and two-family
dwellings) property is sold, a smoke and carbon monoxide detector
compliance certificate, as required by the laws of the State of
New Jersey, must be obtained from the Construction Official/Zoning
Officer, prior to the issuance of a certificate of [continued]
occupancy. The fee for the compliance certificate shall be included
in the fees below. No certificate of [continued] occupancy shall be
issued unless the applicant first obtains a zoning permit for that
property.
A certificate of continued occupancy shall be applied for through
the Construction Code Enforcement Department for the Town of
Kearny. The certificate of continued occupancy shall indicate that
as a result of a general inspection of the visible parts of the
structure, no violations have been determined to have occurred
and no unsafe conditions have been found, and that the existing use
of the structure heretofore lawfully existed. If any violations are
found, no occupancy shall be permitted until all items designated
for correction by the Construction Code Enforcement Department
are made, corrected, and inspected. No certificate of continued
occupancy shall be issued unless the applicant first obtains a
zoning permit for that property.
2. Fees. Fees payable through the Construction Code Enforcement
Department of the Town of Kearny for a residential certificate of
continued occupancy shall be as follows:
One-family dwelling $60 (Includes smoke
detector)
Two-family dwelling $80 (Includes smoke
detector)
Three-family or
more
$40/dwelling unit (No smoke detector
necessary)
c. Change of Use. No owner, tenant or other person shall use or occupy
any building or structure thereafter erected or altered, the use of which
§ 38-9.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-9.3
AO:969
§ 38-9.4. Completion of Buildings for Which Plans Have Been Filed.
[Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-9.400]
Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction or designated use of a building or which a building permit has
been heretofore issued or for which plans are on file with the Construction
Official at the time of passage of this chapter and for the erection of which
a permit is issued within one month from the passage of this chapter
and the construction of which, in either case, shall have been diligently
prosecuted within three months of the date of such permit, and the groundstory
framework of which, including the second tier of beams, shall have
been completed within six months of the date of such permit; and which
entire building shall be completed, according to such plans as have been
filed, within one year from the date of the passage of this chapter, except if
construction has been delayed as a result of a national emergency.
§ 38-9.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-9.500;
Ord. No. 4-12-94; Ord. No. 9-26-95; Ord. No. 2003-(O)-40]
shall be changed after the passage of this chapter, without first
procuring a zoning permit and certificate of occupancy, provided that
certificate of occupancy once granted shall continue in effect as long as
there is no change of use, however, a new zoning permit must be issued
upon every change of commercial tenancy or commercial occupancy.
d. Certificate of Occupancy Records. A record of all certificates shall be
kept on file in the office of the Construction Official and copies shall be
furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary interest or
tenancy in the building affected.
a. Complaints of Violations. Any person may file a complaint if there is any
reason to believe a violation of this chapter exists regarding a violation
of the building code, certificate of occupancy requirements, zoning
permit requirements or conditions of site plan, subdivision or variance
approvals. All such complaints must be in writing and shall be filed with
the Construction Official, who shall properly record such complaint and
immediately investigate.
b. Procedures for Abatement of Violations. A violation of any of these
terms of this chapter shall be abated within five days, or within as
reasonable a time as may be determined, after written notice has been
served, either by mail or personal service.
c. Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
chapter, shall upon conviction be subject to a fine of not less than $100
nor more than $1,000 for each offense or imprisonment not exceeding
90 days or both, in the discretion of the Court imposing sentence
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-5. Each day that a violation occurs or is
committed shall constitute a separate offense. The imposition of the
penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude the Town of Kearny from
instituting an appropriate action or proceeding to prevent an unlawful
§ 38-9.3 KEARNY CODE § 38-9.5
AO:970
§ 38-9.6. Zoning Permits. [Ord. No. 2003-(O)-11 § 2; Ord. No.
2003-(O)-31 § 2]
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use, or to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or
to prevent the occupancy of a building or structure or premises, or
to prevent an illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about any
premises.
a. Required Permit. Before the commencement of a use or the erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, or installation of
any structure or building the property owner shall obtain a zoning
permit. Failure of a property owner to comply with this paragraph is a
violation of law and subjects the owner to penalty under Kearny Code,
N.J., § 38-9.5.
b. Duties of the Zoning Official. The Zoning Official shall grant or deny the
issuance of a zoning permit in writing within 10 days of a request. A
zoning permit shall be issued only if the Zoning Official determines that
the use, structure, or building complies with the provisions of the
municipal zoning ordinance or variance.
c. Compliance with Other Ordinances. The Zoning Official shall not issue a
zoning permit until determining that the use, structure, or building
complies with all applicable codes and ordinances administered and
enforced by any of the following departments or agencies:
1. The Board of Health.
2. The Town Engineer.
3. The Fire Department.
4. The Police Department.
5. The Planning Board.
6. The Board of Adjustment.
7. The Recreation Commission.
8. The Department of Public Works.
9. The Governing Body.
10. The County Planning Board.
11. Any other applicable department, board or agency, by the
Municipal, County, State, Federal or interstate government agency.
d. Fees. Every applicant for a zoning permit shall pay a $25 application fee
to the Construction Code Enforcement Department for each permit.
§ 38-9.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-9.6
AO:971
§ 38-10. INTERPRETATION AND VALIDITY.
§ 38-10.1. Governing Body May Amend. [Ord. No. 10-14-87
§ 138-10.110]
All amendments to this chapter and to the zoning map,88 which forms a part
hereof, shall be in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62 et
seq. and any amendments or revisions thereto.
§ 38-10.2. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-10.200]
§ 38-10.3. Amendments. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-10.300]
e. Zoning Permit Records. The Zoning Official shall keep records of all
permits issued in his or her office. Copies shall be provided upon
request to any person having a proprietary interest or tenancy in the
buildings or lands affected.
a. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health, morals and general welfare; for
lessening the congestion in the streets; for securing safety from fire,
panic and other dangers; for the provision of adequate light and air; for
preventing overcrowding of land or buildings; for the avoidance of
undue concentration of population; and for facilitating adequate
provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks and other
public improvements.
b. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any
way to impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or
ordinance or with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted
or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to
the use of buildings or premises; nor is it intended by this chapter to
interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other
agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this
chapter imposes greater restrictions upon the use of buildings or
premises or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger yards,
courts or other open spaces than are imposed or required by such
existing provision of law or ordinance or by such rules, regulations or
permits or by such easement, covenants or agreements, the provisions
of this chapter shall control.
c. Nothing contained in this chapter shall apply to any public building in
the Town of Kearny.
a. The Town Council may from time to time either on its own motion or on
petition, after public notice and hearing, amend, supplement or change
the regulations and districts herein established. Every such proposed
amendment, supplement or change shall be referred by the Town
88.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map can be found as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 38-9.6 KEARNY CODE § 38-10.3
AO:972
§ 38-10.4. Validity. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-10.400]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter or the
location of any district boundary shown on the Zoning Map that forms a
part hereof is for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be
invalid, such a decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
of this chapter or Zoning Map. The Governing Body of the Town of Kearny
hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance and each section
or part thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections or parts
thereof be declared invalid.
§ 38-10.5. Fees. [Ord. No. 10-14-87 § 138-10.600; Ord. No. 12-12-90;
Ord. No. 1996-29 § 1]
Council to the Planning Board for report before the above public
hearing.
b. Such amending ordinance shall be adopted after the Planning Board
has adopted the land use plan element of a master plan and all of the
provisions of such zoning ordinance or any amendment or revision
thereto shall either be substantially consistent with the land use plan
element of the master plan or designed to effectuate such plan element;
provided that the Governing Body may adopt a zoning ordinance or
amendment or revision thereto which in whole or part is inconsistent
with or not designed to effectuate the land use plan element, but only
by affirmative vote of the majority of the full authorized membership of
the Governing Body with the reasons of the Governing Body for so
acting recorded in its minutes when adopting such a zoning ordinance;
and provided further that, notwithstanding anything aforesaid, the
Governing Body may adopt an interim zoning ordinance pursuant to
law.
c. A protest against any proposed zoning amendment or revision of a
zoning ordinance may be filed with the municipal clerk, signed by the
owners of 20% or more either of the area of the lots or land included in
such proposed change, or of the lot or land extending 200 feet in all
directions therefrom inclusive of street space, whether within or
without the municipality. Such amendment or revision shall not become
effective following the filing of such protest except by the favorable vote
of 2/3 of all the members of the Governing Body of Kearny.
a. Payment of Fees. All fees required hereunder shall be paid in cash,
certified check or money order payable to the Town of Kearny.
b. Construction Official Fees. Construction Official fees shall be paid at the
office of the Construction Official upon filing of an application for a
building permit or Certificate of Occupancy. The fee will be based on
the Uniform Construction Code fees established by the regulations of
the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code.
§ 38-10.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 38-10.5
AO:973
Chapter 39
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS
§ 39-1. DEFINITIONS. [8-4-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-2589]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANTICIPATED MUNICIPAL EXPENSES — The cost of processing an
application for a right-of-way permit, including, but not limited to, all
professional fees such as engineer and attorney costs to the Town.
CABINET — A small box-like or rectangular structure used to facilitate
utility or wireless service from within the municipal right-of-way.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM — The part of the electric system, after
the transmission system, that is dedicated to delivering electric energy to
an end user.
EXISTING POLE — A pole that is in lawful existence within the municipal
right-of-way.
GROUND-LEVEL CABINET — A cabinet that is not attached to an existing
pole and is touching the ground.
c. Additional Fee. An additional fee of $25 as required in response to
inquiries relative to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, use of
premises, use of structures, flood zone location or any inquiry requiring
a search and written response.
d. Escrow Fees. Unless waived by the authority, an applicant for
development shall deposit professional review fees in an escrow
account with the Township of Kearny for review of an application for
development and the preparation of documents related thereto. Such
fees are in addition to the application filing fees in subsection 36-3.2a.
There shall be no initial escrow deposit required. However, if in the
course of an application, the approving authority determines that an
escrow account or deposit is needed and contains insufficient funds to
perform required application reviews, the Chief Financial Officer of the
Town of Kearny shall provide the applicant with a notice of insufficient
escrow or deposit balance. Upon such notice, the applicant shall within
a reasonable time period post a deposit to the account in an amount to
be agreed upon by the approving authority and the applicant.
The charging to and processing of escrow fees and any disputes related
thereto shall be handled in accordance with the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2.
89.Editor's Note: Section 2 of this ordinance stated that applications for any right-of-way
permit governed by this chapter shall no longer be required to apply for approval under
Ch. 30, Fiber Optic Cable, of the Town Code.
§ 38-10.5 KEARNY CODE § 39-1
AO:974
MUNICIPAL RIGHT-OF-WAY — The surface of, and the space above or
below, any public street, road, lane, path, public way or place, sidewalk,
alley, boulevard, parkway, drive, and the like, held by the Town as an
easement or in fee simple ownership. This term also includes any other area
that is determined by the Town to be a right-of-way in which the Town may
allow the installation of poles, cabinets and antennas, as well as rights-ofway
held by the County of Hudson where the Town's approval is required
for the use of same pursuant to N.J.S.A. 27:16-6.
POLE — A long, slender, rounded support structure constructed of wood or
metal located in the municipal right-of-way.
POLE-MOUNTED ANTENNA — A device that is attached to a pole and
used to transmit radio or microwave signals and shall include, but not be
limited to, small cell equipment and transmission media such as femtocells,
picocells, microcells, and outside distributed antenna systems.
POLE-MOUNTED CABINET — A cabinet that is proposed to be placed on an
existing pole or proposed pole.
PROPOSED POLE — A pole that is proposed to be placed in the municipal
right-of-way.
RIGHT-OF-WAY AGREEMENT — An agreement that sets forth the terms
and conditions for use of the municipal right-of-way and includes, but is not
limited to, municipal franchise agreements.
RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT — An approval from the Mayor and Council setting
forth applicant's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
SURROUNDING STREETSCAPE — Existing poles within the same right-ofway
which are located within 500 feet of the proposed pole.
TOWN NONRESIDENTIAL ZONES — All areas of the Town that are not
Town residential zones, including areas within the zoning jurisdiction of the
New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority.
TOWN RESIDENTIAL ZONES — The R-1, R-3, R-4, R-5, R-6, R-7, and R-8 of
the Town of Kearny Zoning Regulations.
UTILITIES REGULATED BY THE BOARD OF PUBLIC UTILITIES —
Companies subject to regulation by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities
under Chapter 48 of the Revised Statutes.
UTILITY SERVICE — Electric, telephone or cable service.
WIRELESS FACILITY — A pole, cabinet, or pole-mounted antenna.
§ 39-2. POLE-MOUNTED ANTENNAS, ACCESS TO RIGHT-OF-WAY,
RIGHT-OF-WAY AGREEMENTS. [8-4-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-25]
a. No person shall operate or place any type of pole-mounted antenna
within the municipal right-of-way without first entering into a right-ofway
agreement with the Town pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 39-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-2
AO:975
§ 39-3. APPLICATION TO UTILITIES REGULATED BY BOARD OF
PUBLIC UTILITIES, OTHER ENTITIES. [8-4-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-25]
Notwithstanding any franchise or right-of-way agreement to the contrary,
all facilities proposed to be placed within the municipal right-of-way by
a utility regulated by the Board of Public Utilities and all other entities
lawfully within the municipal right-of-way shall be subject to the standards
and procedures set forth in this chapter and shall require right-of-way
permits for the siting of poles, antennas and cabinets in the municipal rightof-
way.
§ 39-4. RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS, SITING STANDARDS FOR POLES,
ANTENNAS AND CABINETS IN RIGHT-OF-WAY. [8-4-2020 by Ord.
No. 2020-25]
b. The terms of said right-of-way agreement shall include:
1. A term not to exceed 15 years;
2. Reasonable insurance requirements;
3. A fine for unauthorized installations;
4. A reference to the siting standards set forth in this chapter; and
5. Any other items which may be reasonably required.
a. No pole, antenna or cabinet shall be installed within the municipal
right-of-way without the issuance of a right-of-way permit.
b. Pole Siting Standards.
1. Height. No proposed pole shall be taller than 35 feet or 110% of the
height of poles in the surrounding streetscape, whichever is higher.
2. Distance from Curbline. No proposed pole shall be farther than 18
inches from the curbline.
3. Location, Safety and Aesthetics. No proposed pole shall be erected
in the right-of-way unless it:
(a) Is replacing an existing pole; or
(b) Approved pursuant to a land development application by either
the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Planning Board pursuant to
a land use application; or
(c) Located on the opposite side of the street from the electric
distribution system; and
(d) For sites in the Town residential zones, there is a minimum of
200 linear feet from any other existing pole or proposed pole
along the same side of the street, or for sites in the Town
§ 39-2 KEARNY CODE § 39-4
AO:976
nonresidential zones, there is a minimum of 100 linear feet
from any other existing pole or proposed pole along the same
side of the street; and
(e) Is not located in an area with underground utilities; and
(f) Does not inhibit any existing sight triangles or sight distances;
and
(g) Allows adequate room for the public to pass and repass across,
along and through the right-of-way; and
(h) Is finished and/or painted and/or otherwise camouflaged, in
conformance with best available stealth technology methods,
so as to blend in compatibly with its background and so as to
minimize its visual impact on surrounding properties.
c. Ground-Level Cabinet Siting Standards.
1. Ground-level cabinets are prohibited in the municipal right-of-way
in the Town residential zones and any future residential zones.
2. Ground-level cabinets are permitted in the Town nonresidential
zones provided that such ground-level cabinet:
(a) Is less than 28 cubic feet in volume;
(b) Is finished and/or painted so as to blend in compatibly with its
background and so as to minimize its visual impact on
surrounding properties;
(c) Does not inhibit any existing sight triangles or sight distance;
and
(d) Allows adequate room for the public to pass and repass across,
along and through the municipal right-of-way.
d. Pole-Mounted Antenna and Pole-Mounted Cabinet Siting Standards.
1. Pole-mounted antennas are permitted on existing poles, provided
that each pole-mounted antenna:
(a) Does not exceed three cubic feet in volume;
(b) Is finished and/or painted and/or otherwise camouflaged, in
conformance with best available stealth technology methods,
so as to blend in compatibly with its background and so as to
minimize its visual impact on surrounding properties;
(c) Does not inhibit any sight triangles or sight distance; and
(d) Allows adequate room for the public to pass and repass across,
along and through the municipal right-of-way.
§ 39-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-4
AO:977
§ 39-5. APPLICATION PROCESS. [8-4-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-25]
2. Pole-mounted cabinets are permitted on existing poles in all Town
residential zones and Town nonresidential zones provided that each
pole-mounted cabinet:
(a) Does not exceed 16 cubic feet;
(b) Is finished and/or painted and/or otherwise camouflaged, in
conformance with best available stealth technology methods,
so as to blend in compatibly with its background and so as to
minimize its visual impact on surrounding properties;
(c) Does not inhibit any sight triangles or sight distance; and
(d) Allows adequate room for the public to pass and repass across
the municipal right-of-way.
3. The Town may also require that an applicant provide a certification
from a licensed professional engineer attesting to the structural
integrity of any pole-mounted antenna or pole-mounted cabinet.
a. Preapplication Meeting. Prior to making a formal application with the
Town for use of the municipal right-of-way, all applicants are advised to
schedule a meeting with the Town Engineer to review the scope of the
applicant's proposal.
b. The Mayor and Council may, by resolution, approve or disapprove every
right-of-way permit application based on the recommendations
provided to it pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
c. All applications made under this chapter shall comply with the timeline
set forth in the FCC Order entitled "Accelerating Wireless Broadband
Deployment by Removing Barriers to Infrastructure Investment," WT
Docket No. 17-79; "Accelerating Wireless Broadband Deployment by
Removing Barriers to Infrastructure Investment," WC Docket No.
17-84.
d. Every application made pursuant to this chapter must include a signed
and sealed survey prepared by a New Jersey Licensed Professional
Land Surveyor demonstrating that any proposed pole and/or proposed
ground-level cabinet is located within the municipal right-of-way. Any
such application which does not include such a survey shall
immediately be deemed incomplete.
e. New Poles and Ground-Level Cabinets.
1. The Planning Board shall, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-25(B)(3),
review applications for the placement of new poles and groundlevel
cabinets within the municipal right-of-way and advise the
Mayor and Council of its recommendation to approve or disapprove
same.
§ 39-4 KEARNY CODE § 39-5
AO:978
§ 39-6. RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMIT FEES, DEPOSITS TOWARDS
ANTICIPATED MUNICIPAL EXPENSES AND ANNUAL FEES.
[8-4-2020 by Ord. No. 2020-25]
(a) If the Planning Board recommends the disapproval of a rightof-
way permit, it shall set forth the factual basis for such a
disapproval in writing.
f. Pole-Mounted Antenna and Pole-Mounted Cabinets.
1. The Town Engineer shall review applications to place pole-mounted
antenna and pole-mounted cabinets within the municipal right-ofway
and advise the Town Committee of his or her recommendation
to approve or disapprove same.
(a) If the Town Engineer recommends the disapproval of a right-ofway
permit, he or she shall set forth the factual basis for such a
disapproval in writing.
g. If the Town Committee denies any application for a right-of-way permit
under this chapter, it shall do so in writing and set forth the factual
basis for the denial.
h. Waiver. Mayor and Council may waive any siting standard set forth in
this chapter where the applicant demonstrates that the strict
enforcement of said standard:
1. Will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting any interstate or
intrastate telecommunications service pursuant to 47 U.S.C.
§ 253(a);
2. Will prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting personal wireless
service pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(B)(i)(II);
3. Will violate any requirement set forth in the FCC Order entitled
"Accelerating Wireless Broadband Deployment by Removing
Barriers to Infrastructure Investment," WT Docket No. 17-79;
"Accelerating Wireless Broadband Deployment by Removing
Barriers to Infrastructure Investment," WC Docket No. 17-84; or
4. Will prohibit, or have the effect of prohibiting, the ability of an
entity to provide utility service to any prospective customer within
the Town.
a. Every right-of-way permit application shall include a right-of-way
permit fee in the following amounts:
1. One to five placements on existing poles: $500, plus $100 for each
additional placement on existing poles.
2. $1,000 for new pole installation.
b. Deposit Towards Anticipated Municipal Expenses.
§ 39-5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 39-6
AO:979
§ 39-7. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS. [8-4-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-25]
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
1. In addition to the right-of-way permit fee, the Town Engineer may,
in his or her sole discretion, require the posting of up to $2,000
deposit towards anticipated municipal expenses related to an
application made pursuant to this chapter.
2. Any applicant's deposit towards anticipated municipal expenses
shall be placed in an escrow account. If said deposit contains
insufficient funds to enable the Town to perform its review, the
Town's Chief Financial Officer of the Town shall provide applicant
with a notice of insufficient balance. In order for review to
continue, the applicant shall, within 10 days of said notice, post a
deposit to the account in an amount to be mutually agreed upon.
3. The Town's Chief Financial Officer shall, upon request by the
applicant, after a final decision has been made by the Mayor and
Council regarding the pending right-of-way permit application,
refund any unused balance from the applicant's deposit towards
anticipated municipal expenses.
c. Annual Fees. The entity using any wireless facility installed pursuant to
this chapter shall pay an annual fee to the Town in the amount of $270
per wireless facility. The annual fee shall be paid on the dates set forth
in the right-of-way agreement.
a. Any right-of-way permit approved pursuant to this chapter does not
relieve the applicant from receiving consent from the owner of the land
above which an applicant's facility may be located as may be required
by New Jersey law.
b. In addition to receiving a right-of-way permit, an applicant must also
receive all necessary road opening permits, construction permits and
any other requirement set forth in the Town Code of the Town of Kearny
or New Jersey statute.
c. The Town's consent for use of county roads, as required pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 27:16-6, shall take the form of a right-of-way permit subject to
the standards and application process set forth in this chapter. No such
applicant shall be required to enter into a right-of-way agreement with
the Town.
§ 39-6 KEARNY CODE § DL-1
AO:980
§ DL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION.
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2011-1 1-25-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 8
2011-2 1-25-2011 Zoning Map, 38-3.2 8
2011-3 2-8-2011 Violations of snow and ice removal
from sidewalks, 23-11.3
8
2011-4 2-8-2011 Water-Denial of access
administration fee, 22-9
8
2011-5 2-8-2011 Salary ordinance, Special 8
2011-6 2-8-2011 Salary ordinance, Special 8
2011-7 2-22-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 8
2011-8 3-8-2011 Penalties for overnight off-street
parking locations, 7-33.3A
8
2011-9 3-22-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 8
2011-10 3-22-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 8
2011-11 3-22-2011 Salary ordinances, Special 8
2011-12 Withdrawn 8
2011-13 5-24-2011 Bond, Special 8
2011-14 5-24-2011 Bond, Special 8
2011-15 4-12-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 8
2011-16 4-12-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 8
2011-17 4-5-2011 Water rates, 22-1.19, 22-7.1 8
2011-18 4-12-2011 No turn on red, 7-24 8
2011-19 4-26-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 8
2011-20 4-26-2011 Board of Recreation Commissioners-
Alternate members, 2-37.1.1
8
2011-21 5-10-2011 Precious metal dealers, 5-32.2,
5-32.4
8
2011-22 5-24-2011 Sale of property, Special 8
2011-23 6-15-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 8
2011-24 6-15-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 8
2011-25 6-15-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 8
2011-26 Bond Ordinance, Special 8
2011-27 Withdrawn 8
2011-28 6-28-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 8
2011-29 Bond Ordinance, Special 8
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:981
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2011-30 6-28-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 8
2011-31 7-14-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 8
2011-32 7-14-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 8
2011-33 7-14-2011 Curbs, 23-19 8
2011-34 8-9-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 8
2011-35 8-9-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 8
2011-36 8-9-2011 Qualifications for firefighters, 3-51.6 8
2011-37 8-9-2011 Stop locations, 7-20A; Yield
intersections, 7-22
8
2011-38 9-13-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 9
2011-39 9-27-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 9
2011-40 10-11-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 9
2011-41 10-11-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 9
2011-42 10-11-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 9
2011-43 Bond Ordinance, Special 9
2011-44 10-11-2011 Residency requirements for
employees, 10-1.1
9
2011-45 Salary Ordinance, Special 9
2011-46 11-7-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 9
2011-47 12-6-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 9
2011-48 12-6-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 9
2011-49 Withdrawn 10
2011-50 1-10-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 10
2011-51 Not adopted 10
2011-52 1-10-2012 Delete Landlord-Tenant Resource
Center, 15-1
10
2011-53 1-10-2012 Parking prohibited at all times, 7-13 10
2012-1 1-24-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 10
2012-2 1-24-2012 Non-life hazard uses inspection fees,
19-1.9
10
2012-3 Not adopted 10
2012-4 2-7-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 10
2012-5 Salary, Special 10
2012-6 Not adopted 10
2012-7 2-21-2012 Four-way stop intersection, 7-21 10
§ DL-1 KEARNY CODE § DL-1
AO:982
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2012-8 3-13-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 10
2012-9 3-27-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 10
2012-10 Budget, Special 10
2012-11 Rescinded [by Ord. No. 2012-37] 10
2012-12 3-27-2012 Towing — Licenses, 5-33.1; Towing
activity, 5-33.2, Fees, 5-33.6
10
2012-13 4-10-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 10
2012-14 4-10-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 10
2012-15 4-10-2012 Bus stops, 7-26 10
2012-16 4-10-2012 Parking — West Hudson Hospital
Health Care Parking Deck, 7-33.3A
10
2012-17 4-24-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 10
2012-18 Withdrawn 10
2012-19 5-8-2012 Decks and brick paver patios, 38-5.3 10
2012-20 Not adopted 10
2012-21 5-8-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 10
2012-22 5-22-2012 Fees — Administration, 2-39.2,
286.1, 2-86.2, 2-87; Police
Department, 3-5.1; Licensing and
business regulations, 5-1.1, 5-1.2,
5-3.4, 5-4.6, 5-6.6, 5-7.2, 5-11.1,
5-27.5, 5-29.3, 5-31.2, 5-33.1,
5-35.2, 5-70A.5, 5-71, 5-72.4;
Traffic, 7-35.2; Parks and recreation,
11-3.4, 11-4.1, 11-5.1, 11-6;
Taxation, 12-2.3, 12-2.4, 12-8.2;
Solid waste management, 20-1.7,
20-3.1; Streets and sidewalks,
23-1.2, 23-7, 23-20.7, 23-20.8; Fiber
optic cable, 30-2; Add Ch. 34 —
Summary of fees
10
2012-23 6-12-2012 Residency requirements for
employees, 10-1.1
10
2012-24 6-12-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 10
2012-25 6-12-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 10
2012-26 Bond, Special 10
2012-27 Bond, Special 10
2012-28 6-26-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 10
2012-29 6-26-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 10
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:983
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2012-30 6-26-2012 Overnight off-street parking
locations, 7-33.3A
10
2012-31 Salary, Special 11
2012-32 6-26-2012 Background checks for all
recreation employees and
volunteers, 2-37.3A
11
2012-33 7-10-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2012-34 7-10-2012 Pets precluded from parks and
playgrounds, 11-1.4
11
2012-35 Salary, Special 11
2012-36 7-10-2012 Parking on driveway extensions,
7-11A
11
2012-37 7-10-2012 Rescinds Ord. 2012-11,35-5.3 11
2012-38 7-10-2012 Excavations and Street openings,
23-20.10, 23-20.12
11
2012-39 8-7-2012 Portable Storage Units, 17-9 11
2012-40 Defeated 11
2012-41 8-7-2012 Night towing rates, 5-33.6 11
2012-42 9-11-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2012-43 9-11-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2012-44 9-11-2012 Construction Code office as
appropriate authority
11
2012-45 9-11-2012 Precludes pets from parks and
playgrounds, 11-1.4
11
2012-46 9-11-2012 Permit parking, 7-32.1, Schedule A 11
2012-47 Bond, Special 11
2012-48 Bond, Special 11
2012-49 Bond, Special 11
2012-50 9-25-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2012-51 9-25-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2012-52 Defeated 11
2012-53 9-25-2012 Parking prohibited at all times, 7-13 11
2012-54 10-9-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2012-55 10-9-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2012-56 10-9-2012 Parking prohibited for street
cleaning, 7-12
11
§ DL-1 KEARNY CODE § DL-1
AO:984
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2012-57 10-9-2012 Garage sales and similar type sale,
5-25
11
2012-58 10-23-2012 Hourly rate off-duty police at school
district events, 3-6.5
11
2012-59 Bond, Special 11
2012-60 11-13-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2012-61 11-13-2012 Director of Parks and Recreation,
2-37.2
11
2012-62 Salary, Special 11
2012-63 Salary, Special 11
2012-64 12-4-2012 Handicapped parking, 2-35.1 11
2012-65 12-27-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2012-66 12-27-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2012-67 Salary, Special 11
2012-68 Salary, Special 11
2013-1 2-5-2013 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2013-2 2-5-2013 Ballfield user fees, 11-3.4 11
2013-3 2-19-2013 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2013-4 2-19-2013 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2013-5 2-19-2013 License fee-potentially dangerous
dogs, 9-2.1A
11
2013-6 2-19-2013 Water rates, 22-7.1 11
2013-7 Salary, Special 11
2013-8 Tabled 11
2013-9 3-26-2013 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2013-10 3-26-2013 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2013-11 3-26-2013 Smoking prohibited in town parks,
11-1.5
11
2013-12 Budget, Special 11
2013-13 Salary, Special 11
2013-14 4-23-2013 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2013-15 5-14-2013 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2013-16 5-14-2013 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2013-17 5-28-2013 Smoking in public parks, 11-1.5 11
2013-18 5-28-2013 Cable television 11
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:985
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2013-19 New position and salary, Special 11
2013-20 Bond, Special 11
2013-21 Bond, Special 11
2013-22 Bond, Special 11
2013-23 6-11-2013 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2013-24 New position and salary, Special 11
2013-25 6-25-2013 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2013-26 6-25-2013 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 11
2013-27 Purchase of property, Special 11
2013-28 Sale of property, Special 11
2013-29 7-16-2013 Parking prohibited at all times, 7-13 12
2013-30 7-16-2013 Accept donation of truck, Special 12
2013-31 9-10-2013 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 12
2013-32 9-10-2013 Off-street overnight residential
parking facilities, 7-33.4, 7-33.5,
7-33.6, 7-34.5, 7-34.6
12
2013-33 Tabled 12
2013-34 10-9-2013 Four-way stop intersection, 7-21 12
2013-35 10-9-2013 Readopt tax abatement ordinance,
12-1.1
12
2013-36 10-9-2013 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 12
2013-37 10-9-2013 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 12
2013-38 10-9-2013 Salary, Special 12
2013-39 10-22-2013 Salary, Special 12
2013-40 10-22-2013 Temporary parking prohibited —
snow plowing, 7-7.3; parking
prohibited at all times, 7-13; no turn
on red, 7-24
12
2013-41 11-12-2013 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 12
2013-42 11-12-2013 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 12
2013-43 11-12-2013 Temporary parking prohibited —
snow plowing, 7-7.3; parking
prohibited at all times, 7-13; no turn
on red, 7-24
12
2013-44 12-10-2013 Appropriation, Special 12
2013-45 12-23-2013 Schuyler Crossing Financial
Agreement, Special
12
§ DL-1 KEARNY CODE § DL-1
AO:986
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2013-46 12-23-2013 Mid-block crosswalks, 7-30 12
2013-47 12-23-2013 Collection of garbage, 20-1.1, 20-1.4 12
2013-48 12-23-2013 Adopt Industrial Park
Redevelopment Plan, 28-4
12
2013-49 Tabled 12
2014-1 1-28-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 12
2014-2 1-28-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 12
2014-3 1-28-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 12
2014-4 2-11-2014 Closing streets in school areas, 7-2.1 12
2014-5 3-25-2014 Bond, Special 12
2014-6 3-25-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 12
2014-7 3-25-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 12
2014-8 3-25-2014 Salary, Special 12
2014-9 3-25-2014 Salary, Special 12
2014-10 3-25-2014 Salary, Special 12
2014-11 3-25-2014 Salary, Special 12
2014-12 3-25-2014 CAP, Special 12
2014-13 3-25-2014 Awarding of contracts to certain
business entities, 2-74
12
2014-14 4-8-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 12
2014-15 4-8-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 12
2014-16 5-13-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 13
2014-17 5-27-2014 Approve and adopt amended Passaic
Avenue Redevelopment Plan, 28-5
13
2014-18 6-10-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 13
2014-19 6-10-2014 Salary 13
2014-20 6-10-2014 Reconfiguration of parking spaces
on Kearny Avenue, Special
13
2014-21 6-10-2014 Parking prohibited for street
cleaning, 7-12; parking prohibited
certain hours on certain streets,
7-14
13
2014-22 6-24-2014 Appointment of Qualified
Purchasing Agent, Special
13
2014-23 6-24-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 13
2014-24 6-24-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 13
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:987
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2014-25 6-24-2014 Parking prohibited certain hours on
certain streets, 7-14
13
2014-26 6-24-2014 Loading zones, 7-25 13
2014-27 7-15-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 13
2014-28 8-5-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 13
2014-29 8-5-2014 Create position-Part-time Public
Safety Telecommunicator, 3-57
13
2014-30 9-9-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 13
2014-31 9-9-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 13
2014-32 9-9-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 13
2014-33 Bond, Special 13
2014-34 9-23-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 13
2014-35 9-23-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 13
2014-36 10-14-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 13
2014-37 10-14-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 13
2014-38 10-29-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 13
2014-39 10-29-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 13
2014-40 10-29-2014 Anti-littering campaign, 4-13 13
2014-41 11-12-2014 Domesticated cat owners,
responsibilities, 9-9
13
2014-42 Withdrawn 13
2014-43 Rates paid by Board of Education
for off-duty law enforcement
officers, 3-6.5
13
2014-44 11-12-2014 Feral Cat Program, 9-12 13
2014-45 11-12-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 13
2014-46 11-12-2014 Water charges, 22-7.1 13
2014-47 Emergency appropriation, Special 13
2014-48 12-2-2014 Angle parking, 7-9 13
2014-49 12-2-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 13
2014-50 12-2-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 13
2014-51 Bond, Special 13
2014-52 Bond, Special 13
2014-53 12-29-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-35.1 13
§ DL-1 KEARNY CODE § DL-1
AO:988
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2014-54 12-16-2014 Approve and adopt Kearny Point
Industrial Park, 28-6 Redevelopment
Plan
13
2014-55 12-29-2014 Financial agreement with KPIP
Urban Renewal I, LLC (property at
78 John Miller Way)
13
2015-1 2-24-2015 Amends 7-35.1, handicapped
parking
13
2015-2 2-24-2015 Adds 38-6.4, temporary uses and
structures
13
2015-3 2-24-2015 Establish position-Electrical
subcode official, 14-1.1
13
2015-4 2-24-2015 Amends 7-35.1, handicapped
parking
13
2015-5 2-24-2015 Amends 9-12.5, feral catscaregivers'
responsibilities
13
2015-6 Bond, Special 13
2015-7 Bond, Special 13
2015-8 2-24-2015 Amends, 14-1.3, Construction Code
Fees
13
2015-9 Financial agreement with Schuyler
Crossing Urban Renewal LLC,
Special
13
2015-10 4-14-2015 Amends, 7-35.1, handicapped
parking
13
2015-11 4-14-2015 Amends 7-35.1, handicapped
parking
13
2015-12 CAP Bank, Special 13
2015-13 Salary, Special 13
2015-14 4-14-2015 Amends 7-35.1, handicapped
parking
13
2015-15 4-28-2015 Amends 7-35.1, handicapped
parking
13
2015-16 4-28-2015 Amends 7-13, parking prohibited at
all times
13
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:989
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2015-17 5-12-2015 Adopts master plan, zoning
regulations, codes and standards
now in effect or hereinafter adopted
by the Meadowlands Regional
Commission without further formal
action, Special
14
2015-18 5-12-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
handicapped parking
14
2015-19 5-12-2015 Establishes position of Library
Assistant Bilingual and amends
Salary Ordinance, Special
14
2015-20 5-12-2015 Amends Ch. 19, Fire Prevention and
Protection, 19-1.9, non-life hazard
uses, inspections; fees
14
2015-21 Withdrawn 14
2015-22 5-26-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
handicapped parking
14
2015-23 5-26-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic, 7-35.1,
handicapped parking
14
2015-24 5-26-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-34.4h,
front-end (head-on) parking
14
2015-25 5-26-2015 Establishes position Senior Clerk
Typist Bilingual and amends Salary
Ordinance, Special
14
2015-26 6-9-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1
handicapped parking
14
2015-27 6-9-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic, 7-35.1,
handicapped parking
14
2015-28 6-9-2015 Amends Ch. 4, Police Regulations;
4-21.1, circuses, bazaars and
carnivals-permit, terms and
conditions
14
2015-29 6-9-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-14, parking
prohibited certain hours on certain
streets
14
2015-30 6-9-2015 Amends Ch. 5, Licensing and
Business Regulations; 5-1.2, public
recreational bathing places
14
2015-31 6-9-2015 Salary, Special 14
§ DL-1 KEARNY CODE § DL-1
AO:990
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2015-32 6-9-2015 Establishes position of Security
Guard and Security Guard Bilingual
English and Spanish and amends
Salary Ordinance, Special
14
2015-33 6-9-2015 Amends Ch. 2, Administration;
creates 2-17, establishes position of
Fire Official
14
2015-34 6-24-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
handicapped parking
14
2015-35 Tabled 14
2015-36 7-14-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
handicapped parking
14
2015-37 7-14-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
handicapped parking
14
2015-38 8-11-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
handicapped parking
14
2015-39 8-11-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
handicapped parking
14
2015-40 8-11-2015 Amends Ch. 23, Streets and
Sidewalks; 23-20.8, excavation and
restoration requirements
14
2015-41 9-8-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
handicapped parking
14
2015-42 9-8-2015 Establishes position of Special Law
Enforcement Officer and amends
Salary Ordinance, Special
14
2015-43 9-22-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
handicapped parking
14
2015-44 9-22-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
handicapped parking
14
2015-45 9-22-2015 Amends salary of Police Matron,
Special
14
2015-46 9-22-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-34.4, offstreet
business parking; add 7-34.4g
overnight commercial off-street
parking permit; amends Ch. 34,
Summary of Fees
14
2015-47 Bond, Special 14
2015-48 14-27-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
handicapped parking
14
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:991
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2015-49 14-27-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
handicapped parking
14
2015-50 14-27-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-24, no turn
on red
14
2015-51 14-27-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-25, loading
zones
14
2015-52 14-27-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; created 7-14,
school hour no parking zone
14
2015-53 14-27-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-20, stop
intersections
14
2015-54 10-27-2015 Adopts New Jersey Sports and
Exposition Authority (NJSEA)'s
master plan, zoning regulations
codes and standards for the portion
of the Town within the Hackensack
Meadowlands District
14
2015-55 14-15-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
handicapped parking
14
2015-56 14-15-2015 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
handicapped parking
14
2015-57 14-15-2015 Appropriation, Special 14
2015-58 14-15-2015 Amends Traffic, 7-25, loading zones 14
2016-01 1-26-2016 Salary, Special 15
2016-02 1-26-2016 Salary, Special 15
2016-03 2-9-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
Handicapped Parking on Streets
15
2016-04 2-9-2016 Salary, Special 15
2016-05 2-9-2016 Amends Ch. 3, Police and Fire
Departments; 3-1.1, Composition of
Police Department; 3-2, Work Period
Defined
15
2016-06 2-23-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
Handicapped Parking
15
2016-07 3-8-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.2
Handicapped Parking in Front or
Near Residences; Restricted Parking
Permit
15
2016-08 3-22-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
Handicapped Parking
15
§ DL-1 KEARNY CODE § DL-1
AO:992
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2016-09 3-22-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
Handicapped Parking
15
2016-10 4-12-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
Handicapped Parking
15
2016-11 Withdrawn 15
2016-12 Withdrawn 15
2016-13 4-26-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
Handicapped Parking
15
2016-14 4-26-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
Handicapped Parking
15
2016-15 4-26-2016 CAP Bank, Special 15
2016-16 4-26-2016 Salary, Special 15
2016-17 5-10-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-22, Yield
Intersections
15
2016-18 5-24-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.2,
Handicapped Parking in Front or
Near Residences; 7-36.3 Exceptions
to Parking Permit, Prohibitions
15
2016-19 5-24-2016 Amends Ch. 11, Parks and
Recreational Areas; add 11-7, Dog
Parks
15
2016-20 5-24-2016 Salary, Special 15
2016-21 5-24-2016 Salary, Special 15
2016-22 6-14-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-14, Parking
Prohibited Certain Hours on Certain
Streets
15
2016-23 6-14-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-13 Parking
Prohibited at All Times
2016-24 6-14-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
Handicapped Parking
15
2016-25 6-28-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
Handicapped Parking
15
2016-26 6-28-2016 Amends Ch. 9, Animal Control; 9-1,
Definitions; add 9-6 Tethering of
Animals
15
2016-27 6-28-2016 Establish position of confidential
assistant, Salary
15
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:993
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2016-28 8-23-2016 Amends Ch. 5, Licensing and
Business Regulations; 5-32, Precious
Metal and Other Secondhand Goods
Dealers
15
2016-29 8-9-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
Handicapped Parking
15
2016-30 8-9-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
Handicapped Parking
15
2016-31 8-9-2016 Amends Ch. 5, Licensing and
General Business Regulations;
5-11.1 Overnight Residential Off-
Street Parking Permits; amends Ch.
7, Traffic; 7-33.4, Off-Street
Business Parking Permits,
Applications, Authority to Issue,
Fees
15
2016-32 8-23-2016 Amends Ch. 3, Police Department
and Fire Department; 3-41.2,
Composition, Fire Department
15
2016-33 8-9-2016 Salary, Special 15
2016-34 8-23-2016 Bond, Special 15
2016-35 8-23-2016 Bond, Special 15
2016-36 8-23-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
Handicapped Parking
15
2016-37 8-23-2016 Amends Ch. 7, Traffic; 7-35.1,
Handicapped Parking
15
2016-38 9-27-2016 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2016-39 9-27-2016 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2016-40 9-27-2016 Amends Ch. 3 Police Department
and Fire Department; 3-6.1
Application; 3-6.5 Rates of
Compensation; Administrative Fee;
Payment for Services; adds 3-6.5A
Privately Funded Repetitive Security
Jobs
16
2016-41 9-27-2016 Amends Ch. 4 Police Regulations;
rescinds 4-9.1 Advertise, Display,
Sale Prohibited of Drug
Paraphernalia
16
§ DL-1 KEARNY CODE § DL-1
AO:994
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2016-42 9-27-2016 Amends Ch. 4 Police Regulations;
4-2.1 Drug-Free School Zone Map
Adopted; 4-2A.1 Drug-Free Public
Property Zone Map Adopted
16
2016-43 10-11-2016 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2016-44 10-11-2016 Amends Ch. 12 Taxation; adds
Article 4, 12-9 Hotel Occupancy Tax,
12-9.1 — 12-9.6
16
2016-45 10-11-2016 Amends Ch. 2 Administration; adds
2-4.12 Minutes from March 28,
2006 to date of enactment of this
Code section; adds 2-4.13 Minutes
after the date of the enactment of
this Code section; adds 2-4.14
Approval; adds 2-4.15 Audibility
16
2016-46 10-11-2016 Establish Position of Building
Inspector/Code Enforcement
Officer; Special
16
2016-47 10-11-2016 Establish Positions of Worker 1
Grounds, Tree Maintenance Worker
2 and 3, Special
16
2016-48 10-11-2016 Establish Position of Registered
Environmental Health Specialist and
Specialist Trainee, Special
16
2016-49 10-25-2016 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2016-50 10-25-2016 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2016-51 11-9-2016 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2016-52 11-9-2016 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2016-53 11-9-2016 Amends Ch. 17 Property
Maintenance; creates 17-12
Abandoned Property,
17-12.1—17-12.13
16
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:995
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2016-54 11-9-2016 Amends Ch. 5 Licensing and
Business Regulations; 5-32.6
Retention; Revocation; Other
Restrictions; 5-32.8 Fees; period of
License Validity; 5-32.10 Time Limit
for Conformance; Repealer;
Severability
16
2016-55 Bond, Special 16
2016-56 12-20-2016 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2016-57 12-20-2016 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2016-58 12-20-2016 Establishes Position of Account
Clerk/Library Assistant, Special
16
2016-59 12-20-2016 Establishes Position of Sanitation
Inspector, Special
16
2016-60 12-20-2016 Amends Ch. 4 Police Regulations;
adds 4-28 Security During
Nighttime Retail Hours, 4-28.1 —
4-28.4
16
2017-01 1-24-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-02 1-24-2017 Amends Ch. 20 Solid Waste
Management; 20-1.4f Placement of
Receptacles
16
2017-03 2-7-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; adds 7-35.7
Exempt from Application of Street
Cleaning
16
2017-04 2-7-2017 Amends Ch. 5 Licensing and
Business Regulations; adds 5-35.2b
Pull Tab Machines, Licensing Fees
16
2017-05 2-7-2017 Amends Ch. 2 Administration;
rescinds Ord. 2014-13, 2-74
Restrictions on Awarding of
Contracts to Certain Business
Entities, 2-74.1 — 2-74.11 repealed
16
2017-06 2-7-2017 Appropriates Grants from NJDOT,
Special
16
2017-07 2-21-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-08 2-21-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
§ DL-1 KEARNY CODE § DL-1
AO:996
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2017-09 2-21-2017 Salary, Special 16
2017-10 2-21-2017 Salary, Special 16
2017-11 4-11-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-12 4-11-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-13 4-11-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-14 4-11-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-15 4-11-2017 Creates Ch. 24 Crane Regulations,
24-1 — 24-9
16
2017-16 4-11-2017 Amends Ch. 3 Police Department
and Fire Department, 3-6.5A Private
Security Jobs
16
2017-17 4-11-2017 Salary, Special 16
2017-18 4-11-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-19 4-11-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-20 4-11-2017 Authorizes Temporary Easements,
Special
16
2017-21 Tabled 16
2017-22 Tabled 16
2017-23 4-11-2017 Financial Agreement KPIP Urban
Renewal II LLC, Special
16
2017-24 4-25-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-25 4-25-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-26 4-25-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; creates 7-9A
Head on Parking
16
2017-27 5-11-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-28 5-11-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-29 5-11-2017 Financial Agreement 113 Passaic
Avenue Urban Renewal LLC, Special
16
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:997
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2017-30 5-23-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking on Streets
16
2017-31 5-23-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-14 Parking
Prohibited During Certain Hours on
Certain Streets
16
2017-32 6-27-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking on Streets
16
2017-33 6-27-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-34 6-27-2017 Salary, Special 16
2017-35 6-27-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-36 6-27-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-37 6-27-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-38 6-27-2017 Establish Position of Mail Clerk,
Special
16
2017-39 7-11-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-40 7-11-2017 Establish Position of Court
Attendant, Special
16
2017-41 8-8-2017 Establishes Ch. 8 Abatement and
Prevention of Public Health
Nuisances, 8-1 — 8-6
16
2017-42 8-8-2017 Amends Ch. 9 Animal Control; 9-5
Wildlife Feeding, 9-5.1 Purpose,
9-5.3 Prohibited Conduct
16
2017-43 9-12-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-44 9-12-2017 Financial Agreement, Special 16
2017-45 9-12-2017 Amends Ch. 28 Redevelopment
Plans; 28-5 Passaic Avenue
Redevelopment Plan Amendment to
Permit Immediate Care Medical
Facilities as a Principal Permitted
Use
16
2017-46 9-12-2017 Amends Ch. 10 Personnel Policies;
adds 10-7 Defense and
Indemnification of Claims 10-7.1 —
10-7.7
16
§ DL-1 KEARNY CODE § DL-1
AO:998
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2017-47 9-26-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-48 9-26-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-49 Tabled 16
2017-50 Tabled 16
2017-51 10-10-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-52 10-10-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-13 Parking
Prohibited at All Times on Certain
Streets
16
2017-53 10-10-2017 Amends Chapter 28 Redevelopment
Plans; 28-5 Passaic Avenue
Redevelopment Plan Amendment to
Permit Immediate Care Medical
Facilities as a Principal Permitted
Use (Supersedes Ord. No. 2017-45]
16
2017-54 10-24-2017 Bond, Special 16
2017-55 10-24-2017 Bond, Special 16
2017-56 10-24-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-57 10-24-2017 Amends Ch. 9 Animal Control; 9-13
Sale of Dogs and Cats, 9-13.1 —
9-13.5
16
2017-58 11-8-2017 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2017-59 12-5-2017 Salary, Special 16
2017-60 12-5-2017 Amends Ch. 9 Animal Control; 9-14
Raising and Maintenance of
Chickens, 9-14.1 — 9-14.18
16
2017-61 12-5-2017 Amends Ch. 15 Rental Housing;
adds 15-3 Short-Term Rentals,
15-3.1 — 15-3.5
16
2017-62 Defeated 16
2017-63 12-18-2017 Establish Position of Payroll Clerk,
Special
16
2018-01 1-23-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:999
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2018-02 1-23-2018 Amends Chapter 28 Redevelopment
Plans; 28-5 Passaic Avenue
Redevelopment Plan to Permit
Coffee Shops with Drive-Through as
a Principal Permitted Use
16
2018-03 1-23-2018 Amends Ch. 38 Zoning; 38-6.9
Fences and Walls
16
2018-04 2-6-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2018-05 2-6-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2018-06 2-20-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2018-07 2-20-2018 Salary, Special 16
2018-08 2-20-2018 Establishes the Position of
Registered Environmental Health
Specialist Public Health, Special
16
2018-09 2-20-2018 Establishes the Position of Registrar
of Vital Statistics (Bilingual), Special
16
2018-10 2-20-2018 Establishes the Position of Social
Service Aide (Bilingual), Special
16
2018-11 2-20-2018 Establishes Part-time Position and
Stipend for the Position of Secretary
to the Construction Code/Zoning
Official, Special
16
2018-12 2-20-2018 Amends Ch. 38 Zoning; 38-5.1
Through Lots
16
2018-13 2-20-2018 Establishes Part-time Positions of
Community Service Aide and
Community Youth Worker, Special
16
2018-14 3-27-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2018-15 3-27-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2018-16 4-10-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2018-17 4-10-2018 Amends Chapter 28 Redevelopment
Plans, Kearny Point Industrial Park
Redevelopment Plan
16
2018-18 4-24-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
§ DL-1 KEARNY CODE § DL-1
AO:1000
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2018-19 4-24-2018 Establishes Position of Building
Maintenance Worker/Security
Guard, Special
16
2018-20 4-24-2018 Salary, Special 16
2018-21 4-24-2018 Salary, Special 16
2018-22 5-9-2018 Appropriation, Special 16
2018-23 5-9-2018 Bond, Special 16
2018-24 5-9-2018 Amends Ch. 23 Streets and
Sidewalks; 23-20.10 Restoration
Requirements for Opening Paved
Streets
16
2018-25 5-9-2018 Established Hourly Position of
Computer Operator Trainee, Special
16
2018-26 5-22-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2018-27 5-22-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2018-28 5-22-2018 Amends Ch. 3 Police Department
and Fire Department; 3-1.1
Composition of Police Department
16
2018-29 6-13-2018 Financial Agreement, Special 16
2018-30 6-13-2018 Appropriation, Special 16
2018-31 6-26-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-21 Four-Way
Stops
16
2018-32 7-17-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2018-33 7-17-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.2
Handicapped Parking-Definition of
Disability, Permit Renewal
16
2018-34 8-7-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2018-35 8-7-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2018-36 8-7-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-12 Parking
Prohibited for Street Cleaning
16
2018-37 Bond, Special 16
2018-38 Bond, Special 16
2018-39 9-11-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:1001
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2018-40 9-11-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2018-41 9-11-2018 Amends Ch. 5 Licensing and
Business Regulations; 5-25.1 Garage
Sales-Definitions
16
2018-42 9-25-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2018-43 9-25-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2018-44 Financial Agreement 16
2018-45 10-9-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2018-46 10-9-2018 Amends Ch. 9 Animal Control; 9-1
Definitions; 9-2.1A License Fee for
Potentially Dangerous Dogs; 9-3.7
Potentially Dangerous Dogs, Vicious
Dogs; 9-6.1 Tethering
16
2018-47 10-23-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2018-48 11-7-2018 Amends Ch. 4 Police Regulations;
4-26 Flea Markets; 4-26.2, 4-26.5
16
2018-49 11-7-2018 Payment in Lieu of Taxes, Special 16
2018-50 12-4-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2018-51 12-17-2018 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2019-01 1-22-2019 Establishes Position of Public Safety
Telecommunicator Trainee, Special
16
2019-02 2-19-2019 Bond, Special 16
2019-03 2-5-2019 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2019-04 2-5-2019 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2019-05 2-5-2019 Salary, Special 16
2019-06 2-19-2019 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2019-07 2-19-2019 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2019-08 3-12-2019 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
§ DL-1 KEARNY CODE § DL-1
AO:1002
Ord. No. Date Title Supp. No.
2019-09 3-26-2019 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2019-10 3-26-2019 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2019-11 4-9-2019 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
2019-12 4-9-2019 Amends Ch. 4 Police Regulations;
4-2.1 Drug-Free School Zone Map
Adopted; 4-2A.1 Drug-Free Public
Property Zone Map Adopted
16
2019-13 Not Adopted 16
2019-14 4-23-2019 Amends Ch. 2 Administration;
deletes and replaces 2-48 Advisory
Committee on the Environment and
Sustainability
16
2019-15 4-23-2019 Amends Ch. 11 Parks and
Recreational Areas; 11-3.4 Permits
16
2019-16 5-7-2019 Amends Ch. 7 Traffic; 7-35.1
Handicapped Parking
16
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-17 5-21-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2019-18 5-21-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 17
2019-19 6-11-2019 Schuyler Avenue
Redevelopment Plan
Amendment
NCM 17
2019-20 6-11-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2019-21 6-25-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2019-22 6-25-2019 Water Amendment Ch. 22 17
2019-23 6-25-2019 Appropriation NCM 17
2019-24 7-16-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2019-25 7-16-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2019-26 8-6-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2019-27 8-6-2019 Payment In Lieu of
Taxes Agreement
NCM 17
2019-28 9-10-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2019-29 9-24-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2019-30 9-24-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:1003
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-31 10-8-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2019-32 10-8-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2019-33 10-22-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2019-34 11-12-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2019-35 11-12-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2019-36 12-3-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2019-37 12-3-2019 Police Department and
Fire Department
Amendment
Ch. 3 17
2019-38 12-20-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2019-39 12-20-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2020-01 2-4-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2020-02 2-4-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2020-03 Bond NCM 17
2020-04 2-18-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2020-05 2-18-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2020-06 2-18-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2020-07 2-18-2020 Environmental
Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 29 17
2020-08 2-18-2020 Establishment of
Senior Maintenance
Repairer Position
NCM 17
2020-09 3-10-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2020-10 3-10-2020 Water Amendment Ch. 22 17
2020-11 3-24-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2020-12 6-23-2020 Zoning Amendment Ch. 38 17
2020-13 4-7-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2020-14 4-21-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2020-15 4-21-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2020-16 4-21-2020 Police Regulations
Amendment
Ch. 4 17
2020-17 5-5-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2020-18 5-5-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2020-19 5-5-2020 Streets and Sidewalks
Amendment
Ch. 23 17
§ DL-1 KEARNY CODE § DL-1
AO:1004
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2020-20 5-19-2020 Extension of Certain
License Expiration/
Renewal Dates for
2020 Due to COVID-19
NCM 17
2020-21 6-9-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2020-22 6-9-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2020-23 6-23-2020 Streets and Sidewalks
Supplemental
Ch. 23A 17
2020-24 6-23-2020 Salaries NCM 17
2020-25 8-4-2020 Right-of-Way Permits Ch. 39 17
2020-26 8-4-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
2020-27 8-4-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 17
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:1005