Adopting Ordinance
Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE. [1971 Code § 1-1]
This book shall be known and may be cited as "The Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Lakewood, 1999" and is referred to herein as
the Revision or Code.
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS. [1971 Code § 1-2; New]
For the purpose of this Revision, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require:
CLERK OR TOWNSHIP CLERK — Shall mean the Municipal Clerk duly
appointed pursuant to law.
COUNTY — Shall mean the County of Ocean.
DAYS — Shall mean calendar days.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organizational unit of the Township
government established or designated by ordinance or this Revision as a
department, together with any agency or instrumentality of the Township
government assigned to such organizational unit by the Township
Committee.
DEPARTMENT HEAD — Shall mean the department head designated as
such by ordinance, or the immediate supervisor of an employee.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or chapter of this Revision.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation where an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath. In such cases the words swear and sworn
shall be construed to be equivalent to the words affirm and affirmed.
OCCUPANT. — See tenant.
AO:1
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL AND THE TITLE OF AN OFFICER OR OFFICIAL —
Shall be construed as if the words of the Township of Lakewood followed it.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, including this Revision, as long as it has been adopted
by the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and as long as
it remains in force and effect pursuant to law.
OWNER — When applied to a building or land shall mean and include
any part owner, any corporation, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part
of such building or land.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any kind thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
PRECEDING AND FOLLOWING — Shall mean next before and next after,
respectively.
PROPERTY — Shall mean real and personal property.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARES, PUBLIC PLACE OR PUBLIC
PLACES — Shall severally be construed to mean any and every public
ground, public square, public park or other public place within the
Township.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean any portion of a street between the curbline and
the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding
parkways.
STREET — Shall mean and include an avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk, crosswalk, and every
class of road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general
public.
TENANT OR OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, - shall mean and
include any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or land,
whether alone or with others.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Lakewood in the County of
Ocean and State of New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE OR COMMITTEE — Shall mean the governing
body of the Township.
WEEK — Shall mean seven days.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [1971 Code § 1-3; New]
For the purpose of this Revision and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
§ 1-2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 1-3
AO:2
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
Shall is mandatory and may is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day and if the last day be a Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the offices of the Township are closed, that day
shall be excluded.
Writing and written shall include printing, typewriting and any other mode
of communication using paper or similar material which is in general use,
as well as legible handwriting.
Whenever a specific time is used in this Revision, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during
any day in any year.
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Revision shall
be deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether
or not such designation is included in the citation.
Chapter shall mean one of the major divisions of the Revision identified by
an Arabic and divided by subject matter.
Section shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
Subsection shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
Paragraph shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter or Arabic number.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY. [1971 Code § 1-4]
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this Revision shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or inoperative, in whole or in part,
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this Revision.
§ 1-5. GENERAL PENALTY.1
1. Editor's Note: Penalty provision in compliance with N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.
§ 1-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-5.1
AO:3
§ 1-5.1. Maximum Penalty. [1971 Code § 4-18.1]
For violation of any provision of this Revision or other ordinance of the
Township of Lakewood unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided in
connection with the provision violated, the maximum penalty upon
conviction of the violation shall be by one or more of the following:
imprisonment in the County Jail or in any place provided by the Township
for the detention of prisoners, for any term not exceeding 90 days; or
by a fine not exceeding $1,000; or by a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-5.2. Minimum Penalty. [1971 Code § 4-18.4]
The Township Committee may prescribe that for the violation of any
particular provision of the Revision or of any particular ordinance at least
a minimum penalty shall be imposed which shall consist of a fine which
may be fixed at an amount not exceeding $100. The court before which any
person is convicted of violating any ordinance or Revision provision shall
have power to impose any fine, term of punishment, or period of community
service not less than the minimum and not exceeding the maximum fixed in
the Revision or such ordinance.
§ 1-5.3. Additional Fine for Repeat Offenders. [New]
Any person who is convicted of violating this Revision or an ordinance
within one year of the date of a previous violation of the same provision of
this Revision or of the same ordinance and who was fined for the previous
violation, shall be sentenced by a court to an additional fine as a repeat
offender. The additional fine imposed by the court upon a person for a
repeated offense shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the
maximum fine fixed for a violation of the ordinance or Revision provision,
but shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of
the ordinance or Revision provision.
If the Township Committee chooses not to impose an additional fine upon a
person for a repeated violation of any municipal ordinance, the Committee
may waive the additional fine by ordinance or resolution.
§ 1-5.4. Default of Payment of Fine. [New]
Any person convicted of the violation of any provision of this Revision or any
ordinance may, in the discretion of the court by which he was convicted,
and in default of the payment of any fine imposed therefor, be imprisoned in
the County Jail or place of detention provided by the Township, for any term
not exceeding 90 days, or be required to perform community service for a
period not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-5.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 1-5.5
AO:4
§ 1-5.5. Separate Violations. [1971 Code § 4-18.2]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this Revision or any other ordinance of the Township exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-5.6. Application. [1971 Code § 4-18.3]
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. At the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court, any lesser penalty, including a nominal
penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular case or
violation.
§ 1-6. THE REVISED GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE TOWNSHIP
OF LAKEWOOD TO BE MAINTAINED BY TOWNSHIP CLERK. [New]
It shall be the duty of the Township Clerk or such person as authorized
and directed by the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book
containing "The Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Lakewood,
1999" required to be filed in the office of the Township Clerk for the use of
the public. All changes in the Revision and all ordinances adopted by the
Township Committee subsequent to the adoption of the Revision, which the
Township Committee shall adopt specifically as a part of the Revision, shall,
when finally adopted, be included herein by reference until such change
or new ordinances are printed as supplements to the Revised General
Ordinances, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-7. AMENDMENTS TO CODE. [New]
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the Township
Committee to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code of the Township of Lakewood
shall be understood and intended to include such additions and
amendments. Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the
Code shall be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided
hereunder, inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the Code, as
amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-8. SALE OF CODE BOOK. [New]
Copies of the Code book containing the Code may be purchased from the
Township Clerk upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the
Township Committee, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures
for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-5.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 1-9
AO:5
§ 1-9. ALTERING OR TAMPERING WITH CODE; PENALTIES FOR
VIOLATIONS. [New]
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township of
Lakewood to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section shall
be subject, upon conviction, to the penalty stated in Section 1-5.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
The Township of Lakewood is governed under the Township form of
government outlined in Chapter 63 of Title 40A of the New Jersey Statutes
Annotated. The Administrative Chapter has been drafted in conformity with
the Township Law and in many instances, provisions have been restated
in the Code. Other enabling laws pertaining to the Administrative Chapter
are N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, Police Department; N.J.S.A. 40A:14-7, Fire
Departments; N.J.S.A. 2A:9-7 et seq., Municipal Court; N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69,
Zoning Board of Adjustment; N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23, Planning Board; N.J.S.A.
26:3-1 et seq., Board of Health; N.J.S.A. 40:56A, Environmental Committee;
and N.J.S.A. 40:8-107 et seq., Local Assistance Board. Other authority to
regulate the internal affairs of the Township is contained in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.
For statutes requiring the taking of oaths of office and requiring bond
of certain officers and employees, see Local Fiscal Affairs Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:5-33 et seq.
For salary grades and ranges, wages, compensation and fees of all officers
and employees of the Township, see annual salary ordinances of the
Township. Such ordinances are not included in these Revised Ordinances,
but are saved from repeal. See Adopting Ordinance.
§ 1-9 LAKEWOOD CODE § 1-9
AO:6
ARTICLE I
Mayor and Township Committee
§ 2-1. TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE.
§ 2-1.1. Legislative Power. [1971 Code § 2-2.1]
All legislative power of the Township, except in matters of health, shall be
exercised by the Township Committee pursuant to law. Legislative power
concerning matters of health shall be exercised by the Board of Health.
§ 2-1.2. Organization of Township Committee. [1971 Code § 2-2.2]
The Township Committee shall organize annually during the first week in
January, at which time it shall elect a Mayor from among its members. The
Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Township Committee and perform
such other duties as the Township Committee may prescribe. In the absence
or disability of the Mayor, the Committee shall elect a temporary presiding
officer.
§ 2-1.3. Powers of the Mayor. [1971 Code § 2-2.3]
The Mayor shall have the power to appoint subcommittees of the Township
Committee with the consent of the Township Committee. The Mayor shall
sign and execute documents and agreements on behalf of the Township, and
shall have the power to make proclamations concerning holidays and events
of interest to the Township. The Mayor shall exercise the ceremonial power
of the Township and every other power usually exercised by Township
Mayors or conferred by law.
§ 2-2. MEETINGS OF THE TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE.
§ 2-2.1. Organizational Meeting and Regular Meetings. [1971 Code
§ 2-2.4a]
The Township Committee shall meet annually within the first week in
January. The Committee shall meet regularly thereafter on the second and
fourth Tuesdays in each month at 8:00 p.m., except that the Committee may,
by motion, dispense with or change the date of a regular meeting. When
the time for a regular meeting of the Committee falls on a legal holiday as
prescribed by law, such meeting shall be held on some other day of the week
at the convenience of the Committee as fixed by motion.
§ 2-2.2. Special Meetings. [1971 Code § 2-2.4b]
A Special Meeting may be called at any time upon written request of a
majority of the members of the Township Committee or by the Mayor.
The request and call for a special meeting shall specify the purpose of
the meeting and no business shall be transacted at any special meeting
other than that specified. The call for a Special Meeting shall be filed with
the Township Clerk and shall be served upon each Committee Member
§ 2-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.2
AO:7
as hereinafter provided at least 24 hours prior to the time for which the
meeting is called, provided that the Mayor may determine that an
emergency exists affecting the health or safety of the people, which requires
consideration by the Township Committee within a shorter time, and upon
such determination which the Mayor shall set forth in the call, the call may
be filed with the Clerk at any time prior to the time set for the meeting.
Upon the filing of any call for a Special Meeting, the Clerk shall forthwith
give notice thereof by telephone to each Committee Member, at such place
as he shall have previously designated for that purpose, and shall also serve
or cause to be served a written copy of the call upon each Committee
Member, by delivery of a copy to him personally or by the leaving of a
copy at his usual residence. The Police Department shall cooperate with
the Clerk in effectuating such service of notice. Upon waiver of notice by
all members of the Township Committee, a Special Meeting may be held
without prior notice notwithstanding the above provisions of this section.
§ 2-2.3. Meetings Open to the Public; Rules of Township Committee.
[1971 Code § 2-2.5]
All Regular and Special Meetings of the Township Committee shall be open
to the public. The rules of procedure to be followed and rules for the
consideration of nominations submitted by the Mayor and for the conduct of
other business of the Committee shall be as provided by subsection 2-2.10
of this Code.
§ 2-2.4. Township Committee Conferences. [1971 Code § 2-2.6]
The Committee may meet at any time in executive sessions for the
consideration of any Township business or to meet with any officer or
employee of the Township or any other person on Township business. No
persons other than those specifically invited by the Committee shall be
authorized to participate in any such executive session.
§ 2-2.5. Quorum. [1971 Code § 2-2.7]
A majority of the members of the Township Committee shall constitute a
quorum, and no ordinance shall be adopted by the Township Committee
without the affirmative vote of a majority of the quorum of the Committee
except when required by Statute. If a quorum is not present 1/2 hour after
the appointed time for any meeting, the Presiding Officer or the Clerk may
declare the meeting adjourned.
§ 2-2.6. Adjourned Meetings. [1971 Code § 2-23.1c]
An adjourned meeting shall be considered a continuation of the preceding
meeting, and the business of the Township Committee shall be resumed
where it ceased at the time of the last adjournment.
§ 2-2.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-2.7
AO:8
§ 2-2.7. Roll Call Votes; Minutes. [New]
The vote upon every ordinance, and upon every motion or resolution when
requested, shall be taken by roll call and the yeas and nays shall be
entered on the minutes. The minutes of each meeting shall be signed by the
Township Clerk.
§ 2-2.8. Ordinances. [New]
All ordinances shall be introduced, read, heard and enacted in the manner
provided by general law.
§ 2-2.9. Ordinance Book. [New]
The ordinance book shall be signed by the Mayor and the Township Clerk.
§ 2-2.10. Rules of Procedure Governing Meetings of the Township
Committee. [1971 Code § 2-23]
a. Presiding Officer. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the
Township Committee; and if he is absent, a member of the Township
Committee designated by the Township Committee shall act in the
Mayor's stead. The Mayor shall:
1. Appoint Special Committees of the Township Committee as may be
required.
2. Preside at all meetings of the Township Committee and of the
Committee as a whole.
3. State the questions and announce the results of all matters upon
which the Township Committee may vote.
4. Rule on all questions of order subject to appeal to the Township
Committee.
5. Sign all ordinances adopted in his presence; in his absence the
Temporary Presiding Officer appointed by the Township Committee
shall sign ordinances adopted in the presence of such Temporary
Presiding Officer.
6. Have such other functions, powers and duties as may from time to
time be prescribed by general law, ordinance or resolution.
b. Township Clerk. The Township Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the
Township Committee. In the absence of the Clerk the Deputy Clerk shall
serve and if unable, the Township Committee shall designate a Clerk
Pro Tempore.
c. Agenda. An agenda for each regular meeting of the Township
Committee shall be prepared by the Township Clerk in consultation
with the Mayor and Manager where necessary or appropriate.
§ 2-2.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.10
AO:9
d. Call to Order. The Mayor shall call the meeting to order. In the absence
of the Mayor, the Township Clerk shall call the meeting to order, and
those present shall select a Temporary Presiding Officer who shall
preside during the absence of the Mayor. The Mayor shall assume the
chair as soon as he is in attendance at any meeting which may have
been called to order in his absence, and the Temporary Presiding
Officer shall thereupon relinquish the chair.
e. Quorum Call. At the opening of each meeting of the Township
Committee, the Clerk shall call the roll, and the names of those present
shall be recorded in the minutes. A quorum shall be constituted as set
forth in subsection 2-2.5 of this chapter.
f. Order of Business. The order of business at each meeting of the
Township Committee shall be as follows:
1. Roll call.
2. Call for bids, if any.
3. Invocation by Township Clerk.
4. Approval of minutes of previous meeting.
5. Ordinances, public hearings.
6. Comments from members of the public.
7. Introduction of ordinances.
8. Resolutions.
9. Correspondence.
10. Old business.
11. In the discretion of the chair, further comments from the public on
matters of business pertaining to that meeting only.
12. Comments of committeemen.
13. Payment of bills.
14. Adjournment.
g. Distribution and Reading of Minutes. So far as practicable, the
Township Clerk shall prepare and distribute to the Township Committee
the minutes of each meeting.
h. Committees. The rules of the Township Committee shall govern the
meetings of the Committee of the whole so far as applicable. Special
Committees for legislative purposes may be appointed by the Mayor
pursuant to Resolution. No Special Committee shall proceed to the
consideration of any matter referred to it unless a majority of the
members of the Committee are present. No Special Committee shall
§ 2-2.10 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-2.10
AO:10
report on the matter referred to it at the same meeting at which the
reference was made, except by unanimous consent of the members of
the Committee.
i. Roll Call Vote and Minutes. The vote upon every resolution or ordinance
shall be taken by roll call, and the yeas and nays shall be entered on the
minutes. The minutes of each meeting shall be signed by the presiding
officer and by the Clerk.
j. Nominations and Appointments by Township Committee. Any member
of the Committee may nominate as many candidates as there are offices
to be filled. The Township Committee will consider such nominations in
committee of the whole which will report to a regular meeting of the
Township Committee. Where there is a single office to be filled, the
consensus of the Township Committee on the appointment shall be
taken as to each nominee in alphabetical order and the first nominee to
receive a majority shall be deemed appointed. Where there is more than
one office to be filled, such as on a board, body, commission or authority,
the same procedure shall be followed with respect to each office
separately until the total number of appointments to be made has been
completed. In the discretion of the chair, a group of nominations may be
considered at once where there is no apparent division in the Township
Committee as to the nominees included in the group.
k. Rules of Debate.
1. Question Under Consideration. When a question is presented and
seconded, it is under consideration, and no motion shall be
received thereafter, except to adjourn, to lay on the table, to
postpone, or to amend, until the question is decided. These motions
shall have preference in the order in which they are mentioned and
the first two shall be decided without debate.
2. Mayor. The Mayor, or such other member of the Township
Committee as may be presiding, may move, second and debate,
subject only to such limitations of debate as are by these rules
imposed upon all members, and shall not be deprived of any of the
rights and privileges of a committeeman by reason of his being the
Presiding Officer.
3. Obtaining the Floor. Improper references shall be avoided. Every
member desiring to speak for any purpose whatsoever shall
address the Presiding Officer and upon recognition shall confine
himself to the question under debate, in an orderly manner and
avoiding indecorous language.
4. Interruption. Once recognized a member shall not be interrupted
when speaking unless it is to call him to order or as herein
otherwise provided. If a member is called to order while speaking,
he shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined by
the Presiding Officer; and if in order he shall be permitted to
proceed. Any member may appeal to the Township Committee from
§ 2-2.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-2.10
AO:11
the decision of the Presiding Officer upon a question of order
when, without debate, the Presiding Officer shall submit to the
Township Committee the question, "Shall the decision of the chair
be sustained?" and the Township Committee shall decide by a
majority vote.
5. Privilege of Closing Debate. The member of the Township
Committee moving the adoption of an ordinance or resolution shall
have the privilege of closing the debate.
l. Addressing the Township Committee. Any person may petition the
Presiding Officer for leave to address the Township Committee, which
permission shall be granted only after a showing to the satisfaction of
the Presiding Officer that the subject matter of the address deserves
the time and attention of the Township Committee.
Each person addressing the Township Committee shall give his name
and address in an audible tone of voice. All remarks shall be addressed
to the Township Committee as a body and not to any member thereof.
No persons other than members of the Township Committee and the
person having the floor shall be permitted to enter any discussion,
either directly or through a member of the Township Committee,
without the permission of the Presiding Officer. No questions shall be
asked of any member of the Township Committee except through the
Presiding Officer.
m. Decorum.
1. By Members of Township Committee. While the Township
Committee is in session, the members shall preserve order and
decorum, and a member shall either by conversation nor otherwise,
except as herein provided, delay or interrupt the proceedings, the
peace of the Township Committee, disturb any member while
speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the Township Committee
or its Presiding Officer.
2. By Other Persons. Any person making impertinent or slanderous
remarks or who shall become boisterous while addressing the
Township Committee shall forthwith be barred from further
audience before the Township Committee by the Presiding Officer
unless permission to continue or again address the Township
Committee is granted by the majority vote thereof.
3. Enforcement. The Chief of Police or such member of the Police
Department as he may designate shall be the sergeant-at-arms at
Township Committee meetings and shall carry out all orders and
instructions given by the Presiding Officer for the purpose of
maintaining order and decorum at such meetings.
n. Ordinances, Resolutions, Motions and Contract Documents.
§ 2-2.10 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-2.10
AO:12
§ 2-3. (RESERVED)
1. Introduction. Ordinances may be introduced and adopted by title,
except bonding or local improvement ordinances, which shall be
read in full by the Township Clerk or his designee before
consideration by the Township Committee on second and final
reading. After introduction on first reading every ordinance shall
be published in full together with a notice as required by law.
Publication shall be at least one week prior to the time fixed for
further consideration for second and final passage. At the time and
place specified for public hearing, second reading and final
passage, as specified in such notice, all persons interested shall be
given an opportunity to be heard thereon.
2. Prior Approval. Before submission to the Township Committee, all
ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall be reduced
to writing and shall be approved as to form and legality by the
Township Attorney.
3. Effective Date. All ordinances shall take effect immediately upon
final passage and publication as required by law, or except as may
otherwise be provided by law.
4. Recordation by Township Clerk. Action taken on all ordinances and
contract documents shall be recorded in detail by the Township
Clerk, and the full text of all motions and resolutions shall be set
out in the minutes. Any report made in connection with any of the
foregoing shall be filed with the Township Clerk and reference
thereto entered in the minutes.
o. Adjournment. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be
decided without debate.
p. Roberts Rules. In all cases not otherwise provided by this section,
Roberts Rules of Procedure shall apply.
§ 2-2.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-3
AO:13

ARTICLE II
Statutory Offices
§ 2-4. TOWNSHIP CLERK.
§ 2-4.1. Appointment; Term. [New]
There shall be a Township Clerk appointed by the Mayor and Township
Committee. The term of office of the Clerk shall be three years which shall
run from January 1 in the year in which the Clerk was appointed.
§ 2-4.2. Qualifications. [New]
No person shall be appointed as Township Clerk unless he shall have a
registered Municipal Clerk Certificate issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133
et seq.
§ 2-4.3. Compensation. [New]
The Clerk's salary shall be established in the Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-4.4. Powers and Duties. [1971 Code §§ 2-3.1—2-3.8; New]
The powers and duties of the Township Clerk shall be as follows:
a. Clerk of the Township Committee. The Township Clerk shall serve as
Clerk of the Township Committee. He shall attend all meetings of the
Committee when required by the Committee and shall keep the minutes
of the meetings of the Committee. The minutes of each meeting of the
Committee shall be signed by the officer presiding at the meeting and
by the Clerk.
b. Recorder of Ordinances and Resolutions.
1. The Clerk shall retain the original copies of all ordinances and
resolutions and shall record all ordinances of a permanent
character in books to be provided for that purpose. After each
ordinance he shall also record and certify proof of publication
thereof as required by law. Each ordinance so recorded shall be
signed by the Mayor and the Clerk, who shall attest that it was duly
adopted upon a date stated, and when so signed the recorded copy
shall be deemed to be a public record of the ordinance. Any
omission by the Clerk or the Mayor to record, sign or certify as
herein required shall not impair or affect the validity of any
ordinance which has been duly adopted.
2. Three times yearly during April, August and December, the Clerk,
with the advice and assistance of the Township Attorney, shall bind,
compile or codify all the ordinances, or true copies thereof, which
then remain in force and effect. He shall properly index the record
books, compilation or codification of ordinances.
§ 2-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-4.4
AO:15
c. Custodian of Records. The Clerk shall have custody of and shall safely
keep all records, books and documents of the Township committed to
the Office of the Township Clerk by the Municipal Manager or the
Township Committee.
d. Corporate Seal. The Clerk shall cause the corporate seal of the
Township to be affixed to instruments and writings when authorized by
ordinance or resolution of the Committee or when necessary to
exemplify any document on record in his office, or to certify any act or
paper which from the records in his office shall appear to have been a
public act of the Township or a public document. He shall not affix the
seal or cause or permit it to be affixed to any other instrument, writing
or other paper unless required by law or ordinance.
e. Insurance; Surety Bonds; Contracts. The Clerk, subject to the
supervision of the Township Committee, shall:
1. Be the depository and custodian of all official surety bonds
furnished by or on account of any officer or employee, except his
own bond which shall be placed in the custody of the Treasurer; of
all insurance policies upon or with respect to risks insured for the
benefit of the Township or to protect it against any claim, demand
or liability whatsoever; and all formal contracts for work, labor,
services, supplies, equipment and materials to which the Township
may be a party.
2. Be the depository for and have custody of all performance bonds
running to the Township as obligee, or any other form of security
given by any contractor, subdivision developer or other persons on
account of work done or to be done in or for the Township.
3. Have custody of all leases of property owned by the Township.
4. Report to the Township Committee annually, at such time as the
Committee may require, on the coverage, expiration date and
premium of each surety bond and contract of insurance; the nature
and terms of outstanding leases, the rent reserved by each and
their respective expiration dates.
f. Administrative Rules and Regulations; Filing and Publication. No rule
or general regulation made by any Department, officer, agency or
authority of the Township, except such as relates to the organization or
internal management of the municipal government or a part thereof,
shall take effect until it is filed with the Township Clerk. The Clerk shall
maintain a current compilation of all such rules and regulations which
shall be available for public inspection in his office during business
hours.
g. Maintain Personnel Files. The Township Clerk shall initiate a personnel
file for all new employees of the Township, and all records of such
employee concerning qualifications, permanent status, work history,
§ 2-4.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-4.4
AO:16
§ 2-4.5. through § 2-4.10. (Reserved)
§ 2-4.11. Deputy Township Clerk. [1971 Code § 2-3.9]
§ 2-5. TOWNSHIP ATTORNEY.
§ 2-5.1. Position Established; Organization. [Ord. No. 97-2
§ 2-10.1a]
The Township Attorney shall be an attorney at law of New Jersey. The
Township Attorney shall be the legal advisor to the Township and attorney
and Civil Service records. The Clerk shall make such files available for
inspection by the employee on a reasonable basis.
h. Other Laws and Ordinances. In addition to such other functions, powers
and duties as may be prescribed by ordinance and subject to the
supervision and direction of the Township Committee, the Clerk shall:
1. Serve as the Chief Administrative Officer in all elections held in the
Township, subject to the requirements of Title 19 of the New Jersey
Statutes Annotated;
2. Serve as Chief Registrar of Voters in the Township, subject to the
requirements of Title 19 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated;
3. Administer the provisions of Township ordinances with reference to
the licensing of occupations and activities for which licenses are
required by law or ordinance to be obtained from the Clerk;
4. Serve as coordinator and records manager responsible for
implementing local archives and records retention programs as
mandated pursuant to Title 47 of the New Jersey Statutes
Annotated;
5. Have such other, different and additional functions, powers and
duties as may be prescribed by law or ordinance or delegated to
him by the Township Committee.
a. The position of Deputy Township Clerk is hereby created.
b. The Deputy Township Clerk shall perform all those functions performed
by the Township Clerk in the latter's absence or inability to perform his
necessary functions.
c. At those times that the Township Clerk is present and able to perform
his functions, the Deputy Township Clerk shall perform the functions
that he is directed to perform by the Township Clerk or Municipal
Manager for the purpose of accomplishing the requirements of the
Office of the Township Clerk.
d. The Deputy Township Clerk shall be compensated as set forth in the
annual salary ordinances of the Township.
§ 2-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-5.1
AO:17
of record in all proceedings wherein the Township, or any of its officers and
employees, by reason of any suits growing out of their official position, shall
be a party.
§ 2-5.2. Appointment. [Ord. No. 97-2 § 2-10.1b]
The Township Attorney shall be appointed by a majority vote of the
Township Committee. He shall be a member in good standing of the Bar of
the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-5.3. Vacancy. [Ord. No. 97-2 § 2-10.1c]
In the event of a vacancy of the position of the Township Attorney, the
Township shall by resolution appoint a qualified person to fill such vacancy
for the unexpired portion of the term thereof.
§ 2-5.4. Term. [Ord. No. 97-2 § 2-10.1d]
The Township Attorney shall hold office for a term of one year from January
1 of the year of his/her appointment.
§ 2-5.5. Removal of the Township Attorney. [Ord. No. 97-2 § 2-10.1e]
The Township Committee shall appoint the Township Attorney for a period
of one year and may remove him by a majority vote of its members for
legally sufficient cause. At least 90 days before such removal shall become
effective, the Township Committee shall, by a majority vote of its members,
adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reasons for his removal. The
Township Attorney may reply in writing and may request a public hearing,
which shall be held prior to the expiration of the 90 days and at least 10
days after publication of notice of such hearing. After such public hearing,
if one be requested, and after full consideration, the Township Committee
by majority vote of its members may adopt a final resolution of removal.
By the preliminary resolution, the Township Committee may suspend the
Township Attorney from duty, but his regular salary shall continue to be paid
to him during such period of suspension. If removal is voted, the Township
Committee shall cause to be paid to him forthwith any unpaid balance of his
salary for the next two calendar months.
§ 2-5.6. Powers and Duties Generally. [Ord. No. 97-2 § 2-10.1f]
Except as may be otherwise provided by the Township Committee, the
Township Attorney shall:
a. Be charged with the performance of all legal services of the Township,
including those of legal advisor to the Township Committee, Municipal
Manager, and to all departments, officers and boards of the Township
except where prohibited by law or otherwise directed by the Township
Committee. However, his duties shall not include services to the Zoning
§ 2-5.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-5.6
AO:18
Board of Adjustment or the Planning Board. He shall prosecute and
defend all actions and proceedings by and against the Township.
b. Draft ordinances, resolutions and contracts and advise as to their form
and sufficiency prior to passage or approval.
c. Review and approve all contracts, deeds, documents and instruments
prior to passage.
d. Conduct appeals from orders, decisions or judgments affecting any
interest of the Township as directed by the Municipal Manager or the
Township Committee.
e. Maintain a record of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters which
relate to the Township's interest, and report thereon from time to time
as the Municipal Manager or Township Committee may require.
f. Call to the attention of the Township Committee and Municipal
Manager, matters of law affecting the Township. To this end he shall
report to the Township Committee and Municipal Manager promptly, all
suits brought against the Township.
g. Render all opinions in writing, insofar as practicable and maintain an
indexed record of all his opinions rendered and turn such records over
to his successor in office.
h. Attend all meetings of the Township Committee and also attend
meetings of other Township boards, commissions, departments or
agencies as directed by the Municipal Manager, Mayor or Township
Committee.
i. Conduct prosecutions for crimes and offenses, cognizable by the
Municipal Court of the Township, including violation of ordinances of
the Township as directed by the Manager or the Township Committee,
except when another attorney may be designated by the Township
Committee to do so.
j. Supervise and direct the work of any additional attorneys and technical
assistants as the Township Committee may authorize for special
matters of law.
k. Serve as attorney for the liquidation of tax liens, which shall include the
following duties:
1. Compilation of a list of the tax sales certificates held by the
Township with appropriate reference to availability of each for
foreclosure.
2. Preparation of an analysis of properties covered by tax sales
certificates to the end that they may be aggregated for the
purposes of foreclosure in groups covering various areas
throughout the Township.
§ 2-5.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-5.6
AO:19
3. Prosecuting tax foreclosure actions with diligence and expedition
at such times as they are authorized by the Township Committee.
4. Maintaining such detailed and accurate records of all services
performed and proceedings taken as may be required by the
Township Manager or Township Committee.
5. Where necessary or advisable, securing releases of rights of
reverter or other outstanding interests in and to properties to be
purchased by the Township.
6. Conducting negotiations with title companies on behalf of the
Township and securing estimates therefrom of the cost of title
searches covering properties to be foreclosed.
7. Securing certificates of regularity from such title company as may
be selected by the Township for each individual title foreclosed, to
insure the efficacy of procedures employed.
8. Maintaining records, documents, pleadings and all other papers
relative to the performance of his duties and any and all matters
performed by him upon request of the Township through the
Manager, the Tax Collector or the Township Committee.
9. Performing all other duties not specifically provided herein as may
be necessary or incidental to any of the enumerated duties,
together with such other duties as may devolve upon him by
contract or special retainer; and devoting all necessary time and
effort to the performance of the duties above set forth.
l. Perform all functions relating to land acquisition as may be referred to
him by the appropriate authority, including the establishment and
maintenance of a system whereby all land acquisition is registered with
him together with recorded information as to all searches, title
insurance policies, affidavits of title and other necessary proofs of title,
such as deeds and judgments.
m. Perform all other functions traditionally carried out by a Township
Attorney and perform such duties as may be required by the Township
Committee.
n. Be subject to the direction of the Municipal Manager and the Township
Committee and shall be directly responsible to the Municipal Manager
and Township Committee for the proper performance of his duties and
the proper execution of his powers.
o. Shall not have his duties amended to include functions not ordinarily
performed by an attorney at law.
p. Exercise best efforts when taking on outside representation to avoid
any conflicts of interest.
§ 2-5.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-5.7
AO:20
§ 2-5.7. Records. [Ord. No. 97-2 § 2-10.1g]
All papers, documents, memoranda, reports and other materials relating
to the Township Attorney position shall be and remain the property of
the Township. Upon the termination of his service with the Township,
the Township Attorney shall forthwith surrender to his successor all such
property together with a written consent to substitution of his successor in
all legal actions and proceedings then pending to which the Township is a
party.
§ 2-5.8. Power of Agreement. [Ord. No. 97-2 § 2-10.1h]
Subject to the approval of the Township Committee, the Township Attorney
shall have power to enter into any agreement, compromise or settlement of
litigation in which the Township is involved.
§ 2-6. TOWNSHIP PROSECUTOR.
§ 2-6.1. Appointment. [Ord. No. 97-2 § 2-10.2]
There shall be a Township Prosecutor appointed for a one year term by the
Township Committee. The Township Prosecutor shall be an attorney at law
of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-6.2. Duties. [Ord. No. 97-2 § 2-10.2]
It shall be the duty of the Township Prosecutor to conduct prosecutions for
crimes and offenses, and motor vehicle offenses cognizable by the Municipal
Court of the Township, including violations of ordinances of the Township
as directed by the Manager or the Township Committee. The Township
Prosecutor shall also act on behalf of the State, the complaining witness and
the Township in all zoning ordinance violations where for any reason the
Counsel to the Board of Adjustment does not appear; and special cases at
the express instance and written request of the Municipal Court Judge, the
Mayor, Township Committee or Municipal Manager.
§ 2-6.3. Assistant Township Prosecutor. [Ord. No. 97-2 § 2-10.2]
If so appointed by the Township Committee, an Assistant Township
Prosecutor shall be hired to assist the Township Prosecutor with his official
duties enumerated above. The Assistant Township Prosecutor shall be an
attorney at law of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-6.4. Township Conflict Prosecutor; Appointment; Fees. [Ord. No.
2002-22 § 1]
The Township hereby establishes a position of Conflict Prosecutor who shall
be an attorney of the State of New Jersey appointed by the Township when
the Township Prosecutor declares a conflict in representation. The fee to be
paid to the Conflict Prosecutor is $400 per diem for each prosecutor.
§ 2-5.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-7
AO:21
§ 2-7. PUBLIC DEFENDER.
§ 2-7.1. Established. [1971 Code § 2-31.1]
There shall be an Office of the Public Defender of the Township of
Lakewood.
§ 2-7.2. Appointment. [1971 Code § 2-31.2; Ord. No. 2012-3]
The Public Defender shall be appointed by resolution of the Township
Committee and shall serve for a term of one year from the date of
appointment and until his/her successor is appointed.
§ 2-7.3. Requirements. [1971 Code § 2-31.3]
The Public Defender shall be an Attorney at Law of the State of New Jersey
in good standing.
§ 2-7.4. Duties of the Office of the Public Defender. [1971 Code
§ 2-31.4]
§ 2-7.5. Application Fee. [1971 Code § 2-31.5; Ord. No. 98-19]
a. The Public Defender shall represent indigent defendants charged with
disorderly persons offenses or serious motor vehicle violations in the
Municipal Court of the Township of Lakewood.
b. The definition of indigent shall be the same as that utilized by the Office
of Public Defender of the State of New Jersey for those cases handled by
the Ocean County Office thereof, and the requirements therefor shall be
available for public inspection in the Office of the Court Administrator.
c. A serious motor vehicle violation is defined as one which constitutes a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-10, 12, 13, 18 and 40, N.J.S.A. 39:4-48, 49,
49.1, 50, 96, 129 and 130, N.J.S.A. 39:5C-1, and N.J.S.A. 39:6B-2.
d. The Public Defender shall appear in the Township of Lakewood
Municipal Court at such time and in such manner as designated by the
Judge of the Municipal Court of the Township of Lakewood.
e. The Judge of the Municipal Court may direct the Public Defender to
defend indigents in matters other than those designated herein upon
his findings that the nature of the offense, the defendant, or the penalty
would result in unusual harm or prejudice to the defendant if not
afforded by the Public Defender.
a. Any person applying for representation by the Municipal Public
Defender in the Municipal Court of the Township of Lakewood shall be
required to pay an application fee of $200 to the Municipal Court Clerk
at the time of the application. The amount paid shall be only an amount
necessary to pay the costs of the municipal public defender services.
§ 2-7 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-7.5
AO:22
§ 2-7.6. Township Conflict Public Defender; Appointment; Fees.
[Ord. No. 2002-22 § 2]
The Township hereby establishes a position of Conflict Public Defender who
shall be an attorney of the State of New Jersey appointed by the Township
when the Township Public Defender declares a conflict in representation.
The fee to be paid to the Conflict Public Defender is $400 per diem for each
public defender.
§ 2-7.7. Deputy Public Defender. [Ord. No. 2004-1 § 1]
§ 2-8. (RESERVED)
b. The Court may waive the required fee in whole or in part if the Court
determines upon a clear and convincing showing by the applicant that
the fee represents an unreasonable burden on the person seeking the
services of the Public Defender. The Municipal Court may permit the
applicant to pay the fee over a specified time not to exceed four months.
c. Any funds collected shall be deposited in a dedicated fund administered
by the Chief Financial Officer, and those funds shall be used exclusively
to meet the costs incurred in providing the services of the Public
Defender or if required, attendant expert and lay investigation and
services.
a. Position Established. There is hereby established the position of Deputy
Public Defender within the Office of the Public Defender. The Deputy
Public Defender shall be appointed by the Township Committee for a
term of one year.
b. Duties and Responsibilities. The Deputy Public Defender shall be under
the supervision of the Public Defender. In that connection, it shall be
the duty of the Deputy Public Defender to assist the Public Defender in
the performance of such duties of the Office of the Public Defender.
c. Compensation. The compensation for Deputy Public Defender shall be
established by the Township and shall be between $15,000 to $20,000
per annum.
§ 2-7.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-8
AO:23

ARTICLE III
Administrative Organization2
§ 2-9. CREATION OF DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND
COMMISSIONS.
§ 2-9.1. Listing of Departments, Boards and Commissions. [1971
Code § 2-4.1; Ord. No. 2003-37 § 1]
There shall be the following departments, officers, boards and commissions
in the Township of Lakewood:
a. Departments.
1. Department of Administration.
2. Department of Finance.
3. Department of Public Works.
4. Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning.
5. Department of Lakewood Community Center.
6. Department of Police.
7. Fire Department.
8. Department of Industrial Development.
9. Department of Senior and Social Services.
b. Municipal Court.
c. Boards and Commissions.3
1. Zoning Board of Adjustment.
2. Planning Board.
3. Board of Health.
4. Industrial Commission.
5. Shade Tree Commission.
6. Housing Authority.
7. Lakewood Redevelopment Agency.
8. Office of Emergency Management.
2. Editor's Note: See also Article XIX, Boards, Committees and Commissions, of this chapter.
3. This fee is required for all submissions requiring Board action and must be submitted as a
separate check.
§ 2-9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-9.1
AO:25
§ 2-9.2. Powers and Duties of Department Heads. [1971 Code
§ 2-4.1]
The head of a department, subject to the code and the approval or direction
of the Township Committee, shall:
9. Municipal Utilities Authority.
10. Environmental Commission.
11. Rent Control Board.
12. Americans with Disabilities Compliance Committee and Disabilities
Commission.
13. Lakewood Township Airport Utility.
14. Township of Lakewood Transportation Board.
15. Heritage Commission.
16. Commission on Civil Rights.
a. Prescribe the internal organization of the work of the department.
b. Direct and supervise subordinate officers and employees of the
department and make, alter and enforce individual work assignments.
c. Approve or disapprove payrolls, bills and claims chargeable to
departmental appropriations.
d. Maintain such records of work performance and unit costs thereof as
may be approved or required by the Township Committee.
e. Provide such information and reports on the work of the department as
may be required by the Township Committee.
f. Exercise such other or different powers of administrative supervision
and direction as the Township Committee may delegate.
§ 2-9.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-9.2
AO:26
ARTICLE IV
Department of Administration
§ 2-10. DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION.
§ 2-10.1. Established. [1971 Code § 2-5.1]
There shall be a Department of Administration, the head of which shall be
the Municipal Manager.
§ 2-10.2. Municipal Manager. [1971 Code §§ 2-5.2-2-5.8; Ord. No.
2010-15 § 1]
a. Appointment of Municipal Manager. The Municipal Manager shall be
appointed by a majority vote of the Township Committee for an
indefinite term, such term to be at the pleasure of the Committee. The
Manager shall be chosen by the Committee solely on the basis of
executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to
actual training in governmental affairs, educational experience and
training as evidenced by the completion of a college degree and
preferably a master's degree in public administration, business
administration, or municipal management. At the time of appointment,
the Manager need not be a resident of the Township or State, but
during his tenure of office, the Manager may reside outside the
Township only with the approval of the Township Committee.
b. Removal. The Township Committee may remove the Manager at any
time by a two-thirds vote of its members. The resolution of removal
shall become effective three months after its adoption by the Township
Committee unless the resolution provides that it shall have immediate
effect. If it is to have immediate effect, the Township Committee shall
cause to be paid to the Municipal Manager any unpaid balance of his
salary to the date of termination of employment and in addition his
salary for the next three calendar months following the adoption of the
resolution. This three-month provision shall not apply in the event the
Municipal Manager voluntarily terminates employment by resigning
the office or position. In such event the Manager shall be paid only to
the date of actual termination of duties. The Manager shall give threemonths
notice to terminate prior to voluntary resignation from office.
c. Powers and Duties. In addition to the powers and duties hereinafter set
forth, the Municipal Manager shall have the powers and duties
prescribed by the Laws of New Jersey, the ordinances of the Township
of Lakewood and such other additional powers and duties as may be
prescribed or directed by the Township Committee. Excepted are those
powers or duties required by Law to be exercised by the Township
Committee itself or by another Officer, Board or Body.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:63-7, the Municipal Manager shall be
responsible to the Township Committee for the proper administration
of all affairs to the Township. To that end the Manager shall:
§ 2-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-10.2
AO:27
1. Prepare the budget annually and submit it to the Township
Committee together with a message describing the important
features and be responsible for the administration of the budget
after adoption.
2. Whenever necessary to fill vacancies in administrative positions
that are required by law to be appointments of the Township
Committee, the Municipal Manager shall, acting within the
framework of civil service regulations if applicable, submit the
names of qualified individuals for approval by the Township
Committee. The Manager may recommend the removal or
suspension of any such appointee when it would be in the best
interest of the Township. All recommendations for appointment or
removal shall be based solely on the merit, qualifications or
disqualifications of the official or employee concerned without
regard to his political beliefs or affiliations.
3. To advise the Township Committee of the financial conditions and
future needs of the Township and make such recommendations as
deemed advisable.
4. Prepare and submit to the Township Committee at the end of the
fiscal year a complete report on the finances and conditions of the
Township for the preceding year, and the reports and
recommendations of his administration and each of the
Departments, such reports to include budget recommendations
and audit reports when received.
5. Recommend to the Township Committee adoption of such measures
as he may deem necessary or expedient for the health, safety or
welfare of the Township or for the improvement of administrative
services.
6. Consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units
under his jurisdiction, with the approval of the Township
Committee to give the greatest efficiency and lowest cost. If
designated by the Committee, the Manager may assume the duties
of the head of any Department.
7. Attend all meetings of the Township Committee unless excused
therefrom and be permitted to take part in the discussion of all
matters coming before the Township Committee. Attend all
Township Committee Conferences and other functions or Board
meetings when directed.
8. Supervise the purchase of all materials, supplies and equipment for
which funds are provided in the budget. The Municipal Manager
may issue such rules governing purchasing procedures with the
administrative organization as the Township Committee shall
approve.
§ 2-10.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-10.2
AO:28
9. See that all laws and ordinances are fully enforced and report lack
of enforcement or departmental ineffectiveness in enforcement to
the Committee.
10. Investigate the affairs of the Township or any Department or
division thereof. Investigate all complaints in relation to matters
concerning the administration of the government of the Township,
and as to service maintained by the public utilities in the Township,
and see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the
Township are faithfully observed.
11. Before separation from the Township at the conclusion of his
employment and simultaneous with his receipt of separation pay
from the Township, render a report on all activities of the Township
from the date of his last report to the date of separation.
12. Arrange monthly meetings between Department Heads and the
Township Committee, and arrange such additional meetings as he
may deem necessary.
13. Appoint and remove all Department Heads, subordinates and all
other municipal employees for which no other method of
appointment is otherwise provided by statute. The appointment
and removal of Department Heads shall be with the advice and
consent of the governing body. The Municipal Manager shall report
all such appointments or removals at the next Township Committee
meeting thereafter.
14. Perform such other duties as may be required by the Township
Committee not inconsistent with statutes or ordinances.
d. Township Committee Relations with Administration. Except for the
purpose of inquiry, the Township Committee and its members shall deal
with the administrative service solely through the Municipal Manager
and neither the Township Committee nor any member thereof shall give
orders to any Township administrative officials either publicly or
privately, except in emergency or in event the Manager is absent from
the Township and action is required.
e. Civil Service Status of Manager. The provisions herein contained are
not intended to nor shall they be construed as giving the Municipal
Manager Civil Service status nor shall be attain tenure of office as the
result of his employment.
f. Compensation. The compensation of the Municipal Manager shall be as
provided in and by the salary ordinance of the Township, as amended
from time to time, and shall be set at the pay scale adopted by
resolution of the Township Committee. It shall be permissible for the
Township Committee, upon the necessity of hiring a new Manager to
pay for moving expenses, and in addition, to pay the transportation and
living expenses of applicants for a reasonable time period for interview
so as to attract qualified applicants from areas outside the State of New
§ 2-10.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-10.2
AO:29
§ 2-10.3. Division of Purchasing; Powers and Duties. [Ord. No.
97-10 § 2-6A]
There shall be a Division of Purchasing in the Department of Administration.
The department head shall be the Purchasing Agent. The Division shall
be responsible for coordinating the purchases of the various Township
departments and consolidating these purchases for public bidding annually
or at various times through the year. Under the direction of the Municipal
Manager, the Division of Purchasing through its Purchasing Agent shall
prepare and enforce specifications for the purchase of materials and
supplies, advertise for bids and seek quotations or prices for the purchase of
materials and supplies; receive bids and quotations and make appropriate
recommendations to the Township Committee; inspect or supervise the
inspection of all materials and supplies, the rendition of contractual services
and determine their quality, quantity and conformity with specifications;
purchase, store and distribute all materials and supplies and contract for
all services required by any Township department, office or agency; arrange
and supervise the sale of personal property in the possession of the
Township pursuant to all and with the assistance of the Township Attorney;
supervise and administer all joint purchasing agreements between the
Township and other contracting units of the State of New Jersey; prepare
pre-bidder specifications, regulations and standard questionnaires for
bidding subject to the approval of the Township Committee; ascertain that
Department purchases do not exceed the line item appropriation for each
particular Department; establish a record of authorized purchases and
encumbrance systems so as to reconcile purchases with available
appropriations; assure compliance by all departments with the Local Public
Contracts Law and Regulations, including Affirmative Action Requirements
with the assistance of the Township Attorney.
Nothing contained herein shall require nor prevent the Division of
Purchasing from preparing specifications and contractual documentation or
supervising the execution and performance of contracts for public works or
improvements under the jurisdiction of the Township Engineer.
§ 2-10.4. Purchase Controls; Emergency Purchase Procedure. [Ord.
No. 97-10 § 2-6A.1; Ord. No. 2002]
Jersey as well as within the State if the Committee determines the need
therefor.
g. Execution of Documents. All official documents or forms required to be
signed by the Municipal Manager shall be signed under the name of the
individual as Municipal Manager of the Township of Lakewood.
a. General Purchase Procedures. All requests for purchases must be
submitted through the Division of Purchasing before the goods or
services are ordered or received. No purchase shall be made nor
obligation incurred unless the Chief Financial Officer certifies that a
sufficient unencumbered balance or appropriation is available to pay
§ 2-10.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-10.4
AO:30
§ 2-10.5. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2002-28]
§ 2-10.6. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2000-28]
therefor. Any funds committed in excess of that budgeted is in violation
of state law even if the funds have not yet been spent. Only after a
request has been converted to a Purchase Order and a Purchase Order
Number assigned may the goods or services be ordered. Goods or
services ordered or received before a Purchase Order Number has been
assigned will be determined to be a confirming order and will require a
detailed memorandum of explanation before it will be approved.
b. Emergency Purchases.
1. Any contract may be negotiated or awarded for a contracting unit
without public advertising when an emergency affecting the public
health, safety, or welfare requires the immediate delivery of goods
or performance of services pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:11-6.
2. The Department Head or the Department Head's designee, as soon
as reasonably possible, must notify the Purchasing Agent or the
Supervisor of the Purchasing Agent of the need for a performance
of contract, the nature of the emergency, the time of the
occurrence, and need for invoking the emergency procedures
pursuant to statute.
3. If the Purchasing Agent or the Supervisor of the Purchasing Agent
is satisfied that an emergency exists, that person shall be
authorized to award a contract or contracts for such purposes as
may be necessary to respond to the emergent needs. Such
notification shall be reduced to writing and filed with the
Purchasing Agent as soon as practicable and should be done no
later than 48 hours after the emergency occurrence.
4. Upon the furnishing of the bill of services, the contractor furnishing
such goods or services shall be entitled to be paid therefor.
5. If the Purchasing Agent or the Supervisor of the Purchasing Agent
is unavailable, the chain of command for the requirements of this
subsection shall be:
(a) Municipal Manager;
(b) Director of Finance;
(c) Director of Public Works;
(d) Township Attorney.
§ 2-10.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-10.7
AO:31
§ 2-10.7. General Powers and Duties of Purchasing Agent. [Ord. No.
97-10 § 2-6A.4]
In addition to the purchasing authority conferred by this chapter, the
Purchasing Agent shall:
§ 2-10.8. through 2-10.11. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2000-28]
§ 2-10.12. Purchasing Agent. [Ord. No. 97-10 § 2-6A.9]
a. Act to procure for the Township the highest quality in supplies and
contractual services at the least expense to the Township.
b. Encourage competitive bidding and endeavor to obtain full and open
competition insofar as possible on all purchases and sales.
c. Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing,
prices, market conditions and new products and secure for the
Township the benefits of research done in the field of purchasing by
other governmental jurisdictions, national technical societies and trade
businesses and organizations.
d. Prescribe and maintain such forms as the Purchasing Agent shall find
reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter.
e. Exploit the possibilities of buying in bulk, so as to take advantage of
discounts.
f. Act so as to procure for the Township all Federal tax exemptions to
which it is entitled.
g. Prepare, adopt and maintain a vendor's catalogue file according to
materials and shall contain descriptions of vendor's commodities.
h. Have the authority to declare vendors, who default on their quotations,
irresponsible bidders and to disqualify them from receiving any
business from the Township for a stated period of time as recommended
by the Purchasing Agent and approved by the Township Committee.
i. Prepare and adopt a standard purchasing nomenclature for using
agencies and supplies.
a. Definition. Under the direction of the Municipal Manager, assists the
various Departments and employees of the Township in the preparation
of specifications or solicitation for bids for all purchases; reviews and
signs all vouchers prior to presentation to the Municipal Manager and
Township Committee for approval; prepares and revises purchasing
forms of the Township and recommends changes in purchasing
procedures; does related work as required and as directed by the
Municipal Manager and is the Affirmative Action Officer of the
Township.
§ 2-10.7 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-10.12
AO:32
§ 2-11. DEPUTY MUNICIPAL MANAGER. [Ord. No. 2010-83]
b. Examples of Work. In conjunction with the Treasurer's Office, keeps a
running tally of each Department's purchases and prospective
purchases so as to establish an encumbrance system in order to
reconcile purchases with available appropriations to avoid over
expenditures exceeding Department and Township budgets. Assists
various Departments in preparation of specifications for public bidding
purchases and for solicitation of quotes for purchases not involving
public bidding; coordinates and consolidates purchases of the various
departments accumulating same where possible to foster public
bidding in compliance with Local Public Contract Law and ascertains
that all the bidding specifications, advertisements and contracts
contain the appropriate affirmative action language; assists the
Municipal Manager in the preparation of the budget and performs other
miscellaneous duties as assigned by the Municipal Manager including
those relating to the power set forth in subsection 2-10.3 through
2-10.11 above.
c. Requirements. Requirements for the position will be those set forth by
the New Jersey Department of Personnel.
d. Other Duties.
1. Retain a thorough knowledge of all laws, regulations and
ordinances pertaining to purchasing by the Township including
affirmative action requirements.
2. Reviews and recommends revision to all Township forms for
purchasing by Departments or employees in order to obtain better
control over expenditures and to encourage public bidding when
possible in compliance with the Local Public Contracts Law and
Regulations.
3. Reviews all vouchers submitted to the Township and if approved,
signs same prior to presentation to the Municipal Manager and
Township Committee which approval shall contain a certification
that all goods and services have been received and that the Local
Public Contracts Law and Regulations promulgated thereunder
have been complied with in connection with said purchase.
Rejected vouchers will be returned to the various Departments
with reasons therefor.
4. Shall be responsible for maintaining an inventory of stationery and
office supplies in the Purchasing Department for all Township
Departments and to establish controls thereof to prevent loss due
to theft or misuse of these supplies.
5. Shall carry out such other duties as are assigned by the Municipal
Manager.
§ 2-10.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-11
AO:33
a. The position of Deputy Municipal Manager ("Deputy Manager") is
hereby created.
b. The Deputy Manager may be appointed by a majority vote of the
Township Committee for a term to be at the pleasure of the Committee.
At the time of appointment, the Deputy Manager need not be a resident
of the Township or State, but during his tenure of office, the Manager
may reside outside the Township only with the approval of the Township
Committee.
c. The Township Committee may remove the Deputy Manager at any time
by a 2/3 vote of its members.
d. The Deputy Manager shall have all the powers and duties of the
Manager and shall perform all those functions and duties performed by
the Manager at the direction of the Manager or in the latter's absence
or inability to perform his necessary functions.
e. The provisions herein contained are not intended to nor shall they be
construed as giving the Deputy Manager Civil Service status nor shall
be attain tenure of office as the result of his employment.
f. The compensation of the Deputy Manager shall be as provided in and by
the salary ordinance of the Township, as amended from time to time,
and shall be set at the pay scale adopted by resolution of the Township
Committee.
§ 2-11 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-11
AO:34
ARTICLE V
Department of Finance
§ 2-12. DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE ESTABLISHED.
§ 2-12.1. Director of the Department. [1971 Code § 2-6.1; Ord. No.
2015-28]
There shall be a Department of Finance of the Township which shall have
jurisdiction over all business pertaining to finance. The Chief Financial
Officer shall be the Director of the Department of Finance.
§ 2-12.2. Claims Approval and Designation of Approval Officer
Duties.4 [Ord. No. 2019-14]
a. The Chief Financial Officer of the Township of Lakewood is hereby
designated as the approval officer with the title of "Certifying and
Approval Officer."
b. The Certifying and Approval Officer shall ascertain the existence of
proper and sufficient appropriations for the payments to be made and
determining that there is legal authority for the payments, evidenced by
action of a purchasing department or agent or officer in respect to the
goods or services ordered and incurring of expense therefore.
c. Any and all purchases to be made by the Township of Lakewood, or any
department thereof, which do not require sealed bids pursuant to
statute shall be in accordance with the method designated herein, as
follows:
1. Approvals Over $20.000.00 dollars.
(a) The Certifying and Approval Officer reviews the purchase
order to ascertain compliance with the purchasing procedures
and policies and provisions of the Local Public Contract Law.
All purchase orders which are approved by the Certifying and
Approval Officer are then delivered to the Mayor and or his
designee for approval and signature.
(b) Following receipt and inspection of goods received or assuring
the completion of services in accordance with the contract, the
requestor certifies the receipt of goods or services to the
Certifying and Approval Officer.
(c) The Certifying and Approval Officer reviews the invoice and
voucher for correctness and process the claim for approval or
disapproval as appropriate.
2. Approvals Under $20,000.00 dollars.
4. Editor's Note: Former subsection 2-12.2, Division of the Treasury was deleted in its
entirety by Ordinance No. 2015-28.
§ 2-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-12.2
AO:35
§ 2-12.3. Division of Tax Collection. [1971 Code § 2-6.3]
Within the Department of Finance there shall be a Division of Tax Collection,
the head of which shall be the Township Tax Collector.5
§ 2-12.4. Division of Tax Assessments. [1971 Code § 2-6.4]
Within the Department of Finance, there shall be a Division of Tax
Assessments.
§ 2-12.5. Tax Assessor. [1971 Code § 2-6.4A: Ord. No. 2017-34]
(a) a copy of the purchase order shall be provided to the Mayor
and or his/her designee as soon as possible.
d. After this process is completed all approved items will appear on the
following bill list.
a. Appointment. There shall be a Tax Collector of the Township elected for
a term of four years, subject to statutory provisions providing tenure.
b. Duties. The Tax Collector shall possess all of the powers and duties
established by law. The Collector shall enter in suitable books to be kept
for that purpose the sums received by him each day for taxes, with the
names of the persons on whose account the taxes shall have been paid;
shall keep a record and account of the Finances of the Township; and
shall, within 60 days after the end of the fiscal year, or when otherwise
required by the Township Committee, make and furnish a report
thereof, with a detailed and true statement of all moneys received by
him and disbursed therefrom and for what purposes, from the
commencement of his official year to date of his report, or for such
period as the Township Committee may require, and a list of delinquent
taxpayers for the previous year. The Tax Collector shall file the report,
with two copies of the statement and list of delinquents, with the
Township Clerk within the time hereinbefore specified or when
otherwise required by the Township Committee.
a. Creation. The position of Tax Assessor is hereby established as a full
time position, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146 et seq.
b. Appointment. The Assessor shall be appointed by a majority vote of the
Township Committee, in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:9-148.
c. Vacancy. In the event of a vacancy of the Office of the Township
Assessor, the Township shall, by resolution, appoint a qualified person
to fill such vacancy for the unexpired portion of the term thereof.
5. Editor's Note: See also subsection 2-76.5 for fees, penalties and procedures pertaining to
the Tax Collector's office.
§ 2-12.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-12.5
AO:36
§ 2-12.6. Assessment Clerk. [1971 Code § 2-6.5]
Within the Division of Tax Assessments, there shall be the position of
Assessment Clerk. He shall perform such duties as are assigned to him by
the Township Committee and the municipal assessor.
§ 2-12.7. Tax Searcher. [1971 Code § 2-6.6]
The Tax Searcher of the Township of Lakewood shall be appointed by
the Township Committee. The Tax Searcher shall, when required, furnish
reports relating to property taxes in the Township. The compensation of
Tax Searcher shall be an annual salary as prescribed by ordinance of the
Committee.
§ 2-12.8. Deputy Tax Assessor. [1971 Code § 2-6.4A]
Within the Division of Tax Assessments, there shall be the position of Deputy
Tax Assessor, who shall perform any and all work and services related to
the assessment of property within the Township and the administration of
d. Absence of Assessor. To perform his duties during his temporary
absence or disability, the Township Committee shall designate a
qualified Assessor as a temporary replacement.
e. Term. Unless the Assessor has tenure rights vested pursuant to
applicable law, he shall hold his term of office for a term of four years
from the first day of July next following his appointment, in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:9-148.
f. Qualifications and Duties. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-148.1, a Tax
Assessor shall hold a Tax Assessor Certificate as provided for in N.J.S.A.
54:1-35.25 et seq., and shall have the duty of assessing property within
the Township for the purpose of general taxation. The Assessor shall:
1. Have, perform and discharge all the functions, powers and duties
prescribed by law for a Municipal Assessor.
2. Maintain adequate assessment records of each separate parcel of
real property assessed or exempted.
3. Maintain a current tax map of the Township as a public record and
cause to be recorded thereon all changes in ownership or character
of the real property assessed, employing for that purpose the
facilities of other departments as provided by the Code.
4. Perform such other related duties as are reasonable, incidental
and/or necessary to the performance of any duties specifically
enumerated herein, including notifying the members of the
Township Committee, the Manager and the Chief Financial Officer
of all real estate tax appeals no later than the first of June of each
year.
§ 2-12.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-12.8
AO:37
the Tax Assessment Office under the direction of the Tax Assessor and the
Municipal Manager.
The Deputy Tax Assessor shall meet the qualifications required by N.J.S.A.
40A:9-148.1 and N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.25 et seq. Additionally, the Deputy Tax
Assessor shall be fully familiar with reading tax maps and be experienced in
plotting deed descriptions. He shall have not less than one year of college
engineering and courses in mechanical drawings so as to be familiar with
and able to read architectural and civil engineering drawings.
The Deputy Tax Assessor shall be able to do necessary card computations
for standard assessment cards and be able to properly make front footage
calculations.
If the Deputy Tax Assessor does not hold a college degree in engineering,
then the deputy must have been an aide, draftsman or assistant to a
municipal engineer for not less than five years.
The Deputy Assessor may be directed to perform any duties customarily
performed in any of the above-named positions.
§ 2-12.8 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-12.8
AO:38
ARTICLE VI
(Reserved)6
§ 2-13. (RESERVED)
6. Editor's Note: The Department of Engineering was eliminated by Ordinance No. 98-49,
effective March 19, 1998.
§ 2-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-13
AO:39

ARTICLE VII
Department of Senior and Social Services
§ 2-14. DEPARTMENT OF SENIOR AND SOCIAL SERVICES.
§ 2-14.1. Department of Senior and Social Services Established.
[Ord. No. 99-14]
§ 2-14.2. Duties and Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 99-14]
§ 2-14.3. Director of the Department: Qualifications; Experience.
[Ord. No. 99-14]
The Director of the Department of Senior and Social Services shall have
a Bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university and should
have a minimum of four years professional experience with responsibility
for gathering social service and senior information and have knowledge of
development of new programs or the identification of the existing programs
to meet the needs of senior and social service groups. A Master's degree in
a related field may be substituted for one year of experience.
a. There shall be a Department of Senior and Social Services in the
Township, the head of which shall be the Director of Senior and Social
Services.
a. The Department shall be responsible for the planning, development,
organization, coordination and administration of programs and
activities for Township senior citizen and Township community social
service needs.
b. The Department shall provide information and assistance to citizens
who require aid in dealing with social or government networks.
c. The Department shall encourage and facilitate cooperation among the
organizations that provide human and community services within the
Township.
d. The Department shall investigate funding opportunities for services to
client groups and if appropriate, prepare and administer grants for
senior citizens and community social service needs.
e. The Department shall support the Senior Advisory Committee and other
organizations that provide services to seniors.
f. The Department shall maintain the form of municipal administered
welfare records.
g. The Department shall develop departmental goals and objectives in
budget.
§ 2-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-14.3
AO:41

ARTICLE VIII
Department of Public Works
§ 2-15. DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS ESTABLISHED.
§ 2-15.1. Director of Public Works. [1971 Code § 2-8.1]
There shall be a Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works shall
be appointed by the Township Committee.
§ 2-15.2. Duties of the Director of Public Works. [1971 Code § 2-8.2]
The Superintendent of Public Works shall:
a. Qualifications. The Director of Public Works shall be qualified by
education, training and experience to perform the duties of office as
hereinafter set forth. Prior to his appointment he shall have secured
and be the holder of all necessary licenses, certificates and permits
required by State law, and during his tenure of office he shall continue
to hold such permits, licenses and certificates.
b. Supervision. He shall be under the direct supervision of the Municipal
Manager.
a. Set up and maintain adequate inventory and control thereof of all
materials and supplies needed for the maintenance and repair of all
public works under his supervision.
b. Submit to the Township Committee through the Manager a monthly
report of all work performed and services furnished as well as
inspections made during the previous month.
c. Submit to the Manager his recommendations for budget appropriations
for the ensuing year.
d. Recommend for approval the expenditure of all funds by voucher
chargeable against the public works budget.
e. Inspect or be responsible for the inspection of all storm sewer lines in
the Township either individually or in conjunction with other designated
officials.
f. Receive all complaints from residents and taxpayers of the Township
relating to the operations under his jurisdiction, and investigate and
take the appropriate action, and report the results to the Manager.
g. Attend Township Committee meetings when required.
h. Supervise the operation, maintenance and repair of any Township
equipment used in the performance of the work assigned to him.
i. Set up and maintain all necessary books, records, field notes, maps,
surveys and similar records necessary to perform the duties of his office
§ 2-15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-15.2
AO:43
§ 2-15.3. Assistant Public Works Directors. [1971 Code § 2-8.3]
and turn over all records to any successor or the Township upon
termination of employment.
j. Recommend to the Manager the need for any repairs and replacements
to Township owned equipment, structures, buildings or grounds.
k. Supervise the work performance of any personnel assigned to his
Department or jurisdiction.
a. Assistant Public Works Superintendent of Roads.
1. Job Description. Assists the Public Works Director by performing
varied supervisory tasks and related work as assigned by the Public
Works Director. Supervises the Department in the absence of the
Director.
2. Examples of Work. Involves supervision of all public works road
department activities. Plans, organizes and directs street
maintenance and repair, refuse collection, snow and ice control,
street cleaning, maintenance garage, sanitary landfill, curb and
sidewalk replacement program. Assigns and prepares daily work
schedules.
3. Job Requirements.
(a) Proficiency in the English language sufficient to perform the
duties of the position.
(b) Two years supervisory experience in the construction,
maintenance and repair of streets, sanitation or other public
works facilities or other similar maintenance work.
(c) Two years of college with a course of study which is job related
or have five years experience as a supervisor in a similar or
related position.
(d) Extensive knowledge of the proper procedures used in
administration of a department and ability to prepare clear,
sound, accurate, and informative reports.
(e) Ability to assist in the organization and development of a
comprehensive work program; to take a leading role in
working out effective operating procedures; to work
harmoniously with others; to give suitable assignments and
instructions to individuals and groups; provide them with
needed advice and assistance when difficult and unusual
problems arise, and check their work to see that proper
procedures are followed; that reasonable standards of
workmanship and output are maintained and that desired
objectives are carried out; to assist in making the best use of
§ 2-15.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-15.3
AO:44
§ 2-15.4. Duties of Department of Public Works. [1971 Code § 2-8.4;
Ord. No. 2013-3]
The Department of Public Works, through the Director of Public Works,
shall take charge and be responsible for the construction, operation and
available funds, personnel, and equipment; and to keep needed
records and files.
b. Assistant Public Works Director of Parks.
1. Definition. Assists the Public Works Director by performing varied
supervisory tasks and related work as assigned by the Public Works
Director; does related work as required. Supervises the
Department in the absence of the Director.
2. Examples of Work. Position involves supervision of all Public Works
Parks Department activities. Plans, arranges and directs a program
of park maintenance, park beautification, landscaping, tree
planting and maintenance. Maintains all Township owned property,
ball parks, tennis courts, beach area, band shell and lake area.
Prepares daily work schedules and assigns personnel to various
duties.
3. Requirements.
(a) Proficiency in the English language sufficient to perform the
duties of the position.
(b) Two years college in horticulture or a related field or have five
years experience as a supervisor in a similar or related field.
(c) Two years of supervisory experience in care and maintenance
of parks, tree planting, flower beds, lawn care and other public
works department work.
(d) Extensive knowledge of the proper procedures used in
administration and preparation of clear, sound, accurate and
informative reports.
(e) Ability to assist in the organization and development of a
comprehensive work program; to take a leading role in
working out effective operating procedures; to work
harmoniously with others; to give suitable assignments and
instructions to individuals and groups; to provide them with
needed advice and assistance when difficult and unusual
problems arise, and to check their work to see that proper
procedures are followed; that reasonable standards of
workmanship and output are maintained and that desired
objectives are achieved; to assist in making the best use of
available funds, personnel, and equipment; and to keep needed
records and files.
§ 2-15.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-15.4
AO:45
maintenance of the Lakewood Community Center, all parks and recreational
facilities, storm sewers, cutting of brush, mowing of grass, removal of
snow, maintenance of pipes, valves and pumps in pump station, cleaning of
ditches and the care of other public works in the Township subject to the
orders and directions of the Township committee.
§ 2-15.5. Rules and Regulations. [1971 Code § 2-8.5]
The Township Committee shall by resolution make the rules and regulations
necessary for the proper regulation of the Department of Public Works and
when they are adopted by the Township Committee, they shall be known as
the Rules and Regulations for the Governing of the Department of Public
Works and shall be binding on each member of the Department.
§ 2-15.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-15.5
AO:46
ARTICLE IX
Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning
§ 2-16. DEPARTMENT OF CODE ENFORCEMENT AND ZONING.7
§ 2-16.1. Department Established. [Ord. No. 2003-37 § 2]
There shall be a Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning established
within the Township of Lakewood.
§ 2-16.2. Department Head. [Ord. No. 2003-37 § 2]
a. Appointment. The head of the Department of Code Enforcement and
Zoning shall be appointed by a majority vote of the Township
Committee, subject to Department of Personnel procedures.
b. Qualifications. The head of the Department of Code Enforcement and
Zoning shall have seven years supervisory experience in enforcement of
various municipal codes and ordinances including the Uniform
Construction Code. The Department Head shall have experience in
supervision, direction, planning and organizing all inspection and code
enforcement activities, such as plumbing, electrical, building, zoning,
public health, pollution control and code enforcement. The Department
Head shall also have experience as a department head or supervisor of
building inspections, housing inspections, zoning official, fire
inspections, and plumbing inspections. Certain experience may be
accepted by the Township in lieu of the foregoing qualifications which
would include 10 years experience as a builder or general construction
official to include residential or commercial development or 10 years of
experience as a superintendent of construction for a construction
company engaged primarily in general residential or commercial
development or a combination of experience as a builder or supervisor
which totals 10 years.
c. Powers of the Department Head.
1. The Department Head of Code Enforcement and Zoning shall have
the responsibility to act as a supervisor of local code enforcement,
zoning, property maintenance, and Uniform Construction Code
duties.
2. The Department Head must coordinate and direct the activities of
the various inspection divisions, inspection offices, and zoning
officers of the Township to include property maintenance and
Uniform Construction Code activities and promote the coordinated
efforts of the Inspection Departments, Zoning Department, and
require reports of activities of those divisions/offices to ensure the
thorough and efficient performance of those departments.
7. Editor's Note: Former Section 2-16, Department of Inspections, previously codified herein
and containing portions of 1971 Code § 2-9 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
2003-37.
§ 2-16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-16.2
AO:47
§ 2-16.3. Division of Construction Code Enforcement. [Ord. No.
2003-37 § 2]
3. The Department Head shall prepare the budget for the Department
of Code Enforcement and Zoning.
4. The Department Head shall be directly responsible to the
Municipal Manager and Township Committee for the proper
performance of his duties and those duties of those whom the
Department Head shall supervise.
5. In addition to the above, the Department Head shall assume such
other duties as may be designated by the Township Committee or
Municipal Manager.
d. Duties of the Department Head.
1. The Department Head shall coordinate the Township Inspection,
Zoning, Health Department, Construction official, subcode officials,
and all other inspection officials to include assignment of
workloads in the Township for the purpose of the thorough and
efficient working of the Department. The Department Head shall
receive all reports, necessary from any or all employees, to ensure
efficient and thorough work logs.
2. The Department Head shall report to the Municipal Manager and
the Township Committee on a regular basis as required.
3. The Department Head shall submit to the Municipal Manager a
budget at the appropriate time and make budget recommendations
for the efficient workings of the Department.
4. The Department Head shall assume the supervisory responsibility
for the Construction Official, Housing Inspector, Fire Inspector,
Code Enforcement or Zoning Officials when necessary.
5. The Department Head shall direct, plan, organize and supervise all
inspection activities for the Township including but not limited to
plumbing, electrical, building, zoning, public health, code
enforcement and property maintenance.
6. The Department Head shall ensure that all laws and ordinances
pertaining to the aforesaid are properly and fully enforced.
7. The Department Head must have the ability to conduct
investigations, inspections and prepare reports regarding the same
as well as supervise those matters which must proceed to court or
enforcement jurisdictions.
8. In addition to the above, the Department Head shall assume such
other duties as may be designated by the Township Committee or
Municipal Manager.
§ 2-16.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-16.3
AO:48
§ 2-16.4. Division of Local Code Enforcement and Zoning. [Ord. No.
2003-37 § 2]
a. Established. There is hereby established within the Department of Code
Enforcement and Zoning the Division of Construction Code
Enforcement.
b. Construction Official. The head of the Division of Construction Code
Enforcement shall be the Township Construction Official.
1. Qualifications. The Township Construction Official must meet the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126.
2. Responsibilities. The head of the Division of Construction Code
Enforcement shall have the responsibilities as outlined by the
Uniform Construction Code and shall be in charge of all inspections
and licensing pursuant to the aforesaid code. The Construction
Official shall be responsible for field inspections and special
investigations to ensure compliance with the various codes and
subcodes. The division head shall attend meetings of municipal
agencies as requested and shall appear and testify in municipal
court or other appropriate boards and agencies to ensure
compliance with all Uniform Construction Code regulations.
c. The Division of Construction Code Enforcement shall be responsible for
responding to calls for Uniform Construction Code inspections and the
issuance of Certificates of Occupancies and Approvals.
d. The Construction Code Enforcement Division Head shall perform the
duties and responsibilities pursuant to New Jersey statutes to ensure
the thorough and efficient operation of the division.
a. Established. There is hereby established within the Department of Code
Enforcement and Zoning the Division of Local Code Enforcement and
Zoning.
b. Director.
1. Qualifications. The Director of the Division of Local Code
Enforcement and Zoning shall have three years experience
supervising and working with property maintenance code
enforcement and zoning enforcement. The Director shall have
experience in supervising Board of Adjustment Administration,
inspections for commercial occupancy inspection, liquor license
inspections, Health Department and sanitary inspections, as well as
resale and other certificate of occupancy inspections pursuant to
Lakewood Township ordinances. The Director shall have three
years experience in the full time inspection and enforcement of
zoning and/or building construction/property maintenance. A
license in a building subcode is preferred.
§ 2-16.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-16.4
AO:49
§ 2-16.5. Code Enforcement Officer/Parking Enforcement Officer.
[Ord. No. 2012-57]
2. Responsibilities and Duties. The Director of the Division of Local
Code Enforcement and Zoning shall have the responsibility to
supervise field inspections of Property Maintenance Code
violations and zoning violations. The Director shall be responsible
for coordinating the activities of various field inspection and
supervising investigations of violations, including filing court
complaints and making court appearances in various jurisdictions.
The Director shall be responsible for examining the working plans
of proposed buildings for compliance with State, County and local
regulations to ensure compliance with the same.
a. Established. There is hereby created the dual office of Code
Enforcement Officer/Parking Enforcement Officer. Current and future
Code Enforcement Officers shall also be Parking Enforcement Officers.
b. Powers and Duties.
1. As Parking Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer/
Parking Enforcement Officer shall enforce State, County, or
municipal statutes and resolutions, ordinances or regulations
related to the parking of vehicles within the Township of Lakewood
and shall possess the power and authority to:
(a) Issue a parking ticket pursuant to State or local ordinances for
a parking offense, as those two terms are defined in the
Parking Offenses Adjudication Act P.L. 1985, c. 14 (N.J.S.A.
39:4-193.2 et seq.).
(b) Serve and execute all process for any parking offenses issuing
out the court having jurisdiction over the complaint.
(c) Cause any vehicle parked, stored, or abandoned in the
Township in violation of a statute, resolution, ordinance or
regulation to be towed away from the scene of the violation and
to collect from the vehicle's owner or the owner's agent, on
behalf of the Township, the costs of the towing and subsequent
storage of the vehicle before surrendering the vehicle to the
owner or agent.
2. As Code Enforcement Officer, the Code Enforcement Officer/
Parking Enforcement Officer shall possess the power and authority
to enforce all other ordinances of the Township of Lakewood. He or
she shall, in his or her discretion, issue warnings for ordinance
violations reported to him or her. He or she shall cause a complaint
to be sworn out in accordance with law for violations of Township
ordinances that occur in his or her presence or which he or she
personally observes.
§ 2-16.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-16.5
AO:50
§ 2-17. (RESERVED)
c. Uniform and Insignia. Prior to the commencement of duties, the Code
Enforcement Officer/Parking Enforcement Officer shall be furnished
with insignia that shall clearly identify the Officer's function. The
insignia shall include an appropriate badge together with a nametag
and identify the officer's status as a Code Enforcement Officer/Parking
Enforcement Officer.
d. Exclusion from Police Department and Retirement System; Use of
Firearms. No person appointed Code Enforcement Officer/Parking
Enforcement Officer shall concurrently hold the position of police
officer nor shall such person be a special law enforcement officer. He or
she shall not carry or use a firearm while on duty. He or she is not
eligible for membership in the Police and Fireman's Retirement System
established pursuant to P.L. 1944, c. 255.
§ 2-16.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-17
AO:51

ARTICLE X
Lakewood Community Center8
§ 2-18. (RESERVED)9
§ 2-19. (RESERVED)
8. Editor's Note: For fees for use of the Community Center, see subsection 2-76.7.
9. Editor's Note: Former Section 2-18, Department of the Lakewood Community Center,
previously codified herein was repealed in its entirety by Ord. No. 2013-3.
§ 2-18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-19
AO:53

ARTICLE XI
Police Department
§ 2-20. POLICE DEPARTMENT.10
The establishment, maintenance, regulation and control of the Municipal
Police Department is provided for in N.J.S.A. 40:47-1, et seq.
§ 2-20.1. Established; Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 2015-37
§ 2-20.1]
§ 2-20.2. Police Headquarters. [Ord. No. 2015-37 § 2-20.2]
a. Established. There is hereby established a Police Department in and for
the Township pursuant to the powers vested in the Township of
Lakewood by the statutes of the State of New Jersey.
b. Powers and Duties. It shall be the duty of the Police Department to
maintain law and order, protect public and private property, prevent
insurrection or riot, enforce the laws of the United States, State of New
Jersey, and all ordinances, Codes and laws of the Township of
Lakewood, to apprehend and appear in the prosecution of violators of
such laws, to obey the provisions of this section, and the rules and
regulations established by the appropriate authority, and to present to
the Township through the appropriate authority, recommendations
tending to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the
Township. To this end the Department shall be particularly vigilant in:
1. Determining causes of violations of law.
2. Preventing violations of law.
3. Apprehending and prosecuting offenders.
4. Recovering property wrongfully taken.
5. Securing the peace and safety of the inhabitants of the Township.
6. Promoting traffic safety.
7. Carrying out regulatory activity as may be especially assigned to
the Department.
8. Conducting an effective internal management to achieve the above
objectives.
a. Location. The headquarters of the Police Department shall be in the
Municipal Building, or in such other place as may be established by the
Township Committee.
10.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 2015-37 repealed and replaced Section 2-20 in entirety.
§ 2-20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.2
AO:55
§ 2-20.3. Personnel. [Ord. No. 2015-37 § 2-20.3]
The Mayor and Township Committee shall provide for the appointment of a
Chief of Police and officers and personnel as they shall deem necessary for
the proper and efficient operation of the Police Department. The Mayor and
Township Committee shall determine the terms of office and compensation
and prescribe the powers, functions and duties of all such members, officers
and personnel as permitted by law.
b. Hours. Police Headquarters shall be maintained, staffed and open for
the transaction of business 24 hours per day and seven days each week.
c. Substations. Police Headquarters' substations may be established by
resolution of the Township Committee at such times and in such
locations as may appear to be necessary or proper for the enforcement
of law and the protection and safety of the inhabitants of the Township.
a. Chief of Police. The position of Chief of Police shall be established. In
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Chief of Police shall be the
head of the police force and shall be directly responsible to the
Appropriate Authority for the efficiency and routine day-to-day
operations of the Police Department. The Chief of Police shall, pursuant
to the policies established by the Appropriate Authority:
1. Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special
emergency directives for the disposition and discipline of the force
and its officers and personnel;
2. Have, exercise, and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the force;
3. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel;
4. Delegate such of his authority as he may deem necessary for the
efficient operation of the force to be exercised under his direction
and supervision; and
5. Report at least monthly to the Appropriate Authority in such form
as shall be prescribed by such authority on the operation of the
force during the preceding month, and make such other reports as
may be requested by such authority.
b. Appointment and Promotion. All applicants for appointment to or for
promotion within the Police Department shall be qualified for
appointment of promotion as required by law, ordinance and Civil
Service Commission rules and regulations. All applicants for
appointment shall be residents of Lakewood Township, any contiguous
municipality, or Ocean County, and must maintain continuous residency
within Lakewood Township, any contiguous municipality, and Ocean
County from the announced closing date of the Civil Service
Commission examination up to and including the date of appointment.
§ 2-20.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.3
AO:56
All appointments shall be made in accordance with and subject to the
Civil Service Commission rules and regulations of the State of New
Jersey.
c. Rank and Order of Rank Established. There are hereby established
within the Police Department the following ranks of sworn officers,
which shall descend in the following order.
1. Chief of Police.
2. Deputy Chief of Police.
3. Captain.
4. Lieutenant.
5. Sergeant.
6. Police Officer.
d. Hours of Duty. The hours of duty of the employees of the Police
Department shall be established pursuant to rank, job title or
assignment in accordance with the current collective bargaining
agreement or employee personnel manual. In cases of extreme urgency,
the Chief of Police or his duly authorized representative, or the
appropriate authority, may order any Police Officer to duty as may be
necessary to cope with the emergency.
e. Salaries. The salaries of the members of the Police Department shall be
fixed by the Salary Ordinance of the Township and resolutions of the
Township Committee.
f. Special Positions. Positions of Police Physician, Deputy Police Physician
and Police Chaplain are hereby created. The persons filling these
positions shall be appointed by resolution of the Township Committee,
which resolution shall fix their terms and remuneration. The duties of
Police Physician, Deputy Police Physician and Police Chaplain shall be
those fixed by resolution of the Township Committee.
g. Departmental Awards Program. There is hereby established for the
Police Department a departmental awards program, the purpose being
to encourage and recognize employee incentive, meritorious
achievement, and deeds of valor. Citations and awards shall be made
after nomination and approval of awards by the awards committee. The
awards committee shall consist of one member to be appointed by the
Township Committee, the Municipal Manager, and one member to be
appointed by the Chief of Police. The symbol of an award to a member
of the Police Department shall be worn by none other than the recipient
of the award, except in cases of posthumous awards. A record shall be
kept of all such awards by the Chief of Police, or person in command of
the Police Department of which the recipient is a member, and such
record shall constitute a part of the service record of the recipient. The
§ 2-20.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.3
AO:57
§ 2-20.3A. Chaplain. [Ord. No. 2015-37 § 2-20.3A]
§ 2-20.4. Appropriate Authority. [Ord. No. 2015-37 § 2-20.4]
A committee consisting of the Municipal Manager is hereby designated as
the appropriate authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A: 14-118. In the event
the appropriate authority is required to conduct disciplinary hearings in
accordance with the rules and regulations for the governance of the Police
Department as promulgated by the appropriate authority, then the
appropriate authority is hereby authorized to designate and appoint a
hearing officer who shall conduct a hearing, prepare a record and make
findings of fact, conclusions and a recommendation to the appropriate
authority for final decision.
§ 2-20.5. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 2015-37 § 2-20.5]
The appropriate authority shall adopt rules and regulations for the
governance of the Police Department in accordance with the authority
granted in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118.11
§ 2-20.6. (Reserved)
§ 2-20.7. (Reserved)
§ 2-20.8. Special Law Enforcement Officer - Class I. [Ord. No.
2015-37 § 2-20.8]
recipient on his official uniform, left breast thereof may wear the
symbol of an award, above the wearer's official police badge.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to provide for the
appointment of Chaplains to the Police Department pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-141.
b. Qualifications. All persons appointed as Chaplains shall be ordained
clergyman in good standing of a religious body from which the
clergyman is selected.
c. Rank of Inspector and Captain. The rank of Inspector and Captain is
hereby established within the Police Department for the appointment of
chaplains.
d. Compensation. Any chaplain appointed pursuant to this act shall serve
without compensation.
a. A Special Law Enforcement Officer is defined as any person appointed
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq., to temporarily or
intermittently perform duties similar to those regularly performed by
members of the municipal police force or to provide assistance to a
11.Editor's Note: See subsection 2-20.13, Rules and Regulations Established.
§ 2-20.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.8
AO:58
§ 2-20.8A. Special Law Enforcement Officer - Class II. [Ord. No.
2015-37 § 2-20.8A]
There is hereby established the position of Special Law Enforcement
Officer, Class II within the Police Department of the Township of Lakewood.
Special Officers appointed under the provisions of this subsection shall
be those defined as Class II Officers and shall have those duties and
responsibilities authorized by N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq. The
compensation for Special Law Enforcement Officers, Class Two, shall be
established by Ordinance.
§ 2-20.9. Off-Duty Assignments of Police Officers. (Ord. No. 2017-37
§ 2-20.9: Ord. No. 2016-38: Ord. No. 2017-46)
police force during seasonal periods or in times of emergency. No
person may be appointed as a Special Law Enforcement Officer unless
they:
1. Are a resident of this State during the term of appointment;
2. Are able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently and have a high school diploma or its equivalent;
3. Are sound of body and of good health;
4. Are of good moral character;
5. Have not been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty or
which would make them unfit to perform the duties of this office;
6. Have successfully undergone the same psychological testing that is
required of all full-time police officers in the municipality.
b. Before any Special Law Enforcement Officer is appointed, the Chief of
Police must insure that a background investigation has been conducted
in order to ascertain the eligibility of the applicant and must report the
findings in writing to the appointing authority. Fingerprints of all
applicants must be taken and filed with the State Police and the Federal
Bureau of Investigation. Special Law Enforcement Officers may be
appointed for terms not to exceed one year.
c. Compensation. The salary range for this position shall be as set forth in
the annual salary range ordinance of the Township of Lakewood.
a. "Off-Duty" Defined. Whenever the terms "off-duty," "special duty" or
"extra duty" are utilized in this section, they refer to duty assignments
made by the Chief of Police or his designee at the request of private
citizens for special projects of a private or quasi-public nature, pursuant
to an agreement with the Township of Lakewood in accordance with the
terms of this section. Emergency off-duty shall mean duty assignments
made by the Chief of Police or his designee for off-duty assignments that
require an officer immediately.
§ 2-20.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.9
AO:59
b. Extra Duties. Whenever the Chief of Police or his designee determines
that extra duty assignments shall be performed for a party requesting
private or quasi-public duty, the Chief of Police or his designee shall
enter into an agreement providing for extra duty assignments for which
the Township shall be compensated at the rate set forth below. Such
agreement shall be in accordance with following standards and
provisions:
1. The party requesting the assignment shall execute and deliver an
agreement in a form approved by the Township Committee by
resolution. The Chief of Police or his designee shall be authorized
to execute any such agreement provided it has been submitted in
the form approved by resolution.
2. The Township shall be responsible to provide all necessary
insurance coverage as required by law, including but not limited to,
worker's compensation, public liability, personal injury (including
death) or damage to property which may arise or result from the
extra-duty services performed pursuant hereto.
3. Officers engaged in special duty assignments shall be deemed onduty
and shall conform to all Police Department rules, regulations
and procedures.
4. Any and all extra duty assignments shall be determined and
approved by the Chief of Police or his designee. The Chief of Police
or his designee may assign a patrol vehicle for use in performing
extra duty if and in the event it is determined that the use of a
patrol vehicle is necessary to perform the contracted duty.
5. All special duty assignments shall be within the municipality, unless
specific written approval is granted by the Chief of Police or his
designee to the Officer to work outside of the municipality. If no
municipal Officers are available to work on special duty
assignments within the municipality, the Chief of Police or his
designee may contact adjoining municipal Police Departments to
determine if any are willing to perform such special assignments.
6. The fees for regular off-duty or special assignments shall be a total
of $85 per hour. $65 for each hour shall be paid to the officer
assigned and $20 per hour shall be paid to the Township for
administrative and management costs. The fees for emergency offduty
assignments shall be a total of $95 per hour. $75 for each hour
shall be paid to the officer assigned and $20 per hour shall be paid
to the Township for administrative and management costs. The fees
for off-duty assignments for schools, houses of worship and other
nonprofit entities shall be a total of $47 per hour. $40 for each hour
shall be paid to the officer assigned and $7 per hour shall be paid to
the Township for administrative and management costs. This fee
schedule shall only apply to events held directly by a school, house
of worship or other nonprofit entity. This fee schedule shall not
§ 2-20.9 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.9
AO:60
§ 2-20.10. Drug Testing Policy. [Ord. No. 2015-37 § 2-20.10]
The drug testing policy shall be established by the Chief of Police in
accordance with the provisions of the Attorney General's Law Enforcement
Drug Testing Policy and the Ocean County Law Enforcement Drug Testing
Policy.
apply to private events held at facilities owned by such school,
house of worship or other nonprofit entity, but not held for the
direct benefit of a school, house of worship or other nonprofit
entity.
7. The work to be performed shall be considered "special assignment
from independent contractors" and will not be considered direct
assignment or duty on the job through the Township. The taking of
any and all extra duty assignments shall be on a voluntary basis in
accordance with a system established and administered by the
Chief of Police or his designee.
8. The Chief of Police or his designee shall have the authority to order
any Police Officer to vacate or terminate any special duty
assignment in response to emergency situations or whenever the
assignment creates an unacceptable risk to health, safety and
welfare of the Police Officer and/or the public, in the sole
determination and discretion of the Chief of Police or his designee
or the Chief of Police. The contractor shall not be responsible for
any compensation for the time that the Police Officer is away from
the special duty assignment and shall have no claim for any costs or
damages against the Township or the Police Officer arising from
the termination of a special duty assignment, other than the prorated
return of any costs prepaid to the Municipality.
9. Any and all payments due under any such agreement shall be paid
15 days from the date of billing. Interest shall be charged at the
rate of 12% per annum on any amount billed for which payment has
not been made within 15 days. The delinquent party shall be liable
for all costs, fees and attorney's fees associated with the collection
of any amounts due.
10. When a private citizen, contractor or vendor requests an officer or
officers for off-duty or special assignments, any cancellation of such
request must be made two hours in advance of the date and time of
the assignment. Failure of the private citizen to cancel the request
for the off-duty or special assignment officer shall result in a
minimum of four hours or $260 for each requested officer to be
paid to the Township. This amount represents the cost to the
Township for the officer for the four hour minimum the Township
must pay to the officer for being called out.
§ 2-20.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.11
AO:61
§ 2-20.11. Disciplinary Actions. [Ord. No. 2015-37 § 2-20.11]
Discipline of employees and police officers will be imposed consistent with
New Jersey State statutes and the Rules and Regulations of the Lakewood
Township Police Department. Employees may be subject to discipline for
violating laws, statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations and written
directives.
§ 2-20.12. Internal Affairs. [Ord. No. 2015-37 § 2-20.12]
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-181, internal investigations conducted
by the Police Department for the Township of Lakewood shall be consistent
with the guidelines governing the Internal Affairs Policy and Procedures
of the Police Management Manual promulgated by the Police Bureau of
the Division of Criminal Justice and Department of Law and Public Safety,
together with any amendments or supplements thereto, and said guidelines
are hereby adopted by the Township.
§ 2-20.13. Rules and Regulations Established.12
§ 2-20.13.1. Establishment of the Lakewood Police Department.
a. Legal Authorization. The Police Department of the Township of
Lakewood is established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 and the
Township of Lakewood Municipal Code Section 2-20 and shall hereafter
be referred to as the "Lakewood Township Police Department."
b. Rules and Regulations Established. The appropriate authority of the
Township of Lakewood hereby adopts and promulgates the Department
Rules and Regulations, in accordance with Municipal Code subsection
2-20.5 of the Township of Lakewood and shall be known as the
"Lakewood Township Police Department Rules and Regulations."
c. Right to Amend or Revoke. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the
right is reserved by the appropriate authority to amend or revoke any of
the rules and regulations contained herein. Proposed new rules or
modifications of existing rules governing working conditions shall be
negotiated with the majority representative before they are established.
d. Previous Rules, Policies and Procedures. All rules and regulations
previously issued, general orders, and policies and procedures that are
contrary to the rules contained herein, are hereby revoked. All other
policies and procedures shall remain in force.
e. Rules and Regulations Manual.
1. Application. These rules and regulations are applicable to all police
officers, special law enforcement officers, and to all civilian
employees of the Department, where appropriate.
12.Editor's Note: Subsection 2-20.13 was added by Ord. No. 2015-38
§ 2-20.11 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.13.1
AO:62
2. Distribution. One copy of these rules and regulations shall be
electronically distributed to each employee of the Department
through the PowerDMS software or through manual distribution.
3. Responsibility for Maintenance. Employees shall be responsible for
maintaining a current copy of the rules and regulations, including
all additions, revisions, and amendments as issued.
4. Familiarization. Employees shall thoroughly familiarize themselves
with the provisions of the rules and regulations. Ignorance of any
provision of these rules and regulations will not be a defense to a
charge of a violation of these rules and regulations. It is the
continuing responsibility of each employee to seek clarification
through the chain of command for any rule, which is not fully
understood.
5. Severability. If for any reason any section of these Rules and
Regulations shall be questioned in any court and shall held
unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not be held to affect any
other sections or provisions of this document.
f. Definitions of Terms.
APPROPRIATE AUTHORITY — The Municipal Manager of the Township
of Lakewood as defined and designated by authority of Municipal Code
subsection 2-20.4 of the Township of Lakewood pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40A:14-118.
AUTHORITY — Authority is the statutory or general order vested right
to give commands, enforce obedience, initiate action and make
necessary decisions. Authority may be delegated by those so
designated. Acts performed without proper authority or authorization
shall be considered in violation of the rules and regulations, and those
persons in violation shall be subject to disciplinary action.
CHAIN OF COMMAND — The unbroken line of authority extending
from the Chief of Police through one or more subordinates at each level
of command down to the level of execution and vice versa.
DAYS OFF — Those days on which a given employee is excused from
duty by the appropriate supervisor or is not required to report to duty.
EMPLOYEE — All employees of the Department, whether sworn
regular, special law enforcement officers, or civilian employees.
GENDER — The use of the masculine gender in any general order or
rules and regulations includes the female gender, when applicable.
INCOMPETENCE — Incapable of satisfactory performance of police
duties.
INSUBORDINATION — Failure or deliberate refusal of any employee
to obey a lawful order given by a superior officer. Ridiculing a superior
officer or his order, whether in or out of his presence, is also
§ 2-20.13.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.13.1
AO:63
insubordination. Disrespectful, mutinous, insolent, or abusive language
towards a superior officer is insubordination.
LAWFUL ORDER — Any written or verbal directive issued by a superior
officer to any subordinate or group of subordinates in the course of
police duty which is not in violation of any law, ordinance, or any
department rule or regulation.
MAY/SHOULD — As used herein, the words "may" and "should" mean
that the action indicated is permitted.
MEMBER — Any duly sworn police officer of the Department.
MILITARY LEAVE — The period of time during which an employee is
excused from duty for service with the active or reserve armed forces
of the United States or of the State of New Jersey, as provided by law or
collective bargaining agreement(s).
NEGLECT OF DUTY — Neglect of duty is the failure to give suitable
attention to the performance of duty. Examples include, but are not
limited to, failure to take appropriate action on the occasion of a
crime, disorder, or other act or condition deserving police attention;
absence without leave; failure to report for duty at the time and place
designated; unnecessary absence from the zone/post or assignment
during the tour of duty; failure to perform duties or comply with
provisions prescribed in the rules and regulations and general orders,
and failure to conform to the Department operating procedures.
OFF-DUTY — The status of an employee during the period he is free
from the performance of specified duties also known as days off and/
or hours between tours of duties. Members are subject to recall at all
times.
ON-DUTY — The status of an employee during the period of day when
he is actively engaged in the performance of their duties.
ORDER — Any written or oral directive issued by a supervisor to any
subordinate or group of subordinates in the course of police duty.
PLURALITY OF WORDS — The singular includes the plural and the
plural includes the singular.
PROBATIONARY POLICE OFFICER — Any member of the Department
serving probationary period prior to permanent appointment to police
officer, as pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:17B-66 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 4A:4-5.1
et seq.
WORKING TEST PERIOD — The working period shall be in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 4A:4-5.1 et seq.
SENIORITY — Seniority is determined in accordance with New Jersey
Civil Service Commission guidelines.
SHALL/WILL — As used herein, the words "shall" and "will," mean the
action required is mandatory.
§ 2-20.13.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.13.1
AO:64
SPECIAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Persons vested with
special police authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-146.8 et seq.
STAFF SUPERVISION — Staff supervision is an advisory relationship,
outside the regular hierarchy of command and responsibility in which a
supervisor may review the work of another employee who is responsible
to another superior officer.
SUBORDINATE — A member lower in rank than his superior officer.
SUPERIOR OFFICER — A person holding a higher supervisory or
command rank or position.
SUPERVISOR — An employee, usually holding the appropriate rank,
assigned to a position requiring the exercise of immediate supervision
over the activities of other employees.
TENSE OF WORDS — The words used in the present tense include the
future.
UNPAID LEAVE OF ABSENCE — The period of time during which
an employee is excused from duty and during which time no pay is
received.
g. Code of Ethics.
1. All employees shall read and abide by the Law Enforcement Code
of Ethics.
2. AS A LAW ENFORCEMENT EMPLOYEE, my fundamental duty is to
serve the community; to safeguard lives and property; to protect
the innocent against deception, the weak against oppression or
intimidation and the peaceful against violence or disorder; and to
respect the constitutional rights of all to liberty, equality and
justice.
I WILL keep my private life unsullied as an example to all and
will behave in a manner that does not bring discredit to me or to
my agency. I will maintain courageous calm in the face of danger,
scorn or ridicule; develop self-restraint; and be constantly mindful
of the welfare of others. Honest in thought and deed both in my
personal and official life, I will be exemplary in obeying the law
and the regulations of my Department. Whatever I see or hear
of a confidential nature or that is confided to me in my official
capacity will be kept ever secret unless revelation is necessary in
the performance of my duty.
I WILL never act officiously or permit personal feelings, prejudices,
political beliefs, aspirations, animosities or friendships to influence
my decisions. With no compromise for crime and with relentless
prosecution of criminals, I will enforce the law courteously and
appropriately without fear or favor, malice or ill will, never
employing unnecessary force or violence and never accepting
gratuities.
§ 2-20.13.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.13.1
AO:65
§ 2-20.13.2. Organization.
I RECOGNIZE the badge of my office as a symbol of public faith,
and I accept it as a public trust to be held so long as I am true to
the ethics of police service. I will never engage in acts of corruption
or bribery, nor will I condone such acts by other police officers.
I will cooperate with all legally authorized agencies and their
representatives in the pursuit of justice. I know that I alone am
responsible for my own standard of professional performance and
will take every reasonable opportunity to enhance and improve
my level of knowledge and competence. I will constantly strive to
achieve these objectives and ideals, dedicating myself to my chosen
profession…LAW ENFORCEMENT.
h. Mission Statement and Core Values.
The Lakewood Police Department will provide the highest level of
service through the enforcement of laws and the protection of life,
property and the constitutional rights of all. We will meet the present
and future needs of the public through a continued partnership with
our community. We will remain dedicated to service and committed to
excellence, focusing on the following core values:
• Integrity: We hold ourselves accountable to the highest level of
honesty, truthfulness and ethical conduct.
• Pride: We take pride in ourselves as individuals, our division as a
team and our citizens as a community.
• Respect: We will ensure that all persons are treated with equality,
dignity and courtesy.
• Professionalism: We are committed to the highest level of
professional standards through development of highly trained and
motivated employees.
a. General Duties and Responsibilities.
1. Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall exercise any and all of the rights,
authorities, powers and responsibilities reserved solely to the Chief
of Police as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 and the Township of
Lakewood Municipal Code subsection 2-20.3a.
2. Supervisors.
Supervisors shall be able to perform all of the general duties of a
police officer. Supervisors shall:
(a) Enforce Department rules and insure compliance with
Department policies and procedures.
§ 2-20.13.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.13.2
AO:66
(b) Exercise proper use of their command, within the limits of their
authority, to assure efficient performance by their
subordinates.
(c) Exercise necessary control over their subordinates to
accomplish the objectives for the Department.
(d) Guide and train subordinates to gain effectiveness in
performing their duties.
(e) Use Department disciplinary procedures when necessary.
(f) When using discipline, comply strictly with the provisions of
the Department disciplinary process.
(g) Conduct themselves in accordance with high ethical standards,
on and off-duty.
3. Police Officers.
Police officers shall:
(a) Exercise authority consistent with the obligations imposed by
the oath of office and in conformance with the written
directives of the Department.
(b) Abide by all rules, regulations and Department procedures and
directives governing police officer employees.
(c) Be accountable and responsible to their supervisor for obeying
all lawful orders.
(d) Coordinate their efforts with other employees of the
Department to achieve Department objectives.
(e) Conduct themselves in accordance with high ethical standards,
on and off-duty.
(f) Strive to improve their skills and techniques through study and
training.
(g) Familiarize themselves with the area of authority and
responsibility for their current assignment.
(h) Perform their duties promptly, faithfully and diligently.
(i) Perform all related work as required in a timely fashion.
(j) Support and defend individual protections, rights and
privileges guaranteed by the Constitutions of the United States
and the State of New Jersey.
(k) Take appropriate action to:
1. Protect life and property;
§ 2-20.13.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.13.2
AO:67
§ 2-20.13.3. Rules of Conduct.
2. Preserve the peace;
3. Detect and arrest violators of the law;
4. Enforce all Federal, State, and local laws and ordinances
coming within Department jurisdiction;
5. Safeguard the rights of individuals as provided by the
United States Constitution and Constitution of the State of
New Jersey;
6. Regulate traffic safely and expeditiously;
7. Aid citizens in matters within police jurisdiction;
8. Take appropriate police action in aiding fellow officers as
needed;
9. Provide miscellaneous services.
4. Civilian Employees.
Civilian employees shall:
(a) Take appropriate action to perform the duties of their positions
promptly, faithfully and diligently.
(b) Exercise authority consistent with the obligations imposed by
their position and in conformance with the policies of the
Department.
(c) Be accountable and responsible to their supervisors for
obeying all lawful orders.
(d) Coordinate their efforts with other employees of the
Department to achieve Department objectives.
(e) Conduct themselves in accordance with high ethical standards,
on and off-duty.
(f) Strive to improve their skills and techniques through study and
training.
(g) Familiarize themselves with the area of authority and
responsibility for the current assignment.
(h) Abide by all rules, regulations and Department procedures and
directives governing civilian employees.
(i) Perform all related work as required.
a. General Conduct.
§ 2-20.13.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.13.3
AO:68
1. Performance of Duty.
All employees shall promptly perform their duties as required or
directed by law, rules and regulations or general order, or by lawful
order of a superior officer.
2. Action Off-Duty.
While off-duty, police officers shall take appropriate action as
needed in any police matter that comes to their attention within
their jurisdiction as authorized by New Jersey law and Department
written directive.
While off-duty, police officers who take any police related action
or any other action which may touch upon or reflect upon their
position with the Lakewood Township Police Department shall
notify the highest ranking officer on duty as soon as possible and
shall submit a written report to the Chief of Police as soon as
practical.
3. Neglect of Duty.
Employees shall not commit any act, nor shall they be guilty of any
omission that constitutes neglect of duty.
4. Obedience to Laws, Ordinances, Rules, and General Orders.
Employees shall obey all laws, ordinances, rules, and general
orders of the Department.
5. Withholding Information.
Employees shall report any and all information concerning
suspected criminal activity of others.
6. Reporting Violations of Laws, Ordinances or Rules, and General
Orders.
Employees knowing of other employees violating laws, ordinances,
or rules and general orders of the Department, shall report same to
the Chief of Police through the chain of command. If the employee
believes the information is of such gravity that it must be brought
to the immediate, personal attention of the Chief of Police, the
chain of command may be bypassed.
Employees charged with violating laws or ordinances shall report
same to the Chief of Police through the chain of command.
7. Insubordination.
Employees shall not:
1. Fail or refuse to obey a lawful order given by a supervisor;
§ 2-20.13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.13.3
AO:69
2. Use any disrespectful or abusive language/action towards a
specific supervisor.
8. Providing False Information.
Employees shall not knowingly lie, give false or misleading
information, or provide a false oral/written communication in any
investigation when it is reasonable to expect that the information
may be relied upon by the Department.
9. Conduct Toward Other Department Employees.
Employees shall treat other Department employees with respect.
They shall be courteous and civil at all times in their relationships
with one another. When on-duty and in the presence of the public,
an officer shall be referred to by rank.
10. Compromising Criminal Cases/Investigations.
Employees shall not interfere with the proper administration of
criminal justice.
11. Recommending Attorney and Bail Bond Brokers Prohibited.
Employees shall not suggest, recommend, or advise the retention
of any attorney or bail bond broker to any person as a result of
police business.
12. Posting Bail.
Employees shall not post bail for any person in custody, except
relatives.
13. Use of Force.
Members shall follow New Jersey State Law and Department
general order on the use of force.
14. Physical and Mental Fitness for Duty.
Police officers are required to be capable of performing the
essential functions of their assigned positions without posing a
direct threat to their own health and safety, or that of others.
Officers, who are aware of any reason why they are incapable
of performing the essential functions of their assigned positions
without posing a direct threat to their own health and safety, or that
of others, shall notify their supervisors. The Department reserves
the right to take appropriate action in such circumstances, which
may include deeming the member unfit for duty, placing the
employee on sick leave status, or other action. The Department
reserves the right in appropriate cases to require medical
clearance before allowing the member to return to regular duties.
15. Driver's License.
§ 2-20.13.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.13.3
AO:70
Members shall possess a valid New Jersey driver's license.
Whenever a driver's license is revoked, suspended, or lost, the
employee shall report it before the next tour of duty giving full
particulars. Employees shall not operate Department vehicles,
unless they have a valid New Jersey driver's license.
16. Address and Telephone Numbers.
Employees are required to have a telephone or cellular phone
in the place where they reside. Changes in address or telephone
number shall be reported in writing to the appropriate supervisor
within 24 hours of the change. Upon receipt of this information, the
supervisor will immediately forward the change to the Office of the
Chief of Police.
b. Issuing Orders.
1. Manner of Issuing Orders.
Orders from a supervisor to a subordinate shall be in clear and
understandable language.
2. Unlawful Orders.
No supervisor shall knowingly issue an order, which is in violation
of any law or ordinance.
3. Improper Orders.
No supervisor shall knowingly issue an order, which is in violation
of any Department rules and regulations or general order.
c. Receiving Orders.
1. Questions Regarding Orders.
Employees, in doubt as to the nature or detail of an order, shall
seek clarification from their supervisors by going through the chain
of command.
2. Obedience to Unlawful Orders.
Employees are not required to obey any order, which is contrary to
any law or ordinance. Responsibility for refusal to obey rests with
the employee, who will be required to justify the refusal to obey.
3. Obedience to Improper Orders.
Employees, who are given any order which is contrary to
Department rules and regulations or general order, must first obey
the order to the best of their ability, and then report the improper
order as provided.
4. Conflicting Orders.
§ 2-20.13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.13.3
AO:71
Upon receipt of an order, conflicting with any previous order, the
employee affected will advise the person issuing the second order
of this fact. Responsibility for countermanding the original order
rests with the individual issuing the second order. If so directed,
the latter order shall be obeyed first. Orders will be
countermanded, or conflicting orders will be issued, only when
reasonably necessary for the good of the Department.
5. Reports of Unlawful or Improper Orders.
An employee receiving an unlawful or improper order shall advise
the issuing supervisor of his/her belief that the order in question
is unlawful or improper. If the matter is not resolved, the officer
shall at first opportunity, report in writing to the next highestranking
supervisor above the supervisor who issued the unlawful or
improper order. Action regarding such a report shall be conducted
at the direction of the Chief of Police.
6. Criticism of Official Acts or Orders.
Employees shall not criticize the actions or orders of any
Department employee in a manner which is defamatory, obscene,
or which tends to impair the efficient operation of the Department.
d. Police Records and Information.
1. Release of Information.
Employees shall not release any information nor reveal any
confidential business of the Department to the public or the press
except as provided in Department general orders.
2. Department Records.
Contents of any record or report filed within the Department shall
not be exhibited or divulged to any person other than a duly
authorized police officer, except with the approval of the
appropriate supervisor, or under due process of law, or as
permitted under Department general orders.
3. Reports.
No employee shall knowingly falsify any official report or enter or
cause to be entered any inaccurate, false, or improper information
on records of the Department.
e. Gifts, Rewards, Etc.
1. Soliciting Gifts, Gratuities, Fees, Rewards, Loans, Etc.
Except as stated herein, employees shall not under any
circumstances solicit any gift, gratuity, fees, rewards, loans, etc.
where there is any direct or indirect connection between
solicitations and their Department membership or employment. All
§ 2-20.13.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.13.3
AO:72
solicitations must stay within the parameters of Federal and State
law, directives from the Office of the New Jersey Attorney General
and Ocean County Prosecutor's Office. Employees shall not solicit
for any organization that in anyway references their employment as
an employee of the Township of Lakewood without the knowledge
of the Chief of Police pursuant to the standards set forth above.
Nothing herein is meant to prevent action authorized by N.J.S.A.
45:17A-18 et seq.
2. Acceptance of Gifts, Gratuities, Fees, Loans, Etc.
Employees shall not accept either directly or indirectly any gift,
gratuity, fees, rewards, loans, etc. or any other thing of value
arising from or offered because of his police employment or any
activity connected with said employment or employment with the
Township of Lakewood or which might tend to influence directly
or indirectly the actions of said employee or any other employee
in any matter of police business; or which might tend to cast an
adverse reflection on the Department or any employee thereof.
No employee of the Department shall receive any gift, gratuity,
fees, rewards, loans, etc. from other employees without the express
permission of the Chief of Police.
3. Other Transactions.
Every employee is prohibited from buying or selling anything of
value from or to any complainant, suspect, witness, defendant,
prisoner, or other person involved in any case which has come to
his attention or which arose out of his Department employment,
except as may be specifically authorized by the Chief of Police.
4. Rewards.
Employees shall not accept any gift, gratuity or reward in money
or other consideration for services rendered in the line of duty to
the community or to any person, business or agency except lawful
salary and that which may be authorized by the law and the Chief
of Police.
5. Disposition of Unauthorized Gifts and/or Gratuities.
Any unauthorized gift, gratuity, loan, fee, reward, or other object
coming into the possession of any employee shall be forwarded to
the Chief of Police together with a written report explaining the
circumstances.
6. Debts - Incurring and Payment.
(a) No employee shall borrow any money or otherwise become
indebted to any other employee.
(b) Employees shall not solicit other members or employees to
cosign or endorse any promissory note or other loan.
§ 2-20.13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.13.3
AO:73
(c) No employee shall offer to act as a cosigner or endorser of any
promissory note or other loan for another employee.
(d) Paragraphs 1-3 do not apply to transactions among employees
related to each other.
(e) Employees shall promptly pay all just debts and legal liabilities
incurred by them.
7. Intercession — Soliciting.
Employees shall not attempt to circumvent, undermine or
improperly influence Department procedures for determining
promotions, assignments, disposition of disciplinary charges,
appeals from Department hearings, or related matters. Examples
of circumventing, undermining or improperly influencing such
procedures include, but are not limited to, soliciting unauthorized
persons to intercede in such procedures, communicating or
supplying information in a manner not authorized or permitted
under such procedures, refusing to participate and/or cooperate
in any investigation into alleged improper behavior. Members and
employees may utilize the review, appeal and grievance procedures
provided by statute, ordinance, Department rules and procedures,
ordinance or general order, and collective bargaining agreements.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit employees from lawful
consultation with attorneys and union representatives. Any lawyer
or union representative consulted shall not be permitted to speak
on behalf of the employee and shall not interfere in any
investigatory process, including a prohibition against delaying the
process.
f. Alcoholic Beverages and Drugs.
1. Alcoholic Beverages and Drugs.
(a) No employee of the Department will appear for, or be on duty,
under the influence of an alcoholic beverage (any beverage
containing alcohol) (hereinafter "alcohol") or illegal drugs
(including the illegal use of prescription drugs) (hereinafter
"drugs"), or be unfit for duty because of use of drugs or an
alcoholic beverage. The reasonable opinion of a supervising
officer that the employee is under the influence of, or has
alcohol or drugs in the employee's system shall be sufficient to
establish a violation of this provision. In addition, the presence
of detectable level of alcohol or drugs as tested by blood, urine
or other medical test shall constitute a violation of this
provision. Superior officers shall not assign to duty any
employee in an unfit condition due to the use of alcohol or
drugs and shall immediately relieve of duty and service
weapon any employee found on duty in such condition.
Supervisors shall not allow to remain on duty, any employee
whose fitness for duty is questionable due to the use of alcohol
§ 2-20.13.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.13.3
AO:74
or drugs. The superior officer shall submit a written report
of the incident to the Chief of Police. (See Procedures for
Employees Using Prescription Drugs in a Legal Manner Under
paragraph f1(c) below.)
(b) Employees of the Department, shall not drink alcohol while on
duty, or take any drug as defined herein, except on special
assignment authorized by the Chief of Police. Sworn employees
shall not drink alcohol or take drugs while in uniform or during
any activity where the employee is acting as a representative
or has identified himself as an employee of the Department. An
employee, while assigned to duty in civilian clothes, may use
alcohol or drugs only when absolutely necessary in the
performance of duty, provided such use does not render them
unfit for proper and efficient performance of duty. Employees
should not, to the extent possible, engage in any behavior that
could put him/herself in danger or the public in danger after
consuming alcohol or drugs, for example, driving. All use of
alcohol or drugs used in the performance of an employee's duty
must be documented in writing, detailing the reasons therefore
and the amounts consumed as soon as possible after such
consumption. An employee may be subject to testing to confirm
the level of alcohol/drugs in their system.
(c) Taking Prescription or other Medication While on Duty/
Notification about Medication. Employees of the Department
shall disclose to the Office of Professional Standards if they are
taking medication (prescription or non-prescription) that may
affect their ability to perform their duties, including but not
limited to using a firearm, radio communications, or operating
a motor vehicle. Such employees shall also disclose the
expected duration of their use of such medication. The
Department reserves the right to take appropriate action in
such circumstances, which may include deeming the employee
unfit for duty, placing the employee on sick leave status, or
other appropriate action. The Department may also consider
other appropriate accommodations if the employee has a
disability as defined by law. The Department reserves the right
in appropriate cases to require medical clearance before
allowing the employee to return to regular duties. The
Department reserves the right to take appropriate action in
case of any employee who is impaired on duty for any reason,
including the use of prescription or non-prescription
medication who has failed to give proper advance notification.
(d) Alcohol may not be consumed at or in the police station or
ancillary facilities.
(e) No employee shall, at any time when in uniform, or any part
thereof, except in the performance of duty, enter any place in
which alcohol is served or sold, unless authorized by a
§ 2-20.13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.13.3
AO:75
supervisor. This provision does not include establishments with
a separate dining area where the serving of alcohol is not the
primary function (e.g. certain diners and restaurants which
have a liquor license). If an employee is unclear whether an
establishment would violate this section, he should contact his
supervisor.
(f) Employees shall not bring into or keep any alcohol or drugs on
Department premises except when necessary in the
performance of a police related task. Alcohol or drugs brought
into Department premises in the furtherance of a police related
task, shall be properly identified and stored according to
Department general orders.
(g) Any employee reporting for duty with the odor of alcohol on his
breath or appearing to be under the influence may be subject
to testing as set forth in paragraph f2 below.
(h) No liquor license shall be held by any police officer, or by any
profit corporation or association in which any police officer has
an interest, directly or indirectly.
(i) Pursuant to law, members of the Lakewood Township Police
Department may not be employed by a business located in
Lakewood Township, which is licensed to sell alcoholic
beverages in New Jersey. Members of the Lakewood Township
Police Department may be employed by such licensed
businesses, which are located outside Lakewood Township
with prior notice prior to the Chief of Police and under the
following legal conditions:
(1) Police officers so employed shall not, while engaged in the
selling, serving, possessing or delivering of any alcoholic
beverages: (1) have in his possession any firearm, or; (2)
wear or display any uniform, badge or insignia which
would identify them as a police officer.
(2) No police officer so employed shall be permitted to work in
excess of 24 hours per week in any such establishment.
(3) The Chief of Police retains the right to advise any police
officer that for the good of the Department or for other
operational reasons (including but not limited to the ability
to work overtime), the officer cannot obtain or retain such
employment.
2. Substance Testing.
(a) Members will be ordered to submit to drug testing when there
is a reasonable suspicion to believe that the member is using
drugs illegally, in accordance with the department's general
order, which shall be compliant with the New Jersey Attorney
§ 2-20.13.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.13.3
AO:76
General's Law Enforcement Drug Testing Policy, and the Ocean
County Prosecutor's Directive.
(b) Random drug screening may be ordered in accordance with
the Department's general order, which shall be compliant with
the New Jersey Attorney General's Law Enforcement Drug
Testing Policy, and the Ocean County Prosecutor's Directive.
g. Duty Conduct.
1. Reporting for Duty.
Employees shall report for duty at the time and place specified,
properly uniformed and equipped.
2. Absence from Duty.
Every member who fails to appear for duty at the date, time and
place specified without the consent of competent authority, is
"absent without leave." Such absence must be reported in writing
to the supervisor immediately. Absences without leave in excess of
one day must be reported in writing to the Chief of Police. Any
member who is absent without leave for a continuous period of
5 days shall forfeit their position in the Department, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122.
3. Harassment in the Workplace.
All employees of the Department shall adhere to the general order
established by the Chief of Police and the Township of Lakewood
regarding Harassment in the Workplace.
4. Civil Rights.
All employees shall observe and respect the civil rights of all
persons.
5. Work Expectation.
Employees are expected to perform their duties to the best of their
abilities at all times.
6. Retaliation.
No employee shall take any official action or initiate or engage
in any conduct with the intention to retaliate against any person
for criticizing or complaining about any employee. This shall not
apply to situations where employees are disciplined for engaging in
actions, which constitute insubordination.
7. Personal Relationships.
If a supervisor and subordinate enter into a dating relationship,
marital relationship or civil union during the course of employment,
§ 2-20.13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.13.3
AO:77
and the Department reasonably believes the relationship may
create a conflict of interest, one of the employees shall be
transferred to another shift or assignment. A supervisor or
subordinate involved in a relationship as described within shall
report the relationship to the Chief of Police. Failure to report such
a relationship may subject the involved employees to discipline.
8. Smoking.
P.L. 2005, C.383 "NJ Smoke-Free Air Act" approved January 15,
2006. It provides for an employer's obligation to establish a written
directive protecting the health, welfare and comfort of employees
from those employees who smoke. That written directive must
establish designated non-smoking areas. It is the policy of this
Department not to allow smoking in any office or vehicle assigned
to the Lakewood Township Police Department. Employees desiring
to smoke may do so outside or in an area designated for smoking.
It is the rule of this Department not to allow smoking in any
designated crime scene area.
9. Distractors.
The use of any item or object that distracts an employee from
the performance of duty other than equipment authorized by the
Department is prohibited while on duty.
10. Relief.
Employees are to remain at their assignments and on duty until
properly relieved by other employees or until dismissed by
competent authority.
11. Meals/Breaks.
All meals/breaks are to be consumed within authorized areas,
subject to modification by the supervisor.
12. Training.
Employees shall attend training at the direction of the appropriate
supervisor. Such attendance is considered a duty assignment,
unless the prevailing collective bargaining agreements provides
otherwise.
13. Inspections.
Employees directed to attend full dress inspections shall report
in the uniform prescribed, carrying the equipment specified.
Unauthorized absence from such inspection shall be considered
absence without leave.
14. Prohibited Activity On-Duty.
§ 2-20.13.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.13.3
AO:78
Employees who are on-duty are prohibited from engaging in
activities, which are not directly related to the performance of their
duty with exceptions as noted:
(a) Meeting with other officers (except in performance of their
police duties) without the permission of his/her supervisor.
Sleeping, loafing, idling;
(b) Reading material other than Department required materials
(except at meals);
(c) Conducting private business while on duty;
(d) Unlawful gambling, unless to further a police purpose such as
conducting an investigation of suspected criminal activity as
authorized through the chain of command;
(e) Smoking in public view;
(f) Sexual conduct;
(g) Soliciting or otherwise enhancing secondary employment
interests while on duty or as a result of an official duty;
(h) Conducting secondary employment activities while on duty;
(i) Taking any photographs, pictures, digital images that are not
related to the job, including but not limited to pictures of any
crime scenes, traffic crashes, people, or job related incidents
or occurrence with any personal analog or digital device,
camera or cellular telephone, except as may be necessary for
the furtherance of official duties, and only in accordance with
established Department procedures pertaining to preservation
of evidence and chain of custody;
(j) Releasing any personal or Department photographs, pictures,
digital images of any crime scenes, traffic crashes, people, or
job related incident or occurrence taken with a personal or
Department analog or digital device, camera or cellular phone
to any person, entity, business, or media/Internet outlet
without the express written permission of the Chief of Police;
(k) Video or audio recording, which is not connected with an
official investigation or duties, is prohibited;
(l) Employees are forbidden to videotape or record conversations
with other employees unless related to the job and approved in
advance by the employee's supervisor. This prohibition does
not apply to videotaped interviews of witnesses or suspects
where two or more employees may be present, the routine
recording of telephone calls over or through the Department
telephone system via any recording system approved by the
Chief of Police, or to the use of mobile video recorders installed
§ 2-20.13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.13.3
AO:79
in police vehicles as authorized by the Chief of Police. The
exception to this is for an Internal Affairs investigation as
authorized by the Chief of Police or representatives of the
involved prosecutorial authorities.
(m) Any other activity deemed inappropriate by the Chief of Police.
15. All Other Conduct.
Misconduct by a police officer need not be predicated on the
violation of any particular Department rule or regulation. Police
officers are called upon to exercise tact, restraint and good
judgment in their relationship with the public and must present
an image of personal integrity and dependability in order to have
the respect of the public. The Department will take appropriate
disciplinary action against any officer whose actions violate this
standard of good behavior.
h. Uniforms, Appearance, and Identification.
1. Regulation Uniforms Required.
All members and civilian employees of the Department who are
required to wear a uniform shall maintain regulation uniforms.
Uniforms shall be kept neat, clean and well pressed at all times.
All uniform/equipment must be clean, in good working order, and
conform to Department specifications.
2. Manner of Dress On-Duty — Uniform.
Members and civilian employees of the Department required to
wear a uniform will wear the prescribed duty uniform while on
duty. The Chief of Police or his/her designee may prescribe other
clothing as required by the nature of the duty, which a particular
employee is assigned. Members and civilian employees will wear
and maintain an employee uniform when so directed by the Chief
of Police in accordance with Department general orders.
3. Wearing or Carrying Identification
Employees shall wear or carry their Department identification at all
times, provided that it is practical under the circumstances.
4. Identification as Police Officer.
Except when impractical or where the identity is obvious, police
officers shall identify themselves by displaying the official badge or
identification card before taking police action.
5. Altering Style of Uniform.
Uniforms shall be made of the material and in the style prescribed
in accordance with Department general order, and such style shall
§ 2-20.13.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.13.3
AO:80
not be altered or changed in any manner whatsoever, unless
authorized by the Chief of Police.
6. Manner of Dress - Civilian Attire.
Employees may wear corporate casual or traditional business attire
as prescribed by the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
7. Personal Appearance.
Every employee of the Police Department, while on duty, must at all
times be neat and clean in person, clothes clean and pressed, and
uniform in conformity with Department general orders. Further,
they shall, as often as necessary, examine and clean equipment and
keep it always in good serviceable condition. Personnel on special
assignment includes, but is not limited to, undercover assignment
may be permitted to deviate from the appearance regulations as
authorized by the Chief of Police or designee.
1. Male Employees.
(a) A clean-shaven appearance is required except that
moustaches are permitted. Moustaches shall be neatly
trimmed and shall not extend more than one-half (1/2")
inch beyond the corners of the mouth, nor below the
corner of the mouth.
(b) Beards shall not be permitted. Personnel with a medical
condition, which precludes shaving, shall be required to
present a written statement, signed by a medical doctor,
verifying such condition. Beards may be permitted for
religious reasons upon approval of the Chief of Police.
Non-uniformed employees may deviate from the above
beard standard as authorized by the Chief of Police or
designee.
(c) Hair must be clean, neat and combed. Hair shall not be
worn longer than the top of the shirt collar at the back of
the neck when standing with the head in a normal posture.
The bulk or length of the hair shall not interfere with
normal wearing of all standard headgear. In addition, no
employee will be permitted to wear a hairstyle, which
results in a design or pattern being cut into the hair
pattern. Hair coloring, if used, must appear natural.
(1) Wigs or hairpieces are permitted if they conform to
the above listed standards for natural hair.
(d) Sideburns shall be neatly trimmed and rectangular in
shape and shall not extend lower than the ear lobe. The
maximum width of the sideburns shall not exceed one and
three quarters (1-3/4") inches and the bottom shall be
§ 2-20.13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.13.3
AO:81
trimmed in a straight line. The growth shall not be more
than one-quarter (1/4") inch in depth.
(e) Fingernails shall be clean and trimmed. Nails shall not
extend beyond the tips of the fingers.
2. Female Employees.
(a) Hair must be clean, neat and combed. Hair shall not be
worn longer than the top of the shirt collar at the back of
the neck when standing with the head in a normal posture.
The bulk or length of the hair shall not interfere with the
normal wearing of all standard headgear. In addition, no
employee will be permitted to wear a hairstyle, which
results in a design or pattern being cut into the hair
pattern. Hair coloring, if used, must appear natural.
(1) Wigs or hairpieces are permitted if they conform to
the above standards for natural hair.
(2) Non-uniformed employees may deviate from the above
hair length standard as authorized by the Chief of
Police or designee.
(b) Cosmetics — Cosmetics may be worn provided they are
subdued and blended to match the natural skin color of the
individual. False eyelashes are not permitted. Nonuniformed
employees may deviate from the above
cosmetics standard as authorized by the Chief of Police or
designee.
(c) Fingernails — Fingernails shall be clean and trimmed.
Nails shall not extend beyond the tips of the fingers.
Fingernail polish, if worn, shall be clear. Non-uniformed
employees may deviate from the above fingernail standard
as authorized by the Chief of Police or designee.
3. Jewelry and Body Piercings (All).
(a) Police Officers on duty shall not wear loose fitting jewelry
which may be grasped during a struggle or which can
inflict injury or retard the mobility of the officer. This
provision shall not prohibit non-uniform employees on duty
from wearing jewelry appropriate for the conditions of
their current assignment in accordance with Department
general orders.
(b) No visible body piercing jewelry shall be worn while on
duty. This shall include, but is not limited to nose, eyebrow
and tongue piercing.
4. Tattoos or Similar Markings (All).
§ 2-20.13.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.13.3
AO:82
(a) Definitions:
(1) TATTOO – The act or practice of marking the skin with
designs, forms, figures, art, etc.
(2) SCARIFICATION – The act of intentional cutting of the
skin for the purpose of creating a design, form, figure
or art.
(3) BRANDING – The act of intentional burning of the skin
for the purpose of creating a design, form, figure or
art.
(b) The following tattoos, scarifications and brands are
prohibited:
(1) Any tattoo, scarification or brand located on the head,
face or neck. The Chief of Police reserves the right to
require an officer to cover up a tattoo(s) while the
officer is in uniform.
(2) Depictions of nudity or violence; sexually explicit or
vulgar art, words, phrases or profane language;
symbols likely to offend other members, employees, or
members of the public, i.e., swastikas, pentagrams or
similar symbols; initials, acronyms or numbers that
represent criminal or historically oppressive
organizations, i.e., AB, KKK, SS, MM, BGF, HA, 666 or
any street gang names, numbers and/or symbols; or,
any language or depiction that may impair or disrupt
the operations of the Department, or is inconsistent
with the mission of the Department.
i. Department Equipment and Property.
1. Equipment On-Duty.
Employees shall carry all equipment on-duty as prescribed by
Department general order based on their assignment.
2. Equipment Off-Duty.
Employees shall carry equipment off-duty as prescribed by
Department general order.
3. Firearms.
Employees shall follow Department general order on the care and
handling of firearms.
4. Department Property and Equipment.
Employees are responsible for the proper care of Department
property and equipment assigned to them or used by them in the
§ 2-20.13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.13.3
AO:83
course of duty. Equipment and/or property will be handled and
maintained in accordance with Department general order.
5. Use of Department Property and Equipment.
Employees are prohibited from using any Department property,
equipment, consumable supplies and other resources for personal
business or pleasure.
6. Damaged or Inoperative Property or Equipment.
Employees shall immediately report to their supervisors any loss of
or damage to Department property assigned to or used by them.
The supervisor shall also be notified of any defects or hazardous
conditions existing in any Department equipment or property.
7. Care of Department Buildings.
Employees shall not mark or deface any surface in any Department
building. No material shall be affixed to any wall in Department
buildings without specific authorization from the appropriate
supervisor.
8. Notices.
Employees shall not mark, alter, or deface any posted notice of
the Department. No notices or announcements shall be posted on
bulletin boards without permission of the appropriate supervisor,
except those areas designated for use by the collective bargaining
unit(s). No other form of communication of notices or
announcements, including electronic communication of non-official
police business shall be made unless authorized by the appropriate
supervisor. No notices, pictures or other written communications
may be posted that are degrading, obscene, or considered
detrimental to the good order of the Police Department.
9. Use of Department Vehicles.
Employees shall not use any Department vehicle without the
permission of the Chief of Police or his/her designee. Department
vehicles shall not be used for personal business or pleasure.
10. Operation of Department Vehicles.
When operating Department vehicles, employees shall not violate
traffic laws, except in cases of emergency and then only in
conformity with State law and Department general order regarding
same. Employees shall also operate Department vehicles in a safe
and prudent manner, as dictated by environmental/roadway
conditions, to avoid causing damage to the vehicle.
11. Transporting Citizens.
§ 2-20.13.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.13.3
AO:84
No citizen shall be transported in Department vehicles except as
necessary in the performance of official police duties. Such
transportation will be done in conformance with Department
general order or at the direction of the commanding officer,
immediate supervisor or communications center.
12. Reporting Accidents.
Accidents involving Department personnel, property, equipment
and vehicles must be reported in accordance with Department
general order.
13. Inspection.
Department property and equipment is subject to entry and
inspection without notice. This includes, but is not limited to, any
vehicle, desk, filing cabinet, and/or locker, the use of which is
provided to the employee by the Department.
14. Liability.
If any Department property is damaged or lost as result of misuse
or negligence by an employee, that employee will be held liable to
reimburse the Department for the damage or loss and is subject to
disciplinary action.
15. Surrender of Department Property.
1. Upon Separation from the Department - Employees are
required to surrender all Department property in their
possession upon separation from the service. For failure to
return a non-expendable item, the employee will be required to
reimburse the Department for the fair market value of the
article.
2. Under Suspension - Any employee under suspension shall
immediately surrender their identification, firearm (if
applicable), and all other Department property to the
appropriate supervisor pending disposition of the case.
j. Communications, Correspondence.
1. Restrictions.
(a) Employees shall not use Department letterheads for private
correspondence.
(b) Employees shall only send official correspondence out of the
Department under the direction of the Chief of Police or his/her
designee. This includes, but is not limited to, letters,
subpoenas, e-mails, memorandums, and any other type of
paper or electronic written communication.
2. Forwarding Communications.
§ 2-20.13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.13.3
AO:85
Any employee who receives a written communication for
transmission to another employee shall forward same without
delay.
3. Use of Department Address.
Employees shall not use the Department as a mailing address for
private purposes. The Department address shall not be used for any
private vehicle registration or driver's license.
4. Telephones.
Department telephone equipment may not be used for personal use
involving toll charges without the express approval of a supervisor.
Department telephone numbers may not be given out as numbers
for police officer's personal use or contact. The use of cell phones
while driving a motor vehicle is prohibited.
5. Radio Discipline.
Employees operating the police radios shall strictly observe the
procedures and restriction for such operations as set forth in
Department general order and by the Federal Communications
Commission.
k. Conduct Toward Public.
1. Publicity.
Employees may identify themselves as employees of the Lakewood
Township Police Department. However, members and employees
shall not use or refer to their affiliation with the Lakewood
Township Police Department for purposes of furthering or gaining
advantage in personal pursuits or for any other reason that has
or reasonably may have an adverse impact on the Department or
on the Township of Lakewood. The Chief of Police shall determine
whether an employee's conduct has violated this standard. Nothing
herein is meant to prevent action authorized by N.J.S.A. 45:17A-18
et seq. or the New Jersey State Constitution.
2. Personal Preferment.
No employee may seek the improper influence or intervention of
any person outside of the Department for purposes of personal
preferment, advantage, transfer or advancement. Members and
employees may utilize where legally required and where not
duplicative the review, appeal and grievance procedures provided
by statute, ordinance, Department rules and procedures, Borough
policy, and collective bargaining agreements. Nothing in this
section shall prohibit employees from lawful consultation with
attorneys and union representatives where required by law. Unless
otherwise required by law, an employee may not consult with both
an attorney and a union representative.
§ 2-20.13.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.13.3
AO:86
3. Commercial Testimonials.
Employees shall not permit their names or photographs to be
used to endorse any product or service without the permission
of the Chief of Police. They shall not, without the permission of
the Chief of Police, allow their names or photographs to be used
in any commercial testimonial, which alludes to their position or
employment with this Department or their position as a police
officer or employee of a Police Department.
4. Public Appearance Requests.
All requests for public speeches, demonstrations, etc., will be
routed to the Chief of Police for approval and processing.
Employees directly approached for this purpose shall suggest that
the party submit his request to the Chief of Police.
5. Courtesy.
Employees shall be courteous and orderly in all dealings with
the public. They shall perform their duties professionally, avoiding
harsh, violent, profane or insolent language, and always remain
calm regardless of provocation to do otherwise. Upon request,
they are required to supply their names and badge numbers in a
courteous manner. They shall attend to requests from the public
quickly and accurately, avoiding unnecessary referral to other parts
of the Department.
6. Impartial Attitude.
All employees must remain completely impartial toward all persons
coming to the attention of the Department. Violations of the law
are against the people of the State and not against the individual
officer. All citizens are guaranteed equal protection under law.
Exhibiting partiality for or against a person because of race, creed,
color, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, gender identity or
expression, affectional or sexual orientation, marital status,
domestic partner or civil union status, familial status, liability for
service in the Armed Forces of the United States, disability, atypical
hereditary cellular or blood trait, genetic information, nationality,
pregnancy or other protected class (N.J.S.A.10:5-1 et seq.) is
conduct unbecoming a public employee. Similarly, unwarranted
interference in the private business of others when not in the
interests of justice is conduct unbecoming a public employee.
7. Disparaging Comments Regarding Protected Personal
Characteristics.
Courtesy and civility toward the public is required of all employees
of the Department. Employees shall not use words which humiliate,
disparage, demean, degrade, ridicule, or insult a person because of
their race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, gender
§ 2-20.13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.13.3
AO:87
identity or expression, affectional or sexual orientation, marital
status, domestic partner or civil union status, familial status,
liability for service in the Armed Forces of the United States,
disability, atypical hereditary cellular or blood trait, genetic
information, nationality, pregnancy or other protected class
(N.J.S.A.10:5-1 et seq.).
8. Public Statements.
Employees of the Department shall not make public statements
concerning the work, plans, policies, or affairs of the Department
which may impair or disrupt the operation of the Department or
which are obscene, unlawful, or defamatory.
9. Subversive Organizations.
No employee shall knowingly become a member of or connected
with a subversive organization, except when necessary in the
performance of duty, and then only under the direction of the Chief
of Police.
10. Affiliation with Certain Organizations Prohibited.
Police officers shall not join or affiliate with any organization, or
enter into any business relationships that would interfere with the
officer's ability to fulfill his or her obligations to the Department,
that may impair or disrupt the operations of the Department, or
that is inconsistent with the mission of the Department. This
section shall not apply to active or reserve service in the armed
forces of the United States or the State of New Jersey.
11. Affiliation with Radical Groups.
No employee, except in the discharge of police duties, shall
knowingly associate with or have any dealings with any person or
organization which advocates or which is instrumental in fostering
hatred, prejudice, or oppression against any group set forth in
paragraph k7 above or any political entity.
l. Political Activities.
1. Political Activities Prohibited.
Employees should not be permitted to engage in political activity
while on duty, and no employee shall be permitted to use his official
position to influence another person's partisan or non-partisan
political activity.
2. Election to Public Office.
Employees shall not be candidates for or hold an office in elective
public positions or political organizations within or inclusive of the
§ 2-20.13.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.13.3
AO:88
jurisdiction in which they are employed unless authorized to do so
by the Ocean County Prosecutor.
3. Soliciting Prohibited.
Employees of the Department shall not solicit contributions for
political purposes while on duty or when such activity prevents the
employee from performing his job with the Department, nor shall
any employee interfere with or use the influence of his office for
political reasons.
4. Contributions.
Employees may contribute funds or any other thing of value to
candidates for public office subject to the provision of law
governing such contributions.
5. Polling Duties.
Employees shall not engage in any polling duties except in the
performance of their official duties.
6. Displaying of Political Material.
Employees shall not display any political material on any
government property or on their person while on duty or in uniform
or while representing the Department or the Township of
Lakewood.
m. Judicial Appearance and Testimony.
1. Court Appearances.
Employees must attend court or quasi-judicial hearings as required
by a subpoena. Permission to omit this duty must be obtained from
the prosecuting attorney handling the case or other competent
court official. When appearing in court, either the official uniform
or appropriate business attire shall be worn. Weapons will not be
displayed unless wearing the uniform. Members shall present a
neat and clean appearance, avoiding any mannerism, which might
imply disrespect to the court.
2. Testifying for the Defendant.
Any employee subpoenaed to testify for the defense in any trial
or hearing, or against the Township of Lakewood in any hearing
or trial shall notify their supervisor upon receipt of the subpoena.
He/she shall also notify the appropriate prosecutorial authority
handling the case.
3. Duty of Employees to Appear and Testify.
It shall be the duty of every employee to appear and testify upon
matters directly related to the conduct of his office, position or
§ 2-20.13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.13.3
AO:89
employment before any court, grand jury, or the State Commission
of Investigation.
4. Department Investigations — Testifying.
Employees shall be required to respond to questioning, provide
reports, and render materials during Department investigations
in accordance with the provisions of the New Jersey Attorney
General's Internal Affairs Policy & Procedures currently in effect.
5. Truthfulness.
Employees are required to be truthful at all times whether under
oath or not.
6. Civil Action, Court Appearances — Subpoenas.
An employee shall not volunteer to testify in civil actions and shall
not testify unless legally subpoenaed. Employees will accept all
subpoenas legally served. If the subpoena arises out of Department
employment or if the employee is informed that he is a party
to a civil action arising out of Department employment, he shall
immediately notify the Chief of Police, who in turn shall notify the
proper authorities. Employees shall not enter into any financial
understanding for appearances as witnesses prior to any trial,
except in accordance with Department directives.
7. Civil Depositions and Affidavits.
Employees shall confer with their supervisor before giving a
deposition or affidavit on a civil case. If the supervisor determines
that the case is of importance to the Township of Lakewood, he
shall inform the Chief of Police through the chain of command
before the deposition or affidavit is given.
8. Civil Action, Expert Witness.
Employees shall not volunteer or agree to testify as expert
witnesses in civil actions without the prior written approval of the
Ocean County Prosecutor and the Chief of Police.
9. Civil Process.
Members shall not serve civil process or assist in civil cases unless
the specific consent of the Chief of Police is obtained. They shall
avoid entering into civil disputes, particularly while performing
their police duties, but shall prevent or abate a breach of the peace
or crime in such cases.
10. Internal Affairs Investigations.
The Lakewood Township Police Department hereby adopts and
incorporates the "Internal Affairs Policy & Procedures" of the Police
Management Manual promulgated by the Police Bureau of the
§ 2-20.13.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.13.3
AO:90
§ 2-20.13.4. Disciplinary Regulations. [Ord. No. 2015-38]
Division of Criminal Justice in the Department of Law and Public
Safety to govern the conduct of internal affairs investigations.
a. Disciplinary Action.
1. Disciplinary Action.
Department employees regardless of rank or assignment, shall
be subject to disciplinary action, according to the nature or
aggravation of the offense, for violating their oath and trust by
committing an offense, incapacity, misconduct or disobedience of
established Department Rules and Regulations punishable under
the laws or statutes of the United States, the State of New Jersey,
municipal ordinances, or failure, either willfully or through
negligence or incompetence to perform the duties of their rank
of assignment; or for violation of any general order or rule or
regulations of the Department; or for failure to obey any lawful
instruction, order, or command of a superior or supervisor.
Disciplinary action in all cases will be decided on the merits of each
case.
The disciplinary system established herein shall reflect the
overarching emphasis for improving the quality of service being
delivered by employees of this Department. Discipline should not
engender a strictly negative connotation. The disciplinary process
is meant to correct employee actions and conduct that tend to
impede the efficient and effective operation of the Department.
The proper use of discipline can achieve this objective without
realizing a reduction in morale. Training and counseling shall be a
function of the Department's overall disciplinary system. In lieu of
discipline, training and counseling shall be corrective actions used
to modify an employee's performance.
2. Establishing Elements of Violation.
Existence of facts establishing a violation of the law, ordinance, or
rule is all that is necessary to support any allegation of such as a
basis for disciplinary action. Nothing in these rules and regulations
prohibits disciplining or charging employees merely because the
alleged act or omission does not appear herein, in the Department,
or in laws and ordinances within the cognizance of the Department.
b. Department Authority to Discipline.
Final disciplinary authority and responsibility rests with the Chief of
Police. When necessary, the Chief of Police may suspend any employee
from duty pending the filing of formal charges.
1. Discipline Authority.
§ 2-20.13.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.13.4
AO:91
(a) Under the provisions of N.J.A.C. 4A:2-2.3, employees,
regardless of rank, shall be subject to disciplinary action for:
(1) Incompetency, inefficiency or failure to perform duties;
(2) Insubordination;
(3) Inability to perform duties;
(4) Chronic or excessive absenteeism or lateness;
(5) Conviction of a crime;
(6) Conduct unbecoming a public employee;
(7) Neglect of duty;
(8) Misuse of public property, including motor vehicles;
(9) Discrimination that affects equal employment opportunity
(as defined in N.J.A.C. 4A:7-1.1), including sexual
harassment;
(10) Violation of Federal regulations concerning drug and
alcohol use by and testing of employees who perform
functions related to the operation of commercial motor
vehicles, and State and local policies issued thereunder;
and
(11) Violation of New Jersey residency requirements as set
forth in P.L. 2011, c. 70; and
(12) Other sufficient cause.
(b) Violations of any of the causes listed above may subject an
employee to progressive discipline up to and including
dismissal.
(c) All disciplinary matters will be decided fairly and impartially on
the merits of the case considering all mitigating and
aggravating factors.
(d) All disciplinary procedures shall be in accordance with the
laws of the State of New Jersey, applicable case law, collective
bargaining agreements, administrative regulations, Civil
Service Commission rules and municipal ordinance.
(e) Major Discipline.
(1) Major discipline shall include:
(i) Removal;
(ii) Disciplinary demotion;
(iii) Suspension or fine for more than five working days;
§ 2-20.13.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.13.4
AO:92
(iv) Suspension or fine for five working days or less where
the aggregate number of days suspended or fined in
any one calendar year is 15 working days or more;
(v) The last suspension or fine where an employee
receives more than three suspensions or fines of five
working days or less in a calendar year.
(2) Major discipline shall be administered under the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 4A:2-2 et seq., N.J.S.A. 40A:14-149,
and applicable case law.
(f) Minor Discipline.
(1) Minor discipline includes discipline from a reprimand to a
suspension (or equivalent fine) of five working days or less.
(2) Minor discipline shall be administered under the
provisions of N.J.A.C. 4A:2-3.1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 40A:14-147,
collective bargaining agreements, and applicable case law.
2. Progressive Discipline/Corrective Action.
A system of progressive discipline/corrective action shall be used,
wherever appropriate and practicable. Discipline shall follow the
basic concepts of due process as established in N.J.A.C. 4A:2-1 et
seq. Basic guidelines include:
(a) In certain situations, formal discipline is not required in order
to correct employee performance in various areas. All training
and counseling resulting from a performance issue shall be
documented and forwarded through the appropriate chain of
command to the Chief of Police or designee. Performance
based issues may be corrected by using training and
counseling outlined below:
Training - Training is encouraged as a means of improving
employee effectiveness and performance through positive and
constructive methods. Training and discipline are not mutually
exclusive. Certain minor offenses may be handled through
targeted training. Supervisors have an affirmative obligation to
observe the conduct and appearance of employees and detect
those instances wherein corrective action (training) may be
necessary. Training includes:
• Verbal Instruction - The supervisor may, depending on the
circumstances, provide individual on the spot training
where such is indicated.
• Peer Training - The supervisor may assign the employee to
another employee with experience in the area where
training is indicated.
§ 2-20.13.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.13.4
AO:93
• In-Service Training - The supervisor may refer the
employee to an in-service training program.
Counseling - Counseling is indicated where personal actions
or job performance are in conflict with basic police practice
and agency general orders. Certain first offenses are
sufficiently minor in nature and may be handled by
supervisors by documenting the counseling session on a
performance notice. Facts to be considered in making these
decisions will include, but are not limited to the person's
intent, receptivity of the supervisory consulting and their
desire to correct the problem. More serious infractions may
indicate the need for a stronger response in place of, or
in addition to, counseling. There is no right to a hearing
for counseling notices except as may exist under applicable
collective bargaining agreements. The final disposition notice
regarding the corrective action shall be filed in the employee's
personnel file.
(b) Repeat performance based issues or minor misconduct issues
may be corrected through formal discipline by using the
following actions:
Oral Reprimand - They are intended to be the least intrusive
form of discipline. To be effective, however, written oral
reprimands must be timely. Otherwise, the employee may
believe future infractions will be tolerated. In some cases, a
minor infraction may warrant more than counseling, but less
than a written reprimand. In those instances, a report of the
offense shall be documented and issued to the employee as a
written verbal reprimand. There is no right to a hearing for
a written oral reprimand, unless provided for in the current
collective bargaining agreement. The disciplinary document
shall be filed in the employee's personnel file.
Written Reprimand - In some cases, the misconduct may
warrant more stringent measures. In these instances, a report
of the offense shall be documented and issued to the employee
as a written reprimand. There is no right to a hearing for
written reprimands except as may exist under applicable
collective bargaining agreements. The final disposition notice
regarding the discipline shall be filed in the employee's
personnel file.
(c) Serious misconduct issues or repeat minor misconduct issues
may be corrected with more serious formal discipline using
one or more of the following actions:
(1) Monetary fine; (only when suspension would be
detrimental to public health, safety or welfare and agreed
upon by the employee, see N.J.S.A. 11A: 2-20).
§ 2-20.13.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-20.13.4
AO:94
(2) Suspension without pay;
(3) Demotion;
(4) Termination.
(d) Such actions are taken when an employee's performance
deficiency is repeated despite prior corrective action, or when
a violation is serious and significant enough to require punitive
action. Depending upon the seriousness of the violation,
punitive disciplinary action may not always be based upon the
progressive disciplinary process. It may be necessary to utilize
punitive disciplinary action with the first occurrence of an act
or behavior.
(e) All punitive actions applied as a result of discipline shall be
documented and forwarded through the appropriate chain of
command to the Chief of Police or designee.
3. Appeals Procedure.
(a) Appeals from penalties imposed as a result of discipline or
corrective action may be taken as provided in the Township of
Lakewood personnel policies, manuals, ordinance and New
Jersey Civil Service Commission regulation and laws of the
State of New Jersey.
(b) Appeals to Civil Service Commission.
(1) Any employee of the Department who has been tried and
convicted upon any disciplinary charge or charges may
obtain review by the Civil Service Commission pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 11A:1-1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 4A:2-1.1 et seq.
(2) Disciplinary charges appealed to Civil Service Commission
transmitted for hearing to the Office of Administrative Law
before an Administrative Law Judge shall be adjudicated in
compliance with N.J.A.C. 1:1-1.1 et seq.
§ 2-20.13.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-20.13.4
AO:95

ARTICLE XII
Fire Department
§ 2-21. FIRE DEPARTMENT; COMPANIES ESTABLISHED. [1971
Code § 2-11]
The Township recognizes Lakewood Fire Co. Number 1, Rescue Fire Co.
Number 2, Jr. Hose Co. Number 3, Reliance Hose Co. Number 4 and
Lakewood Hook and Ladder Co. Number 1 as duly incorporated Volunteer
Fire Companies authorized for fighting fires within the Township.
§ 2-21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-21
AO:97

ARTICLE XIII
Department of Economic Development
§ 2-22. DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
ESTABLISHED.
§ 2-22.1. Purpose; Created. [1971 Code § 2-18.11a; Ord. No.
2001-55 § 3]
The Township of Lakewood pursuant to powers designated in N.J.S.A.
40:55B-1 et seq., has created an Industrial Commission for the purpose as
set forth therein; and it appears necessary and desirable that, in order to
coordinate the various programs and activities of the Township Committee
and the Industrial Commission, and the municipal office handling
foreclosures, and to properly channel all of the activities wherein they are
engaged in the process of acquiring, preparing, developing and disposing
of lands for industrial purposes under a department head responsible for
coordination of all of the activities, a department is established which shall
be known as the Department of Economic Development.13
§ 2-22.2. Director of Economic Development. [1971 Code
§ 2-18.11b; Ord. No. 98-50; Ord. No. 2001-55 § 5]
There is hereby created the Department of Industrial Development whose
Department Head shall be entitled Director of Economic Development.
The Department Head shall be appointed by the Township Committee by
majority vote and shall hold office for a term not to exceed two years,
subject to removal by the Township Committee by a majority of its
membership in the same manner and for the same legally sufficient cause as
otherwise set forth in subsection 2-5.5, entitled "Removal of the Township
Attorney." The term of office shall be computed from the effective date of
the appointment.
§ 2-22.3. Duties; Responsibilities. [1971 Code § 2-18.11c; Ord. No.
2001-55 § 5]
The Director of Economic Development shall be in charge of and promote
coordination between the aforementioned municipal departments and
agencies and the business community and is particularly charged with
promotion and development of municipal industrial lands and industrial
parks within the Township.
§ 2-22.4. Record Keeping; Funding from Government. [1971 Code
§ 2-18.11d]
The Director's secretary shall keep continuous records of the transactions
of the industrial growth of the community and the activities of the Industrial
Commission, as well as a continuous log of the minutes of the Industrial
13.Editor's Note: See Section 2-38, Industrial Commission.
§ 2-22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-22.4
AO:99
Commission. The Director shall also assist in obtaining funds from all
possible government sources and to assist in the community in industrial
development in cooperation with the Industrial Commission.
§ 2-22.5. Departmental Employees. [1971 Code § 2-18.11e; Ord. No.
2001-55 § 6]
The Economic Director shall make the final determination as to the hiring,
dismissal, promotion, or disciplining of the employees in his Department
and to the extent the Director deems it administratively appropriate, he may
delegate to the employees in the Department, consistent with applicable
laws and regulations, any of the functions or powers delegated or assigned
to him by this subsection; provided that any such delegation or allocation
shall not relieve the Director from his administrative responsibilities for
proper operation of his Department.
§ 2-22.6. Budget. [1971 Code § 2-18.11f; Ord. No. 2001-55 § 7]
The Director of the Department of Economic Development is authorized
and directed to prepare and submit to the Municipal Manager budget
requests affecting the Department and the Industrial Commission. The
Municipal Manager shall forward copies of such requests to the Township
Committee. Additionally, the Director shall prepare long and short range
recommendations as to the needs and goals of his Department. These
recommendations will normally be prepared in connection with the annual
and capital budgets, but may be submitted as separate memoranda.
§ 2-22.7. Advice; Investigations; Coordinate Work. [1971 Code
§ 2-18.11g; Ord. No. 2001-55 § 8]
The Director of Economic Development, and the resources of the
Department, through the Director, shall be available to the various
committees and boards of the Township for consultation and advice. The
Department will conduct investigations and provide technical assistance
to the Planning Board regarding all elements of the Master Plan, which
include land use, conservation, traffic, housing, utilities, and recreational
elements in the industrial areas. The Director shall coordinate the work of
the Department with the Planning Board, the Zoning Board, and the Fire
Districts of the Township. The Director shall also prepare recommendations
for budget transfers affecting the Department.
§ 2-22.8. Administrative Responsibility. [1971 Code § 2-18.11h]
As Director of the Department, he will be responsible for implementing
the Department budget, and will be held administratively responsible for
implementing and executing the departmental work.
§ 2-22.9. Recommendations. [1971 Code § 2-18.11i]
In all instances where the Director has submitted a recommendation to
the Municipal Manager, the Director should be available to meet with
§ 2-22.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-22.9
AO:100
the Township Committee and the Municipal Manager relative to the
recommendation.
§ 2-22.10. Duties Regarding Development. [1971 Code § 2-18.11j]
The Director shall plan, organize and direct the planning and promotional
activities involved in the economic and industrial development of the
Township; plan, organize and direct a program designed to enhance the
economic and industrial development of the Township, and coordinate
federal aid programs relating to the economic growth of the Township.
§ 2-22.11. Analyze; Maintain Reports and Files. [1971 Code
§ 2-18.11k]
The Director shall analyze and make economic, real estate and industrial
surveys; analyze and evaluate business trends, legislation and
developments affecting industry; maintain records of and provide
information on labor availability, transportation, facilities, housing,
hospitals, education facilities, tax structure of the Township, zoning
requirements, etc. The Director shall attend and participate in conferences
and meetings concerned with the industrial development of the Township
and prepare reports and studies pertaining to the industrial and business
development of the municipality; handle mail promotions directed to
industrial firms in an effort to attract new ratables and make survey tours
of available sites for prospective clients. The Director shall maintain up to
date files on available sites, their specifications, and pertinent information
on existing available structures. The Director shall refer prospective clients
to various public and private agencies for receiving financial assistance,
manpower training and assist clients with processing the necessary
paperwork, and represent the Township's position on industrial
development matters at various Federal and State hearings.
§ 2-22.12. Office of Urban Enterprise Zone (UEZ). [1971 Code
§ 2-18.12]
Within the Department of Industrial Development is hereby created the
Office of Urban Enterprise Zone Administration.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this Office is to administer the Urban
Enterprise Zone in the Township of Lakewood consistent with the
enabling statute and administrative regulations governing same.
b. This Office will be headed by the UEZ Coordinator who shall have an
appropriate title as designated by the Municipal Manager. The
Coordinator shall have the status of a division head in the Township
organization and shall be appointed for a term of one year by a majority
vote of the Township Committee.
c. Duties and Responsibilities. The Office of the UEZ shall have the
following responsibilities:
§ 2-22.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-22.12
AO:101
1. Monitor Township compliance with statutes and regulations
governing the administration of the UEZ office; interface with the
New Jersey UEZ Authority Office and staff;
2. Promote zone benefits to local businesses and help local businesses
to satisfy requirements for designation as "qualified businesses";
3. Coordinate various agencies and personnel to increase business
and employment opportunities within the zone;
4. Implement initiatives set forth in the approved application;
5. Design a plan of zone development in association with the advisory
committee;
6. Carry out such other functions as may be directed by the Municipal
Manager and/or his designee in furtherance of the goals and
objectives contained in the approved application;
7. Carry out such other economic development functions as may be
necessary.
§ 2-22.12 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-22.12
AO:102
ARTICLE XIV
Department of Community Development Block Grants
§ 2-23. DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK
GRANTS.
§ 2-23.1. Purpose of Section. [Ord. No. 2001-103]
The purpose of this section is to establish a Department of Community
Development Block Grants and a Department head within the Township
of Lakewood who shall be responsible for the oversight of Community
Development Block Grants funding.
§ 2-23.2. Department Established. [Ord. No. 2001-103]
There is hereby established a Department of Community Development
Block Grants.
§ 2-23.3. Duties of Director. [Ord. No. 2001-103]
The Department shall be headed by the Director of Community
Development Block Grants who shall be responsible for the planning,
organization, coordination, and administration of the Community
Development Block Grant Program and the funding received for said
programs. The Director may also be assigned additional duties at the
direction of the Municipal Manager.
§ 2-23.4. Functions and Duties of Department. [Ord. No. 2001-103]
§ 2-23.5. Qualifications of Director. [Ord. No. 2001-103]
The Director of the Department shall have a minimum of three years
experience in the area of housing economics, public services, and working
with the administration of grants. A bachelors degree may be substituted
for one year of required experience.
§ 2-24. (RESERVED)
a. The Community Development Block Grants Department shall interact
with Municipal, County, State, and Federal governments for the receipt
of funding, program planning, and implementation.
b. The Department shall also interact with private agencies and nonprofit
organizations within the community to maximize the funding received
from the grants.
§ 2-23 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-24
AO:103

ARTICLE XV
Department of Human Resources14
§ 2-25. DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES.
§ 2-25.1. Department Established; Director. [Ord. No. 2017-1]
There is hereby created within the Township of Lakewood the Department
of Human Resources which shall be headed by the Director of Human
Resources.
§ 2-25.2. Director; Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 2017-1]
The Director of the Department of Human Resources shall be responsible
for training, compliance, salary and benefit issues among other things.
§ 2-25.3. Director; Qualifications. [Ord. No. 2017-1]
The Director of the Department of Human Resources shall have a Bachelor's
Degree and be experienced in personnel management or municipal
government affairs.
14.Editor's Note: See subsection 10-1.3 for adoption of the Personnel Policies and Procedures
Manual by Ord. No. 2017-1 (2/15/17) and amended in entirety by Ord. No. 2017-36 (9/14/
17).
§ 2-25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-25.3
AO:105

ARTICLE XVI
Other Municipal Officers and Employees
§ 2-26. EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN.
§ 2-26.1. Definition. [1971 Code § 2-30a]
Under direction operates or is aboard an ambulance to a location where
emergency medical treatment is needed and provides such treatment both
at the scene and on the return trip to the hospital; does related work as
required.
§ 2-26.2. Examples of Work. [1971 Code § 2-30b]
Answers all calls for emergency medical treatment; drives ambulance to
required location; parks ambulance in a safe location and creates a safe
traffic environment by placement of road flares, removal of debris, and
redirection of traffic; determines the nature and extent of injury and
establishes priorities for emergency care; renders emergency care such as
opening and maintaining an airway, giving positive pressure ventilation;
cardioresuscitation; stops bleeding by bandaging or tourniquets; treats
shock; immobilizes fractures and provides initial care of poisoned and
burned patients; searches for medical identification emblem as a clue for
providing emergency care; extricates patients from entrapment; radios the
dispatcher for additional help if needed; prepares victims for transportation
in an ambulance; cares for patient on return trip to hospital; reports to
the dispatcher the nature and extent of injuries to assure prompt medical
care on arrival; may request advice from hospital physician or emergency
department; emergency treatment may include delivery of babies; on arrival
transfers to stretcher, carries into hospital and provides nurse or doctor the
evaluation of the patient's condition; prepares a simple report of trips made
and also enters trips into a chronological log; may also act as dispatcher
determining priorities in calls for ambulance and dispatching the
ambulance.
§ 2-26.3. Requirements. [1971 Code § 2-30c]
a. Satisfactory completion of an 81 hour Emergency Medical Technician-
Ambulance training program accredited by the New Jersey Department
of Health.
b. Possession of a valid New Jersey driver's license.
c. Thorough knowledge of the principals of emergency medical or first aid
treatment, of the use and practice of pulmonary and cardiac
resuscitation, of the administration of oxygen when necessary, of the
appropriate emergency treatment depending on the patient's condition,
of the priorities to be observed in the treatment of patients.
d. Ability to read, write, speak and understand English sufficiently to
perform the duties of this position; ability to remain calm in a crisis
§ 2-26 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-26.3
AO:107
§ 2-27. CONFIDENTIAL AIDE TO THE MAYOR.
§ 2-27.1. Definition. [1971 Code § 2-5.11a; New]
Acts as a personal aide and liaison between Mayor, the Civil Rights
Commission and other various governmental agencies and assists him by
performing varied responsible administrative duties as it relates to civil
rights in the Township.
§ 2-27.2. Examples of Work. [1971 Code § 2-5.11b]
Conducts the operation of the Civil Rights Office; collects and analyzes data
needed as a basis for policy decisions; prepares correspondence, reports
and recommendations for the review and signature of the Mayor; handles
complex and confidential civil rights matters; coordinates the activities of
said office with various other governmental agencies; acts as a liaison
between the Mayor and public and provides information to those requesting
it; makes referrals to the proper state, local and other groups; assembles
data and other materials required for reports; attempts to resolve problems
brought to the attention of the Civil Rights Commission and the Mayor;
maintains all records of the Civil Rights Commission.
§ 2-27.3. Requirements. [1971 Code § 2-5.11c]
situation, to establish rapport with the patient, to drive an ambulance
with caution and to work harmoniously with others.
e. Good health and freedom from disabling physical and mental defects
which would impair the proper performance of the required duties or
which might endanger the health and safety of oneself or others.
NOTE: Medical Examination: Candidates certified from the eligible list
for this title may be required to undergo a medical examination by the
appointing authority.
f. Must be a resident of the Township of Lakewood.
g. Must hold a valid EMT-A Card.
The salary range for said position shall be as set forth in the Salary
Ordinance of the Township of Lakewood.
1. Five years experience in the area of civil rights and affirmative action
programs.
2. Thorough knowledge of policies, procedures and regulations relative to
the work of municipal government, of the statutory provisions
regarding municipal government and of the policies and procedures
involved in the formulation of effective policies and procedures.
3. Ability to organize assigned technical tasks and interpret basic law and
regulations; to talk with employees and public officials; to prepare
§ 2-26.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-27.3
AO:108
§ 2-28. (RESERVED)
detailed correspondence; to prepare clear, sound, accurate and
informative statistical and other reports on personnel transactions and
problems containing findings, conclusions, and recommendations, and
to maintain essential records and files.
§ 2-27.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-28
AO:109

ARTICLE XVII
Municipal Court
§ 2-29. MUNICIPAL COURT ESTABLISHED.
§ 2-29.1. Established; Powers. [1971 Code § 2-13.1]
There shall be a Municipal Court in the Township pursuant to the provisions
of Chapter 264 of the 1948 Laws of New Jersey, as amended and
supplemented, to be known as the Municipal Court of the Township of
Lakewood, Ocean County. The Municipal Court shall have a seal bearing
the impress of the name of the Court. The Court shall be held in the
Municipal Building of the Township, or such other place as the Township
Committee designates, and shall exercise all the functions, powers, duties
and jurisdiction conferred upon municipal courts by the provisions of
Chapter 264 of the 1948 Laws of New Jersey, as amended and
supplemented, or any other statutes.
§ 2-29.2. Municipal Judge; Powers and Duties. [1971 Code § 2-13.2]
There shall be a Judge of the Municipal Court appointed by the Township
Committee. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall serve for a term of
three years from the date of appointment and until a successor is appointed
and qualifies. The Judge of the Municipal Court shall have and possess the
qualifications, and shall have, possess and exercise all the functions, duties,
powers and jurisdiction conferred by Chapter 264 of the 1948 Laws of New
Jersey, as amended and supplemented, or be General Law or ordinance.
§ 2-29.3. Municipal Court Administrator. [1971 Code § 2-13.3]
There shall be a Court Administrator who shall be appointed by the
Township Committee and who shall perform such functions and duties
prescribed by law, the rules applicable to Municipal Courts, and by the
Municipal Court Judge. His duties shall include, but not be limited to:
a. Carrying out the rules, regulations, policies and procedures relating to
the operation of the Court.
b. Interviewing and speaking to prospective complainants; receiving
complaints and dispensing information relating to Court matters.
c. Maintaining the financial records of the Court.
d. Attending Court, taking minutes of the trials and entering them in the
docket; arranging trial calendars; signing Court documents; preparing
and issuing warrants and commitments.
e. Taking and preparing bail bonds, making inquiry as to their sufficiency
and equity; receiving and accounting for fines and costs.
f. Interviewing persons on citizen complaint matters to determine if there
is a basis for formal action and, if necessary, issue summonses requiring
§ 2-29 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-29.3
AO:111
court appearances in this regard; maintaining and classifying records
and files.
§ 2-29.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-29.3
AO:112
ARTICLE XVIII
(Reserved)
§ 2-30. through 2-33 (RESERVED)
§ 2-30 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-30
AO:113

ARTICLE XIX
Boards, Committees and Commissions15
§ 2-34. PLANNING BOARD.
§ 2-34.1. Establishment. [1971 Code § 2-14.1]
There is hereby established in the Township, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1
et seq., a Planning Board of nine members, consisting of the following four
classes:
Class I. The Mayor.
Class II. One of the officials of the Township other than a member of
the Township Committee to be appointed by the Mayor, provided that if
there be an Environmental Commission, the member of the Environmental
Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board as required by
Section 1 of P.L. 1968, c.245, N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall be deemed to be the
Class II Planning Board member for the purposes of sections 2-34 through
2-36 of this revision in the event that there be among the Class IV members
of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
and a member of the Board of Education.
Class III. A member of the Township Committee to be appointed by it.
Class IV. Six other citizens of the Township to be appointed by the Mayor.
The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office, except that
one such member may be a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and
one such member may be a member of the Board of Education.
If there be a Township Environmental Commission, the member of the
Environmental Commission who is also a member of the Planning Board, as
required by Section 1 of P.L. 1968, c.245, N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall be a Class
IV Planning Board member, unless there be among the Class IV members of
the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and
a member of the Board of Education, in which case the member common
to the Planning Board and Township Environmental Commission shall be
deemed a Class IV member of the Planning Board.
§ 2-34.2. Terms. [1971 Code § 2-14.2]
The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his official
tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class III shall
be for one year or terminate at the completion of their respective terms of
office whichever occurs first, except for a Class II member who is also a
member of the Environmental Commission.
15.Editor's Note: See also Article III of this chapter for a listing of the departments, boards
and commissions. Also, the Board of Assistance has been abolished. Services are provided
by the County of Ocean.
§ 2-34 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-34.2
AO:115
The term of the Class II or Class IV member who is also a member of
the Environmental Commission shall be for three years or terminate at
the completion of his term of office as a member of the Environmental
Commission, whichever occurs, first. The term of the Class IV member who
is also a member of the Board of Adjustment, or Board of Education shall
terminate whenever he is no longer a member of such other body or at the
completion of his Class IV term, whichever occurs first.
The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to sections 2-34
through 2-36 of this revision shall be so determined that, to the greatest
practicable extent, the expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly
over the first four years after their appointment as determined by resolution
of the Township Committee, provided, however that no term of any member
shall exceed four years, and further provided that nothing herein shall affect
the term of any present members of the Planning Board, all of whom shall
continue in office until the completion of the terms for which they were
appointed. Thereafter, all Class IV members shall be appointed for terms of
four years except, as otherwise hereinabove provided. All terms shall run
from January 1 of the year in which the appointments are made.
§ 2-34.3. Vacancies; Removal from Office; Planning Board Alternate
Members. [1971 Code § 2-14.3]
a. Vacancies. If a vacancy in any class shall occur otherwise than by
expiration of term, it shall be filled by appointment as above provided
for the unexpired term.
b. Removal from Office. Any member other than a Class I member, after a
public hearing if he requests one, may be removed by the Township
Committee for cause.
c. Planning Board Alternate Members. The Township Committee may
appoint alternate members to serve on the Planning Board in the
absence or disqualification of a member of the class to which they are
appointed. Such alternate shall not exceed one in Class II, one in Class
III and two in Class IV. Alternate members of Classes II and III shall be
appointed for terms to expire at the same time as the terms of regular
members of their respective classes. Alternate members of Class IV
shall serve for terms of two years; provided, however, that in the event
that two alternate members of Class IV are appointed, the initial terms
of such members shall be one and two years respectively. Such
alternate members upon appointment shall be designated as follows:
Class II Alternate, Class III Alternate and, if Class IV has two alternates,
Class IV Alternate Number 1 and Class IV Alternate Number 2. Each
alternate shall be eligible to serve during the absence or
disqualification of a member of their respective class only and, if Class
IV has two members, they shall serve in rotation.
§ 2-34.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-34.4
AO:116
§ 2-34.4. Organization of Board. [1971 Code § 2-14.4]
The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman from the
members of Class IV, and select a Secretary who may be either a member of
the Planning Board or a Municipal employee designated by it.
§ 2-34.5. Planning Board Attorney. [1971 Code § 2-14.5]
There is hereby created the Office of the Planning Board Attorney. The
Planning Board may annually appoint, fix the compensation of or agree
upon the rate of compensation of the Planning Board Attorney who shall be
an attorney other than the Township Attorney.
§ 2-34.6. Experts and Staff. [1971 Code § 2-14.6]
The Planning Board may also employ or contract for the services of experts
and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board shall not,
however, exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the Township Committee for its use.
§ 2-34.7. Powers and Duties Generally. [1971 Code § 2-14.7]
The Planning Board is authorized to adopt bylaws governing its procedural
operation. It shall also have the following powers and duties:
a. To make and adopt and, from time to time, amend a master plan for the
physical development of the Township including any areas outside its
boundaries, which, in the Board's judgment, bear essential relation to
the planning of the Township in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
b. To administer the provisions of the land subdivision ordinance and site
plan review ordinance of the Township in accordance with the
provisions of such ordinances and the Municipal Land Use Law of 1975,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
c. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations.
d. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
e. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects and amendments thereto projected over a term of six years,
and recommend same to the Township Committee.
f. To consider and make report to the Township Committee within 35 days
after referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26 (a), and also pass upon
other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board by the
Township Committee, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26
(b).
§ 2-34.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-34.7
AO:117
§ 2-34.8. Time. [1971 Code § 2-14.8]
g. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans or conditional uses, to grant to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment:
1. Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70C from lot area, lot
dimensional setback and yard requirements, provided that such
relief from lot area requirements shall not be granted for more than
one lot.
2. Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for issuance of permit for
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainage way, flood-control basin or public area reserved pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32.
3. Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for issuance of a permit
for a building or structure not related to a street.
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice of a
hearing on the application for development shall include reference to the
request for a variance or direction for issuance of a permit as the case may
be.
h. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the Township Committee for the aid and assistance of
the Township Committee or of other agencies or officers.
a. Minor Subdivisions. Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted or
denied within 45 days of the date of submission of a complete
application to the Planning Board or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Approval of a minor subdivision shall
expire 190 days from the date of Planning Board approval, unless,
within such period, a plat in conformity with such approval and the
provisions of the Map Filing Law, or a deed clearly describing the
approved minor subdivision is filed by the developer with the County
Recording Officer, and the Township Engineer and the Township Tax
Assessor. Any such plat or deed must be signed by the Chairman and
Secretary of the Planning Board before it will be accepted for filing by
the County Recording Officer.
b. Preliminary Approval Major Subdivisions. Upon submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the Planning
Board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Upon submission of a complete
application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the Planning Board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. Otherwise, the Planning Board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval for the subdivision.
§ 2-34.7 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-34.8
AO:118
§ 2-34.9. Applications; Procedure for Filing. [1971 Code § 2-14.9]
Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the Planning Board
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. shall be filed with
the Secretary of the Planning Board of the Township. The applicant shall
file, at least 14 days before the date of the monthly meeting of the Board,
at least 13 copies of a sketch plat; at least 13 copies of applications for
minor subdivision approval; at least 13 copies of applications for major
subdivision approval or at least 13 copies of an application for site plan
review, conditional use approval, or planned development. At the time of
filing the application, but in no event less than 14 days prior to the date set
for hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps, or other papers
required by virtue of any provision of sections 2-34 through 2-36 or any
rule of the Planning Board. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms
from the Secretary of the Planning Board. The Secretary of the Board shall
inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate application and of
the regular meeting dates of the board.
§ 2-34.10. Advisory Committee. [1971 Code § 2-14.10]
The Mayor may appoint one or more persons as a Citizens' Advisory
Committee to assist or collaborate with the Planning Board in its duties, but
such persons shall have no power to vote or take other action required of
the Board. Such persons shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
c. Ancillary Powers. Whenever the Planning Board is called upon to
exercise its ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as set
forth in paragraph 2-34.7g of this section, the Planning Board shall
grant or deny approval of the application within 95 days after
submission by the developer of a complete application or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
Planning Board to act within the time period prescribed shall constitute
approval of the application, and a certificate of the administrative
officer as to the failure of the Planning Board to act shall be issued on
request of the applicant.
d. Final Approval. Application for final subdivision approval shall be
granted or denied within 45 days of submission of a complete
application or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date
of signing of the plat, unless within such period the plat shall have
been duly filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer.
The Planning Board may, for good cause shown, extend the period for
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date
of signing of the plat.
§ 2-34.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-34.11
AO:119
§ 2-34.11. Environmental Commission. [1971 Code § 2-14.11]
Whenever the Environmental Commission has prepared and submitted to
the Planning Board an index of the natural resources of the Township, the
Planning Board shall make available to the Environmental Commission an
informational copy of every application for development to the Planning
Board. Failure of the Planning Board to make such informational copy
available to the Environmental Commission shall not invalidate any hearing
or proceeding.
§ 2-34.12. Rules and Regulations. [1971 Code 2-14.12]
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of sections 2-34 through
2-36 of this Revision. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths
and taking of testimony, the provisions of the County and Municipal
Investigations Law of 1953, N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq., shall apply.
§ 2-35. ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 2-35.1. Establishment; Composition; Terms. [1971 Code § 2-15.1]
A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq. consisting of seven residents of the Township appointed
by the Township Committee to serve for terms of four years from January 1
of the year of their appointment. The terms of the members first appointed
shall be so determined that, to the greatest practicable extent, the
expiration of such terms shall be distributed evenly over the first four years
after their appointment, provided that the initial term of no member shall
exceed four years. Thereafter, the term of each member shall be for four
years. Nothing in sections 2-34 through 2-36 of this Revision shall, however,
be construed to affect the term of any present member of the Zoning Board
of Adjustment, all of whom shall continue in office until the completion of
the terms for which they were appointed.
No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment may hold any elective office
or position under the Township.
A member may be removed by the Township Committee for cause, after a
public hearing, if the member requests one.
§ 2-35.2. Vacancies. [1971 Code § 2-15.2]
A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled for
the unexpired term only.
a. Zoning Board Alternate Members. The Township Committee may
appoint to the Zoning Board not more than two alternate members.
Alternate members shall be designated by the Chairman Alternate
Number 1 and Alternate Number 2 and shall serve in rotation during
the absence or disqualification of any regular member or members.
§ 2-34.11 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-35.3
AO:120
§ 2-35.3. Board of Adjustment Attorney. [1971 Code § 2-15.3]
There is hereby created the Office of Attorney to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may annually appoint, fix the
compensation of or agree upon the rate of compensation of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment Attorney, who shall be an attorney other than the
Township Attorney.
§ 2-35.4. Experts and Staff. [1971 Code § 2-15.4]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix
the compensation of such experts and for other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which exceed
the amount appropriated by the Township Committee for use of the Board,
exclusive of gifts or grants.
§ 2-35.5. Rules and Regulations. [1971 Code § 2-15.5]
The Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of sections 2-34 through
2-36 of this Revision. In the issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths
and taking of testimony, the provisions of the County and Municipal
Investigations Law of 1953, N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq., shall apply.
§ 2-35.6. Powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. [1971 Code
§ 2-15.6]
a. The powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq., and amendments and supplements
thereto, and with the provisions of sections 2-34 through 2-36 of this
revision.
b. It is further the intent of sections 2-34 through 2-36 herein to confer
upon the Zoning Board of Adjustment as full and complete powers as
may lawfully be conferred upon such Board, including, but not by way
of limitation, the authority, in connection with any case, action or
proceeding before the Board, to interpret and construe the provisions
of sections 2-34 through 2-36 of this Revision, or any term, clause,
sentence or word hereof, and the zoning map, in accordance with the
general rules of construction applicable to legislative enactments.
c. The Board may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, grant variances from the terms of sections
2-34 through 2-36 of this Revision in accordance with the general or
specific rules contained herein, and with the general rules hereby laid
down that equity shall be done in cases where the strict construction of
the provisions of such sections would work undue hardship. The powers
and duties of the Board having been delegated to and imposed upon it
by statute, the Board shall in all cases follow the provisions applicable
to it in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or subsequent statutes in such case
made and provided, and it shall, from time to time, furnish to any
§ 2-35.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-35.6
AO:121
§ 2-35.7. Appeals and Applications. [1971 Code § 2-15.7]
§ 2-35.8. Power to Reverse or Modify Decisions. [1971 Code
§ 2-15.8]
In exercising the above-mentioned power, the Board of Adjustment may, in
conformity with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., or amendments
thereto or subsequent statutes applying, reverse or affirm wholly or partly
or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed
from, and make such other requirement, decision or determination as ought
person requesting it a copy of its rules and information as to how
appeals or applications may properly be filed with the Board for its
decision thereon.
a. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved, or by an officer, department, board, or bureau of the
Township affected by any decision of an administrative officer to the
Township. Each appeal shall be taken within the 65 days prescribed by
the statute by filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the
appeal was taken, together with 10 copies of the notice with the
Secretary of the Board of Adjustment. Such notice of appeal shall
specify the grounds for the appeal. The Officer from whom the appeal is
taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
b. Applications addressed to the original jurisdiction of the Board of
Adjustment without prior application to an administrative officer shall
be filed with the Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. 13 copies
of the application shall be filed. At the time of filing the appeal or
application, but in no event less than 14 days prior to the date set for
hearing, the applicant shall also file at least 13 black-on-white prints of
the preliminary plat, as well as 13 copies of all plot plans, maps or other
papers required by virtue of any provisions of sections 2-34 through
2-36 of this Revision or any rule of the Board of Adjustment. The
applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the Secretary of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment. The Secretary of the Board shall inform
the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate proceedings and of the
regular meeting dates of the Board.
c. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect
of which the decision appealed from was made, unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the Board of Adjustment after
notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that, by reason of facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent
peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed
otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the
Board of Adjustment or by the Superior Court of New Jersey on
application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and
on due cause shown.
§ 2-35.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-35.8
AO:122
to be made, and to that end, have all the powers of the administrative officer
from whom the appeal was taken.
§ 2-35.9. Expiration of Variance. [1971 Code § 2-15.9]
Any variance from the terms of sections 2-34 through 2-36 of this Revision
hereafter granted by the Board of Adjustment permitting the erection or
alteration of any structure, or permitting a specified use of any premises
shall expire by limitation unless such construction or alteration shall have
been actually commenced on each and every structure permitted by the
variance, or unless such permitted use has actually been commenced within
nine months from the date of entry of the judgment or determination of
the Board of Adjustment; except however, that the running of the period of
limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal
from the decision of the Board of Adjustment to the Township Committee or
to a court of competent jurisdiction until the termination in any manner of
such appeal or proceeding.
§ 2-35.10. Powers Granted by Law. [1971 Code § 2-15.10]
The Board of Adjustment shall have such powers as are granted by law to:
a. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there
is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made by an
administrative official or agency based on or made in the enforcement
of the zoning chapter.
b. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the map or zoning
chapter, or for decisions upon other special questions upon which such
board is authorized by the zoning chapter to pass.
c. Where, by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape of a
specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional topographic
conditions, or by reason of extraordinary and exceptional situation or
condition of such piece of property, the strict application of any
regulation in the zoning chapter would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional and undue hardship
upon the owner of such property, grant upon an application or an
appeal relating to such property, a variance from such strict application
so as to relieve such difficulties or hardship; provided, however, that no
variance shall be granted under this paragraph to allow a structure or
use in a district restricted against such structure or use, and further
provided that the proposed development does not require approval by
the Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in
conjunction with which the Planning Board shall review a request for a
variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60a.
d. Grant a variance to allow a structure or use in a district restricted
against such structure or use in particular cases and for special
reasons, but only by the affirmative vote of at least 2/3 of the full
authorized membership of the Board.
§ 2-35.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-35.10
AO:123
§ 2-35.11. Additional Powers. [1971 Code § 2-15.11]
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall in addition to the powers specified in
subsection 2-15.10, have power given by law to:
§ 2-35.12. Time for Decision. [1971 Code § 2-15.12]
The Board of Adjustment shall render its decision not later than 120 days
after the date an appeal is taken from the decision of an administrative
officer, or the submission of a complete application for development to the
Board pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70 (b).
Failure of the Board to render a decision within such one hundred twenty-
(120) day period or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
§ 2-36. PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO BOTH THE PLANNING
BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 2-36.1. Conflicts of Interest. [1971 Code § 2-15A.1]
No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the Board
on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
§ 2-36.2. Meetings. [1971 Code § 2-15A.2]
e. No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent or purpose of the zone plan and zoning chapter. Any
application under any subsection of this section may be referred to any
appropriate person or agency, including the Planning Board, for its
report provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time
within which the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall act.
1. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a building
or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public drainageway, floodcontrol
basin or public area reserved on the official map.
2. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55B-36 for a building
or structure not related to a street.
The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant to the same extent
and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board subdivision or site
plan approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37-59 or conditional use approval
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67 whenever the Board is reviewing an application
for approval of a use variance pursuant to paragraph 2-35.10d of this Revision.
§ 2-35.10 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-36.2
AO:124
§ 2-36.3. Minutes. [1971 Code § 2-15A.3]
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the Board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the board, the findings, if
any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made
available for public inspection during normal business hours at the office of
Secretary to each Board. Any interested party shall have the right to compel
production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceeding
concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party may
be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use as provided for
in the rules of the Board.
§ 2-36.4. Fees. [1971 Code § 2-15A.4; Ord. No. 98-76 § 1; Ord. No.
2006-54 § 1; Ord. No. 2009-10 § 1; Ord. No. 2009-36 § 1; Ord. No.
2010-18 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2016-16]
Fees for applications or for the rendering of any service by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, or any members of their
administrative staffs shall be as provided for in Schedule B and Schedule
C attached hereto and made a part of this section. All advertising fees
required prior or subsequent to all hearings on any application to the
Lakewood Township Planning Board and/or the Lakewood Township Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall be borne entirely by the applicant. Fees not
otherwise provided by ordinance, may be provided for and adopted as part
of the rules of the respective boards and copies of such rules or the separate
fee schedule shall be available to the public.
a. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
shall be scheduled no less often than once a month, and any meeting so
scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of
application for development to process.
b. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the Chairman or on
the request of any two Board Members, which shall be held on notice to
its members and the public in accordance with all applicable legal
requirements.
c. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
d. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provision of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
e. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, C. 231, Laws of N.J.
1975. An executive session for the purpose of discussing and studying
any matters to come before either Board shall be deemed a regular or
special meeting in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-9.
§ 2-36.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-36.4
AO:125
a. Schedule A: General Regulations.
1. Proposals involving more than one use or application type shall pay
a fee equal to the sum of the fee for each element, including
variances.
2. Special Meetings of Boards. Upon request of the applicant, the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment may call for a
special meeting to conduct a public hearing or otherwise consider
an application for development provided that in such event, each
applicant scheduled for the special meeting shall pay a fee of
$1,200 in addition to the required application and escrow fees to
the Township of Lakewood to defray the costs associated with
attendance of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment
staff.
3. Exemptions. The Administrative Officer shall exempt charitable,
philanthropic, fraternal and religious nonprofit organizations
holding and providing documentation of a tax exempt status under
the Federal Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (26 U.S.C. 501 (c) or
(d)) from 50% of the foregoing application and escrow fees.
Replenishment of escrow accounts shall be established in
accordance with the subsection entitled "Replenishment of Escrow
Accounts" in Schedule C. A Board of Education shall be exempt
from application and escrow fees. Further, a disabled person, or a
parent or sibling of a disabled person shall be exempt from the
payment of application and escrow fees in connection with any
application for development which promotes accessibility to the
living unit of the disabled person. A disabled person shall mean a
person who has the total and permanent inability to engage in any
substantial gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable
physical or mental impairment, including blindness, and shall
include but not be limited to, any resident of this State who is
disabled pursuant to the Federal Social Security Act or the Federal
Railroad Retirement Act of 1974, or is rated as having a 60%
disability or higher pursuant to any Federal law administered by
the United States Veterans' Act.
b. Schedule B: Application Fees.
1. Certified list of property owners: $10.00
2. Minor subdivisions: $350.00+ $75.00 each lot
3. Major subdivisions:
Preliminary: $1,000.00
Final: $500.00
4. Preliminary site plans: $1,000.00
5. Final site plans: $500.00
§ 2-36.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-36.4
AO:126
6. For revisions/amendments to an approved plan (each submission):
$250.00
7. For resubmission/extension of expired approvals (Reaffirmation):
$250.00
8. For administrative approval review and comment, change in
permitted use: $250.00
9. For publication of Notice of Determination: $50.00
10. For appeals and interpretation of zoning map: $100.00
11. For a variance or other appeal where the premises involves an
existing single-family dwelling: $100.00 + $25.00 each additional
variance
12. For a bulk variance: $200.00 + $50.00 each additional variance
13. For a variance or other appeal or interpretation involving a use or
structure:
Residential: $300.00
Nonresidential: $600.00
14. For a zone change application: $250.00
15. For a conditional use permit: $250.00
16. For a building permit in conflict with official map or building permit
for a lot not related to a street: $150.00
17. Erection of a structure on an unimproved street pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 of the Municipal Land Use Law: $150.00
18. For a Zoning Permit: $25.00
19. Plot Plan:
New Construction: $100.00
Addition: $50.00
20. Tax Map Maintenance:
Minor subdivision:
$100.00 for the first two lots created
$50.00 for each additional lot
Major subdivision:
Less than 10 lots $500.00
11-50 lots $750.00
51-100 lots $1,000.00
§ 2-36.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-36.4
AO:127
100+ lots $1,500.00 + $250.00 for each additional 50
lot increment or portion thereof
Residential condominium projects
$500.00 plus $10.00 per unit
21. Concept Plan Review: $100.00
22. Stenography Fee: $75.0016
c. Schedule C: Escrow Deposits Pertaining to Both Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment Applications.
1. Establishment of Escrow Account. As a precondition to filing an
application before either the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, the applicant shall deposit, in the form of cash,
certified check or the equivalent, with the Township Treasurer/
Chief Financial Officer, the escrow deposit required for each
element of the application, as set forth below. No application shall
be acted upon by either the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment until all escrow funds and required fees have been
deposited in accordance with this subsection.
(a) Escrow amounts. Escrow funds in the amounts specified herein
shall be required relative to the following applications:
(1) Minor subdivision: $3,000.00
(2) Sketch plat for major subdivision, preliminary major
subdivision and preliminary site plan approval for
residential use:
0-10 lots or units $3,500.00
11-25 lots or units $4,500.00
26-100 lots or units $5,000.00 + $25.00
per lot
101 + lots or units $6,000.00 + $20.00
per lot
(3) Final major subdivision and final site plan approval for
residential use:
0-10 lots or units $1,250.00
11-25 lots or units $1,750.00
26-100 lots or units $2,500.00 + $20.00
per lot
16.This fee is required for all submissions requiring Board action and must be submitted as a
separate check.
§ 2-36.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-36.4
AO:128
101 + lots or units $3,000.00 + $15.00
per lot
(4) Nonresidential site plan approval, inclusive of minor site
plan:
Preliminary up to two acres $4,250.00
Over two acres $4,250.00 + $300.00
per acre
Final up to two acres $2,250.00
Over two acres $2,250.00 + $150.00
per acre
(5) Variances applications:
Hear and decide application
appeals
$ 250.00
Interpretation of zoning map/
ordinances
$ 250.00
Hardship variance:
Residential $150.00 for the first
category plus $75.00
for each additional
hardship variance (i.e.
per dimension, lot,
unit, etc.)
Nonresidential $300.00 for the first
category plus $150.00
for each additional
hardship variance (i.e.
per dimension, lot,
unit, etc.)
Use Variance:
Residential $ 500.00
Nonresidential $1,500.00
Conditional uses $500.00
Building permit in conflict with
official map or for a lot not
related to a street
$500.00
Erection of a structure on an
unimproved street pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 of the
Municipal Land Use Law
(6) Amended development applications, extensions, reapprovals
and zone change requests:
§ 2-36.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-36.4
AO:129
Re-Approval of subdivisions or site
plans
50% of original fee
Extension of preliminary or final
major subdivision or site plan
approval
$750.00
Amended preliminary or final major
subdivision or site plan approval
original
50% of original fee
Zone change application $1,500.00
(7) Miscellaneous escrow fees:
Exception to design and
performance standards
$250.00 for one
category design or
performance standard
plus $150.00 for each
additional category
Change in use application for a
use specifically permitted in the
zone.
$500.00
Concept Plan Review $500.00
2. Purpose of Escrow Account. An applicant shall be responsible to
reimburse the municipality from the escrowed funds deposited for
the actual municipal costs incurred for all professional review
activity, tax map maintenance, stenographer recording and
correspondence with respect to an application. Professional review,
activity or correspondence shall include the services of a duly
licensed engineer, surveyor, planner, attorney, realtor, appraiser or
other expert who would provide professional services to insure that
an application meets performance and design standards.
3. Replenishment of Escrow Account. Additional escrow funds are
required when the escrow has been depleted to 20% of the original
escrow amount. The Township shall notify the appropriate Board
when escrow funds have been so depleted. The Board or other
review committee shall not take any further action on the
application until the applicant has replenished the escrow account
by depositing 50% of the original escrow amount with the
Township.
4. Escrow Deposits.
(a) Whenever an amount of money in excess of $5,000 shall be
deposited by an applicant with a municipality for professional
services employed by the municipality to review applications
for development, for municipal inspection fees in accordance
with subsection h of section 41 of the Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53)
or to satisfy the guarantee requirements of subsection a of
§ 2-36.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-36.4
AO:130
section 41 of the Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53), the money, until
repaid or applied to the purposes for which it is deposited,
including the applicant's portion of the interest earned
thereon, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, shall
continue to be the property of the applicant and shall be held
in trust by the municipality. Money deposited shall be held
in escrow. The municipality receiving the money shall deposit
it in a banking institution or savings and loan association in
this State insured by an agency of the Federal government,
or in any other fund or depository approved for such deposits
by the State, in an account bearing interest at the minimum
rate currently paid by the institution or depository on time or
savings deposits. The municipality shall notify the applicant in
writing of the name and address of the institution or depository
in which the deposit is made and the amount of the deposit.
The municipality shall not be required to refund an amount
of interest paid on a deposit which does not exceed $100 for
the year. If the amount of interest exceeds $100, that entire
amount shall belong to the applicant and shall be refunded to
him by the municipality annually or at the time the deposit is
repaid or applied to the purposes for which it was deposited,
as the case may be; except that the municipality may retain,
for administrative expenses, a sum equivalent to no more than
thirty-three and one-third (33 1/3%) percent of that entire
amount, which shall be in lieu of all other administrative and
custodial expenses.
(b) The provisions of paragraph (a) shall apply only to that interest
earned and paid on a deposit after the effective date of
paragraph (a).
(c) The Chief Financial Officer of a municipality shall make all of
the payments to professionals for services rendered to the
municipality or approving authority for review of applications
for development, review and preparation of documents,
inspection of improvements or other purposes under the
provisions of P.L. 1975, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). The
application review and inspection charges shall be limited only
to professional charges for review of applications, review and
preparation of documents and inspections of developments
under construction and review by outside consultants when an
application is of a nature beyond the scope of the expertise of
the professionals normally utilized by the municipality. The
only costs that shall be added to any such charges shall be
actual out-of-pocket expenses of any such professionals or
consultants, including normal and typical expenses incurred in
processing applications and inspecting improvements. The
municipality or approving authority shall not bill the applicant,
or charge any escrow account or deposit authorized under
paragraph (d) of this subsection, for any municipal clerical or
§ 2-36.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-36.4
AO:131
administrative functions, overhead expenses, meeting room
charges, or any other municipal costs and expenses except
as provided for in this subsection, nor shall a municipal
professional add any such charges to this bill. If the salary,
staff support and overhead for a municipal professional are
provided by the municipality, the charge shall not exceed 200%
of the sum of the products resulting from multiplying (i) the
hourly base salary, which shall be established annually by
ordinance, of each of the professionals by (ii) the number of
hours spent by the respective professional upon review of the
application for development or inspection of the developer's
improvements, as the case may be. For other professionals,
the charge shall be at the same rate as all other work of the
same nature by the professional for the municipality when
fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants or
developers.
(d) If the municipality requires of the developer a deposit toward
anticipated municipal expenses for these professional services,
the deposit shall be placed in an escrow account pursuant to
section 1 of P.L. 1985, c. 315 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.1).
(e) Each payment charged to the deposit for review of
applications, review and preparation of documents and
inspection of improvements shall be pursuant to a voucher
from the professional, which voucher shall identify the
personnel performing the service, and for each date the
services performed, the hours spent to one-quarter hour
increments, the hourly rate and the expenses incurred. All
professionals shall submit vouchers to the Chief Financial
Officer of the municipality on a monthly basis in accordance
with schedules and procedures established by the Chief
Financial Officer. If the services are provided by a municipal
employee, the municipal employee shall prepare and submit to
the Chief Financial Officer a statement containing the same
information as required on a voucher, on a monthly basis. The
professional shall send an information copy of all vouchers or
statements submitted to the Chief Financial Officer
simultaneously to the applicant. The Chief Financial Officer
shall prepare and send to the applicant a statement which shall
include an accounting of funds listing all deposits, interest
earnings, disbursements, and the cumulative balance of the
escrow account. This information shall be provided on a
quarterly basis, if monthly charges are $1,000 or less, or on a
monthly basis if monthly charges exceed $1,000. If an escrow
account or deposit contains insufficient funds to enable the
municipality or approving authority to perform required
application reviews or improvement inspections, the Chief
Financial Officer shall provide the applicant with a notice of
the insufficient escrow or deposit balance. In order for work to
§ 2-36.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-36.4
AO:132
continue on the development or the application, the applicant
shall, within a reasonable time period, post a deposit to the
account. In the interim, any required health and safety
inspections shall be made and charged back against the
replenishment of funds.
(f) The following close-out procedures shall apply to all deposits
and escrow accounts established under the provisions of P.L.
1975, c.291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) and shall commence
after the approving authority has granted final approval and
signed the subdivision plan, in the case of application review
escrows and deposits, or after the improvements have been
approved as provided in section 41 of P.L. 1975, c.291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53), in the case of improvement inspection escrows
and deposits. The applicant shall send written notice by
certified mail to the Chief Financial Officer and the approving
authority, and to the relevant municipal professional, that the
application or the improvements, as the case may be, are
completed. After receipt of such notice, the professional shall
render a final bill to the Chief Financial Officer within 30 days,
and shall send a copy simultaneously to the applicant. The
Chief Financial Officer shall render a written final accounting
to the applicant on the uses to which the deposit was put within
45 days of receipt of the final bill. Any balances remaining in
the deposit or escrow account, including interest in
accordance with section 1 of P.L. 1985, c.315 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.1), shall be refunded to the developer along with the
final accounting.
(g) All professional charges for review of an application for
development, review and preparation of documents or
inspection of improvements shall be reasonable and necessary,
given the status and progress of the application or
construction. Review fees shall be charged only in connection
with an application for development presently pending before
the approving authority or upon review of compliance with
conditions of approval, or review of requests for modification
or amendment made by the applicant. A professional shall not
review items which are subject to approval by any State
governmental agency and not under municipal jurisdiction
except to the extent consultation with a State agency is
necessary due to the effect of State approvals in the
subdivision or site plan. Inspection fees shall be charged only
for actual work shown on a subdivision or site plan or required
by an approving resolution. Professionals inspecting
improvements under construction shall charge only for
inspections that are reasonably necessary to check the
progress and quality of the work and such inspections shall be
reasonably based on the approved development plans and
documents.
§ 2-36.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-36.4
AO:133
(h) If the municipality retains a different professional or
consultant in the place of the professional originally
responsible for development, application review, or inspections
of improvements, the municipality or approving authority shall
be responsible for all time and expenses of the new
professional to become familiar with the application or the
project, and the municipality or approving authority shall not
bill the applicant or charge the deposit or the escrow account
for any such services.
5. Maintenance Guarantees and Inspection Fees.
(a) Before a recording of final subdivision plats or as a condition of
final site plan approval or as a condition to the issuance of a
zoning permit pursuant to subsection d of section 52 of P.L.
1975, c.291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65), the approving authority may
require, and shall accept, in accordance with the standards
adopted by ordinance for the purpose of assuring the
installation and maintenance of on-tract improvements:
(1) The furnishing of a performance guarantee in favor of the
municipality in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost
of installation, which cost shall be determined by the
Municipal Engineer according to the method of calculation
set forth in section 15 of P.L. 1991, C.256 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.4), for improvements which the approving
authority may deem necessary or appropriate including:
streets, grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks,
street lighting, shade trees, surveyor's monuments, as
shown on the final map and required by the Map Filing
Law, P.L. 1960, c.141 (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), water
mains, culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other
means of sewage disposal, drainage structures, erosion
control and sedimentation control devices, public
improvements of open space and, in the case of site plans
only, other on-site, on-tract and off-site improvements and
landscaping.
The Municipal Engineer shall prepare an itemized cost
estimate of the improvements covered by the performance
guarantee, which itemized cost estimate shall be
appended to each performance guarantee posted by the
obligor.
(2) Provision for a maintenance guarantee to be posted with
the Governing Body for a period not to exceed two years
after final acceptance of the improvement, in an amount
not to exceed 15% of the cost of the improvement, which
cost shall be determined by the Municipal Engineer
according to the method of calculation set forth in section
15 of P.L. 1991, c.256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4). In the event
§ 2-36.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-36.4
AO:134
that other governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed or the
improvements are covered by a performance or
maintenance guarantee to another governmental agency,
no performance or maintenance guarantee, as the case
may be, shall be required by the municipality for such
utilities or improvements.
(b) The time allowed for installation of the improvements for
which the performance guarantee has been provided may be
extended by the Governing Body by resolution. As a condition
or as part of any such extension, the amount of any
performance guarantee shall be increased or reduced, as the
case may be, to an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of
the installation, which cost shall be determined by the
Municipal Engineer according to the method of calculation set
forth in section 15 of P.L. 1991, c.256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4) as
of the time of the passage of the resolution.
(c) If the required improvements are not completed or corrected
in accordance with the performance guarantee, the obligor and
surety, if any, shall be liable thereon to the municipality for the
reasonable cost of the improvements not completed or
corrected and the municipality may either prior to or after the
receipt of the proceeds thereof complete such improvements.
Such completion or correction of improvements shall be
subject to the public bidding requirements of the Local Public
Contracts Law, P.L. 1971, c.198 (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.).
(d) Municipal Engineer's report on improvements.
(1) Upon substantial completion of all required street
improvements (except for the top course) and appurtenant
utility improvements, and the connection of same to the
public system, the obligor may request of the Governing
Body in writing, by certified mail addressed in care of the
Municipal Clerk, that the Municipal Engineer prepare, in
accordance with the itemized cost estimate prepared by
the Municipal Engineer and appended to the performance
guarantee pursuant to paragraph c5(a) of this subsection,
a list of all uncompleted or unsatisfactorily completed
improvements. If such a request is made, the obligor shall
send a copy of the request to the Municipal Engineer. The
request shall indicate which improvements have been
completed and which improvements remain uncompleted
in the judgment of the obligor. Thereupon the Municipal
Engineer shall inspect all improvements covered by
obligor's request and shall file a detailed list and report, in
writing, with the Governing Body, and shall simultaneously
send a copy thereof to the obligor not later than 45 days
after receipt of the obligor's request.
§ 2-36.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-36.4
AO:135
(2) The list prepared by the Municipal Engineer shall state, in
detail, with respect to each improvement determined to be
incomplete or unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the
incompleteness of each incomplete improvement or the
nature and extent of, and remedy for, the unsatisfactory
state of each completed improvement determined to be
unsatisfactory. The report prepared by the Municipal
Engineer shall identify each improvement determined to
be complete and satisfactory together with a
recommendation as to the amount of reduction to be made
in the performance guarantee relating to the completed
and satisfactory improvement, in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the Municipal
Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee
pursuant to paragraph c5(a) of this subsection.
(e) Approval or rejection of improvements by Governing Body.
(1) The Governing Body, by resolution, shall either approve
the improvements determined to be complete and
satisfactory by the Municipal Engineer, or reject any and
all of these improvements upon the establishment in the
resolution of cause for rejection; and shall approve and
authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the
performance guarantee relating to the improvements
accepted, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate
prepared by the Municipal Engineer and appended to the
performance guarantee pursuant to paragraph c5(a) of
this subsection. This resolution shall be adopted not later
than 45 days after receipt of the list and report prepared
by the Municipal Engineer. Upon adoption of the
resolution by the Governing Body, the obligor shall be
released from all liability pursuant to its performance
guarantee, with respect to those approved improvements,
except for that portion adequately sufficient to secure
completion or correction of the improvements not yet
approved; provided that 30% of the amount of the total
performance guarantee posted may be retained to ensure
completion and acceptability of all improvements.
For the purpose of releasing the obligor from liability
pursuant to its performance guarantee, the amount of the
performance guarantee attributable to each approved
improvement shall be reduced by the total amount for
each such improvement, in accordance with the itemized
cost estimate prepared by the Municipal Engineer and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to
paragraph c5(a) of this subsection, including any
contingency factor applied to the cost of installation. If
the sum of the approved improvements would exceed 70%
§ 2-36.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-36.4
AO:136
of the total amount of the performance guarantee, then
the municipality may retain 30% of the amount of the
total performance guarantee to ensure completion and
acceptability of all improvements, as provided above.
(2) If the Municipal Engineer fails to send or provide the list
and report as requested by the obligor pursuant to
paragraph c5(d) of this subsection within 45 days from
receipt of the request, the obligor may apply to the court in
a summary manner for an order compelling the Municipal
Engineer to provide the list and report within a stated time
and the cost of applying to the court, including reasonable
attorney's fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party.
If the Governing Body fails to approve or reject the
improvements determined by the Municipal Engineer to
be complete and satisfactory or reduce the performance
guarantee for the complete and satisfactory improvements
within 45 days from the receipt of the Municipal
Engineer's list and report, the obligor may apply to the
court in a summary manner for an order compelling,
within a stated time, approval of the complete and
satisfactory improvements and approval of a reduction in
the performance guarantee for the approvable complete
and satisfactory improvements in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate prepared by the Municipal
Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee
pursuant to paragraph c5(a) of this subsection; and the
cost of applying to the court, including reasonable
attorney's fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party.
(3) In the event that the obligor has made a cash deposit with
the municipality or approving authority as part of the
performance guarantee, then any partial reduction
granted in the performance guarantee pursuant to this
subsection shall be applied to the cash deposit in the same
proportion as the original cash deposit bears to the full
amount of the performance guarantee.
(f) If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the
approving authority may require the obligor to complete or
correct such improvements and, upon completion or
correction, the same procedure of notification, as set forth in
this subsection shall be followed.
(g) Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right
of the obligor to contest by legal proceedings any
determination of the Governing Body or the Municipal
Engineer.
§ 2-36.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-36.4
AO:137
(h) The obligor shall reimburse the municipality for all reasonable
inspection fees paid to the Engineer for the foregoing
inspection of improvements; provided that the municipality
may require of the developer a deposit for the inspection fees
in an amount not to exceed, except for extraordinary
circumstances, the greater of $500 or 5% of the cost of
improvements, which cost shall be determined pursuant to
section 15 of P.L. 1991, c.256 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4). For those
developments for which the inspection fees are less than
$10,000, fees may, at the option of the developer, be paid in
two installments. The initial amount deposited by a developer
shall be 50% of the inspection fees. When the balance on
deposit drops to 10% of the inspection fees because the
amount deposited by the developer has been reduced by the
amount paid to the Municipal Engineer for inspection, the
developer shall deposit the remaining 50% of the inspection
fees. For those developments for which the inspection fees are
$10,000 or greater, fees may, at the option of the developer, be
paid in four installments. The initial amount deposit drops to
(10%) percent of the inspection fees because the amount
deposited by the developer has been reduced by the amount
paid to the Municipal Engineer for inspection, the developer
shall make additional deposits of 25% of the inspection fees.
The Municipal Engineer shall not perform any inspection if
sufficient funds to pay for those inspections are not on deposit.
(i) In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of
development pursuant to subsection a of section 29 of P.L.
1975, c.291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38), the provisions of this
subsection shall be applied by stage or section.
(j) To the extent that any of the improvements have been
dedicated to the municipality on the subdivision plat or site
plan, the municipal Governing Body shall be deemed, upon the
release of any performance guarantee required pursuant to
paragraph c5(a) of this subsection, to accept dedication for
public use of streets or roads and any other improvements
made thereon according to site plans and subdivision plats
approved by the approving authority, provided that such
improvements have been inspected and have received final
approval by the Municipal Engineer.
6. Maintenance Guarantees - Limitations. A municipality shall not
require that a maintenance guarantee required pursuant to section
41 of P.L. 1975, c.291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53) be in cash or that more
than 10% of a performance guarantee pursuant to that section be
in cash. A developer may, however, provide at his option some or all
of a maintenance guarantee in cash, or more than 10% of a
performance guarantee in cash.
§ 2-36.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-36.4
AO:138
§ 2-36.5. Hearings. [1971 Code § 2-15A.5]
7. Performance Guarantee - Acceptance. The approving authority
shall, for the purposes of section 41 of P.L. 1975, c.291 (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53), accept a performance guarantee or maintenance
guarantee which is an irrevocable letter of credit if it:
(a) Constitutes an unconditional payment obligation of the issuer
running solely to the municipality for an express initial period
of time in the amount determined pursuant to section 41 of P.L.
1975, c.291 (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53);
(b) Is issued by a banking or savings institution authorized to do
and doing business in this State;
(c) Is for a period of time at least one year; and
(d) Permits the municipality to draw upon the letter of credit if the
obligor fails to furnish another letter of credit which complies
with the provisions of this subsection 30 days or more in
advance of the expiration date of the letter of credit or such
longer period in advance thereof as is stated in the letter of
credit.
a. Rules. The Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment may make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies which rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.,
or of sections 2-34 through 2-36 of this Revision.
b. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearings or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law, P.L.
1953, C. 1938, N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq., shall apply.
c. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer and the right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
d. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
e. Records. Each board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means.
The Board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recordings in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his expense.
§ 2-36.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-36.6
AO:139
§ 2-36.6. Notice Requirements for Hearings. [1971 Code § 2-15A.6;
Ord. No. 2013-78 § 1, 2]
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., the applicant shall give notice thereof as
follows:
a. Public notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Township at least 10 days prior to the date of the
hearing.
b. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the
current tax duplicate located within 200 feet in all directions of the
property which is the subject of such hearing and whether located
within or without the municipality in which the applicant's land is
located. Such notice shall be given by serving a copy thereof on the
owner as shown on the current tax duplicate or his agent in charge of
the property by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property
owner at his address as shown on the current tax duplicate. A return
receipt is not required. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by
service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by
service upon its president, a vice-president, a secretary or other person
authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation.
c. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of the
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice required to
be given pursuant to paragraph 2-36.6b to the owners of lands in such
adjoining municipality which are located within 200 feet of the subject
premises.
d. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the County
Planning Board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the official county map or on the county master plan, adjoining other
county land or situate within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
e. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing of an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
f. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Secretary to the Planning Board or
Secretary to the Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10b.
§ 2-36.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-36.6
AO:140
§ 2-36.7. List of Property Owners Furnished. [1971 Code § 2-15A.7]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12c, the Zoning Officer of
the Township shall within seven days after receipt of a request therefor
and upon receipt of payment of a fee of $10, make and certify a list from
the current tax duplicate of names and addresses of owners to whom the
applicant is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph 2-36.6b of this
Revision.
§ 2-36.8. Decisions. [1971 Code § 2-15A.8]
§ 2-36.9. Publication of Decision. [1971 Code § 2-15A.9]
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Township. Such publication shall be arranged
by the Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment,
as the case may be, and the costs of publication shall be paid for by the
g. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing, and the applicant shall file
an affidavit of proof of service with the Board holding the hearing on the
application for development.
h. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
i. The form of notice shall be as follows: All notices required to be given
pursuant to the terms of sections 2-34 through 2-36 of this revision shall
state the date, time and place of the hearing, the nature of the matters
to be considered and identification of the property proposed for
development by street address, if any, or by reference to lot and block
numbers, as shown on the current tax duplicate in the municipal tax
assessor's office, and the location and times at which any maps and
documents for which approval is sought are available as required by
law.
a. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the Board, which shall include findings of fact
and legal conclusions based thereon.
b. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant, or if represented, then to his attorney,
without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to
all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed
by the board of such service. A copy of the decision shall also be filed in
the Office of the Township Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed
decision available to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other
public documents in the Township.
§ 2-36.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-36.9
AO:141
applicant. Such notice shall be sent to a newspaper of general circulation in
the Township within 10 days of the date of any such decision.
§ 2-36.10. Payment of Taxes. [1971 Code § 2-15A.10]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65, every application for
development submitted to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no taxes or assessments
for local improvements are due or delinquent on the property which is the
subject of such application; or if it is shown that taxes or assessments are
delinquent on such property, any approvals or other relief granted by either
Board shall be conditioned upon either the prompt payment of such taxes or
assessments or the making of adequate provision for the payment thereof in
such manner that the Township will be adequately protected.
§ 2-36.11. Stormwater Detention/Retention Facilities Maintenance
Requirement. [1971 Code § 2-15A.11]
§ 2-36.12. Severability. [1971 Code § 2-15A.12]
If any section, subsection or paragraph of this section is declared to be
unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in part, by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such section, subsection, or paragraph shall, to the
extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid, or inoperative, remain in full
force and effect and no such determination shall be deemed in full force
and effect and no such determination shall be deemed to invalidate the
remaining sections, subsections, or paragraphs of this section. All other
a. A detention basin shall be required for the development of any for-sale,
multi-family development. The detention basin shall be a part of a
common open space owned by an owners' association which must be
constituted in order for final approval to be granted prior to the release
of any performance guarantees. No maintenance responsibility or
otherwise shall inure to the Township of Lakewood with regard to the
detention basin. This class of detention basin shall be contained within
a lot to be designated as a drainage easement which shall be deeded to
the owners' association by the developer. No portion of the detention
basin shall be included in any required lot area.
b. The developer shall enter into an agreement with the Township of
Lakewood for the maintenance of the stormwater management facility.
Responsibility for the maintenance of the stormwater management
facility shall reside in the developer until such time as an owners'
association is formed. Upon the formation of an owners' association,
responsibility for maintenance of the lot containing the detention basin
shall reside with the owners' association. The maintenance agreement
shall remain in full force and effect regardless of the Township's release
of the project's performance guarantees as provided to the Township by
the developer at the commencement of the project.
§ 2-36.9 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-36.12
AO:142
portions of this ordinance and chapter shall remain in full force and effect
except to the extent modified herein.
§ 2-36.13. Appeals. [1971 Code § 2-15B; Ord. No. 2002-54 § 1
§ 2-36.14. Miscellaneous Provisions. [1971 Code § 2-15C]
a. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment. An appeal to the Zoning Board
of Adjustment may be taken by any interested party affected by any
decision of the administrative officer of the Township based on or made
in the enforcement of the zoning ordinance, or official map. Such appeal
shall be taken within 65 days by filing a notice of appeal in the manner
set forth in paragraph 2-35.7a of this Revision, and in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69.76.
a. Definitions of Terms. Whenever a term is used in section 2-34 through
2-36 of this Revision which is defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., such
term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the definition of such
term found in that statute, unless a contrary intention is clearly
expressed from the context of sections 2-34 through 2-36.
b. Repeals. All sections of the land subdivision ordinance, the zoning
ordinance, the site plan review ordinance or any other ordinance of the
Township which contains provisions contrary to the provisions of
sections 2-34 through 2-36 shall be and are hereby, to the extent of such
inconsistency, hereby repealed.
c. Ordinances Continued. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-90
and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62a, the substantive provisions of the existing land
subdivision ordinance, zoning ordinance and site plan review ordinance
of the Township and the development regulations set forth therein shall
continue in full force and effect until February 1, 1978, as an interim
zoning ordinance or until the adoption by the Township of substantially
revised development regulations pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
d. Pending Applications. All applications for development filed prior to
December 23, 1976 may be continued but any appeals arising out of
decisions made on any such application shall be governed by the
provisions of section 2-36 of this Revision.
e. Citation. Sections 2-34 through 2-36 shall be known and may be cited as
The Land Use Procedures Ordinance of the Township of Lakewood.
f. Effective Date. Sections 2-34 through 2-36 shall take effect on
December 23, 1976.
g. Copy to be Filed with County Planning Board. Immediately upon
adoption of section 2-34 through 2-36, the Township Clerk shall file a
copy thereof with the County Planning Board as required by law. The
Clerk shall also file with the County Planning Board copies of all other
§ 2-36.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-36.14
AO:143
§ 2-37. BOARD OF HEALTH.17
§ 2-37.1. Established. [1971 Code § 2-17.1; New]
There shall be a Board of Health in the Township which shall consist of
seven members composed as follows:
Five members to be appointed by resolution of the Township Committee to
serve terms of four years;
Two members to be appointed by resolution of the Township Committee to
serve for a term of four years, one to serve as Secretary, in addition to his
regular duties as a member of the Board, one to be a medical doctor of the
State of New Jersey. The Board members shall select the member to act as
Secretary.
§ 2-37.2. Terms. [1971 Code § 2-17.2]
All terms shall begin on January 1st of the year in which the member is
appointed.
§ 2-37.3. Compensation. [1971 Code § 2-7.3]
The Secretary may be compensated for his duties as Secretary and such
compensation shall be provided for in the resolution of appointment.
§ 2-37.4. Powers and Duties. [1971 Code § 2-17.4]
The Board of Health shall have the power and authority to adopt ordinances
relating to the protection of the health of the Township residents, shall
employ necessary personnel and fix their salaries, and shall have under its
jurisdiction the Bureau of Vital Statistics of the Township, the Health Officer
and any other employee necessary to carry out its duties. The Board of
Health shall have all the jurisdiction conferred upon Boards of Health by
Title 26 of the New Jersey Statutes.
§ 2-38. INDUSTRIAL COMMISSION.18
§ 2-38.1. Established. [1971 Code § 2-18.1]
The Industrial Commission of the Township of Lakewood is hereby
established. The Industrial Commission shall consist of seven members and
shall be a body corporate.
ordinances of the Township relating to land use, such as the
subdivision, zoning and site plan review ordinances.
17.Editor's Note: The complete Revised General Ordinances of the Board of Health of the
Township of Lakewood are codified at the end of this volume.
18.Editor's Note: See also Section 2-22, Department of Economic Development.
§ 2-36.14 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-38.2
AO:144
§ 2-38.2. Appointment of Members; Terms. [1971 Code § 2-18.2]
The members of the Industrial Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor.
Each member shall be, for the last five years preceding his appointment,
a citizen of the United States and a qualified voter of the State of New
Jersey. Members shall be appointed for a term of five years. Vacancies in
the membership of the Commission, occurring for whatever cause, shall be
promptly filled by appointment by the Mayor for the unexpired term thereof.
Members shall serve for their respective terms and until their successors
are appointed and qualify.
§ 2-38.3. Qualifications of Members. [1971 Code § 2-18.3; Ord. No.
2001-56]
Each member shall be chosen with a special view to his qualifications and
fitness for service on the Commission. He shall have had experience in
industry or commerce and shall be conversant with the industrial needs and
facilities of his Commission's Municipality.
A member of the governing body of the Municipality shall not be appointed
as a member of the Commission.
There shall be appointed upon said Commission, unless local conditions
shall otherwise require, one representative of industry or commerce; a
representative of labor; a representative of the clearinghouse of banks
of said Municipality; a representative of the Chamber of Commerce; a
representative of the service clubs of such Municipality; a representative
of the legal profession; and a representative of a recognized real estate
dealers' association.
No member, officer or employee of the Commission shall be interested
directly or indirectly in any contracts for work or materials used by the
Commission or in any sales, leases or agreements in connection with lands,
buildings or other property owned or controlled by it, or in any fees or
compensation of any kind paid to any broker, architect, engineer, merchant
or other person doing business with the Commission, or in any other
transaction of or with the Commission or the benefits or profits thereof.
§ 2-38.4. Oath. [1971 Code § 2-18.4]
Before assuming office, each member and officer of the Commission shall
take and subscribe an oath that he will faithfully and impartially discharge
the duties of his office.
§ 2-38.5. Compensation. [1971 Code § 2-18.5]
The members and officers of the Commission shall serve without
compensation but each shall receive his actual disbursements for expenses
for performing his duties.
§ 2-38.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-38.6
AO:145
§ 2-38.6. Officers. [1971 Code § 2-18.6]
The members of the Commission shall choose annually from among its
members, a Chairman or President and any other officers as it may deem
necessary. The Mayor shall be ex officio a member.
§ 2-38.7. Quorum. [1971 Code § 2-18.7]
A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum of the Board.
§ 2-38.8. Assistance. [1971 Code § 2-18.8; Ord. No. 2019-4]
Insofar as may be practicable, the employees and assistants required by the
Commission shall be recruited from the public officers and employees of
the Township. The Commission shall appoint an attorney to provide legal
services to the Commission. The Township Engineer shall be the engineer of
the Commission and the several departments of the Township Government
shall be available to the Commission for the purposes of the Commission's
business. Township employees serving the Commission shall do so without
compensation other than their regular compensation as employees of the
Township. The Commission shall make known to the Mayor its needs in the
nature of services by employees, and the Mayor shall designate which of the
employees, if any, shall render this service.
§ 2-38.9. Office. [1971 Code § 2-18.9]
The Commission shall have and maintain a suitable office where its maps,
plans, documents, records and accounts shall be kept, subject to public
inspection at such times and under such reasonable regulations as the
Commission shall determine. If practicable, existing office facilities of the
Township shall be used by the Commission without charge by the Township,
and wherever possible the office and similar equipment of the Township
shall be used by and be made available for the use of the Commission
without charge.
§ 2-38.10. Powers. [1971 Code § 2-18.10]
To effectuate its purposes, the Commission shall have the following powers:
a. To sue and be sued.
b. To adopt and use an official seal.
c. To adopt suitable bylaws for the management of its affairs.
d. To determine the qualifications and duties of its employees, and to fix
their compensation subject to the foregoing provisions hereof.
e. To enter into contracts.
f. The Commission shall have no power to place the credit of the Township
or to create any debt against the Township, or in any manner act as the
agent of the Township or of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-38.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-38.10
AO:146
§ 2-39. (RESERVED)
§ 2-40. SHADE TREE COMMISSION.
§ 2-40.1. Established. [1971 Code § 2-19.1]
A Commission is hereby established consisting of five residents of the
Township to be known as the Shade Tree Commission of the Township,
pursuant to the terms and provisions of an Act of the Legislature of the
State of New Jersey entitled "An act providing for the regulating, planting,
care and control of shade trees and shrubbery upon the public highways
and in municipal parks, and for the care, control and improvement of these
parks, authorizing the continuance of existing shade tree commissions, and
prescribing their powers and duties," (Revision of 1915) approved April 14,
1915, and the amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 2-40.2. Appointment; Term. [1971 Code § 2-19.2]
The members of the Shade Tree Commission shall be appointed by the
Mayor for terms of five years beginning on January 1 next succeeding their
appointment. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be made for the unexpired
term only.
§ 2-40.3. Powers and Duties. [1971 Code § 2-19.3]
The Commission shall have and exercise full, sole and exclusive control
over the regulation, planting and care of shade and ornamental trees and
shrubbery in and upon any public highway, park or parkway of the Township
except State or County highways, parks or parkways, and shall have such
other powers as may be vested in the Commission under the laws of the
State of New Jersey.
§ 2-41. HOUSING AUTHORITY.
§ 2-41.1. Established. [1971 Code § 2-20.1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:14A-4, a body corporate and politic to be known as
the Housing Authority of the Township is hereby established.
§ 2-41.2. Members. [1971 Code § 2-20.2]
The Authority shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed and
hold office for the terms as hereinafter provided. The Township Committee
shall appoint five Commissioners of the Authority and the Mayor shall
appoint one Commissioner. Commissioners shall be appointed to hold office
for a term of five years, and until their respective successors are appointed
g. All of the powers set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55B-1, et seq., as amended and
supplemented, are incorporated in this section by reference and are
granted to the Industrial Commission.
§ 2-38.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-41.2
AO:147
and have qualified, except that all vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
term.
§ 2-41.3. Director. [1971 Code § 2-20.3]
The Director shall mean the Executive Officer of the Public Housing
Development Authority in the State Department of Community Affairs as
provided by N.J.S.A. 55:14A-3. On receipt of notification of the creation of
the Housing Authority, the Director shall appoint one member thereof who
shall hold office at his pleasure.
§ 2-41.4. Agency of Township. [1971 Code § 2-20.4]
The Authority is hereby constituted an agency and instrumentality of the
Township as provided by law and statute in such case made and provided.
§ 2-41.5. Redevelopment Projects by Housing Authority. [1971 Code
§ 2-20.5]
§ 2-42. through §2-44. (RESERVED)
§ 2-45. LAKEWOOD REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY.
a. Findings. There exist in the Township of Lakewood blighted areas, or
areas in the process of becoming blighted, which impair economic
values and tax revenues, cause an increase in and spread of disease and
crime, and constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals and welfare
of the residents of the Township. These conditions necessitate excessive
and disproportionate expenditures of public funds for crime prevention
and punishment, public health and safety, fire and accident protection
and other public services and facilities. The clearance, replanning and
preparation for rebuilding of the aforesaid areas, and the prevention
and reduction of blight and its causes, are public uses and purposes for
which public money may be spent and private property acquired by
eminent domain or otherwise, and are governmental functions.
Redevelopment activities will stimulate more residential construction,
the production of better housing and more desirable neighborhood and
community development at lower costs, and it is necessary in the public
interest that preparation for such projects be made.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 300, Laws of 1949, the Housing
Authority of the Township is authorized to carry out redevelopment
projects as defined in the law, and to have all the rights, powers,
privileges and immunities conferred, and to be subject to the limitations
imposed by Chapter 300, Laws of 1949 for this purpose.
b. Certified Copy. The Township Clerk is authorized and directed to file a
certified copy of this section with the appropriate State agency.
§ 2-41.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-45.1
AO:148
§ 2-45.1. Declaration of Policy. [1971 Code § 2-20A.1]
It is hereby declared that there exists in the Township of Lakewood an area
or areas particularly in the Central Business areas of the Township that
have become blighted or are in the process of becoming blighted by reason
of hazard, unsafe, unsanitary, dilapidated, or overcrowded condition of the
buildings therein, or by reason of prior inadequate planning of the area, or
excessive land coverage, or the lack of proper light and area or deleterious
land use, or the unsound subdivision plotting and street and road mapping,
or obsolete layout, or a combination of these factors; that such areas
have been and will continue to be harmful to the physical, social, and
economic well being of the Township of Lakewood, necessitating excessive
and disproportionate expenditure of public funds for crime prevention and
punishment, for the extension of costly municipal facilities such as parking,
drainage, and the like, for safe guarding of the health, safety, morals and
welfare of the citizens of the Township; that the acquisition, clearance,
planning, reconstruction and redevelopment of such areas will promote the
public health, safety, morals, and welfare, and economic well being of the
community, and stimulate the proper growth of urban dwelling and business
in properly planned direction consistent with present day requirements for
adequate environment thereby preserving existing values and maintaining
taxable values of property within or contiguous to such areas and encourage
the sound growth of the community.
As a matter of legislative determination by the Township Committee it is
hereby declared to be the policy of the Township to promote the health,
safety, morals and welfare by the creation of an agency to be known as the
"Lakewood Redevelopment Agency," which is an agency of the Township
created for the public purpose of acquiring and replanning such area of the
Township as may be directed by the Township Committee and of holding,
redeveloping or disposing of such area in such manner as directed so
that the area shall become available for economically and socially sound
development by private or public enterprise or by a combination of both.
§ 2-45.2. Creation of Agency. [1971 Code § 2-20A.2]
There is hereby created and designated for the reasons above set forth an
Agency pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55C-1, et seq., to be known as the Lakewood
Redevelopment Agency. Such agency shall be an instrumentality of the
Township of Lakewood, and shall consist of five members who are appointed
by the Township Committee. Each Commissioner shall be appointed as
aforesaid for a term of five years, and until his successor is appointed and
has qualified. Any vacancy occurring in the Office of Commissioner, for any
cause, shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment, but
for the unexpired term only.
In addition to the Commissioners above mentioned the agency shall include
one additional Commissioner who shall be appointed by the Commissioner
of Conservation and Economic Development subject to the approval of the
State Housing Council, who shall hold office for a term of five years and
until his successor is appointed and has qualified and who shall be entitled
§ 2-45.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-45.2
AO:149
to vote as a Commissioner of the Agency and to all other privileges as such
Commissioner. Any such additional Commissioner may be removed from
office by the Commissioner of Conservation and Economic Development for
inefficiency or neglected duty or misconduct in office, after public hearing,
at which he shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard, either in person
or by counsel, and at least 10 days prior to the holding of which he shall
be served with a copy of the charges. Any vacancy occurring in the Office
of such additional Commissioner from any cause shall be filled in the same
manner as the original appointment, but for the unexpired term only.
No Commissioner of any Agency may be an officer or employee of the
two except that the Township Committee may authorize one member of
the Planning Board and one member of the Local Housing Authority to
accept appointment as a Commissioner of the Agency. A certificate of the
appointment of reappointment of any Commissioner shall be filed with the
Clerk and such certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the due and
proper appointment of such Commissioner. A Commissioner shall receive
no compensation for his services but he shall be entitled to his necessary
expenses, including traveling expenses, incurred in the discharge of his
duties. The powers of each Agency shall be vested in the Commissioners
thereof in office. A majority of all member appointed and qualified shall
constitute a quorum of the Agency for the purpose of conducting its
business and exercising its powers. Action may be taken by the Agency
upon a vote of the majority of the Commissioners present, unless in any
case the bylaws of the Agency shall require a larger number. The Agency
shall select a Chairman and a Vice-chairman from among its Commissioners
and it may employ a Secretary (who shall be Executive Director), technical
experts and such other officers, agents and employees, permanent and
temporary, as it may require, and shall determine their qualifications, duties
and compensation. For such legal services as it may require, the Agency
may call upon the Township Attorney or may employ its own counsel and
legal staff. The Agency may delegate to one or more of its agents or
employees such powers and duties as it may deem proper, to be exercised
under its supervision and control. No Commissioner or employee of the
Agency shall acquire any interest, direct or indirect, in any project,
redevelopment area nor shall be have any interest, direct or indirect, in any
contract or proposed contract for materials or services or in any property to
be furnished or used in connection with any project or redevelopment area.
If any Commissioner or employee of an Agency owns or controls an interest,
direct or indirect, in any property included or planned to be included in
a project or redevelopment area or in any contract or proposed contract
he shall immediately disclose the same in writing to the Agency and such
disclosure shall be entered upon its minutes. Failure to so disclose such
interest shall constitute misconduct in office. Upon such disclosure such
Commissioner or employee shall not participate in any action by the Agency
affecting such property or contract. For inefficiency or neglect of duty or
misconduct in office, a Commissioner may be removed by the Township
Committee, provided that he is served with a copy of the charges at least
10 days prior to a public hearing thereon and is afforded an opportunity
to be heard at such hearing, in person or by counsel. In the event of the
§ 2-45.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-45.2
AO:150
removal of any Commissioner, a record of the proceedings, together with
the charges and findings thereon shall be filed in the Office of the Township
Clerk.
§ 2-45.3. Dissolution of Agency. [1971 Code § 2-20A.3]
At any time two years after July 9, 1970, the Township, may, by ordinance,
dissolve such Agency, provided the Agency has not undertaken, contracted
for or proceeded with the clearance, replanting, development or
redevelopment of a blighted area in accordance with a redevelopment plan;
however, such ordinance shall in any case provide that all obligations, if any,
of the Agency shall be assumed by the Township.
Upon the adoption of an ordinance of dissolution, the offices of the members
of the Agency shall be vacated and the capacity of the Agency to transact
business or exercise any power shall cease.
§ 2-45.4. Powers and Duties. [1971 Code § 2-20A.4]
The Lakewood Redevelopment Agency is authorized to carry out such
redevelopment projects as may be designated by the Township Committee
and in so doing shall have all of the rights, powers, privileges and
immunities conferred, and is to be subject to the limitations set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55C-1 through 40:55C-39 inclusive, as well as any amendments
or supplements thereto.
§ 2-46. OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.
§ 2-46.1. Council on Emergency Management.
There shall be a Council on Emergency Management pursuant to Chapter
438 of the 1956 Laws of New Jersey, N.J.S.A. App. A:9-41, and a Director
thereof. The Department of Police and all departments of the Township
government shall cooperate with and assist the Council as required.
§ 2-47. MUNICIPAL UTILITIES AUTHORITY.
§ 2-47.1. Findings. [1971 Code § 2-24.1]
The Township finds that it is in the public interest and policy of the State
of New Jersey to foster and promote by all reasonable means the provision
and distribution of an adequate supply of water for the public and private
uses of counties and municipalities and their inhabitants and the relief of
waters in or bordering the State from pollution and, thus the reduction and
ultimate abatement of the menace to the public health resulting from such
pollution.
§ 2-47.2. Creation. [1971 Code § 2-24.2]
Pursuant to the Municipal Utilities Authorities Law, constituting Chapter
183 of the Laws of New Jersey of 1957 (Chapter 14 B of Title 40 of the
§ 2-45.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-47.2
AO:151
Revised Statutes of New Jersey) there is hereby created and established a
public body corporate and politic, as an agency and instrumentality of the
Township under the corporate name and title of "The Lakewood Township
Municipal Utilities Authority." The Municipal Utilities Authority shall, within
the territorial boundaries of the Township, have and may exercise all or
any of the powers provided for in and conferred upon municipal utilities
authorities by the Municipal Utilities Authorities Law.
§ 2-47.3. Membership. [1971 Code § 2-24.3]
The Municipal Utilities Authority shall consist of five members and not more
than two alternate members who shall be appointed by resolution of the
Township Committee. The members first appointed shall be the resolution
of appointment be designated to serve for terms respectively expiring on
the first days of the first, second, third, fourth and fifth Februaries next
ensuing after the date of appointment. On or about January 1 annually one
person shall be appointed as a member of the Municipal Utilities Authority
to serve for a term commencing on February 1 in such year and expiring on
February 1, in the fifth year after such year. In the event of a vacancy of the
member of the Municipal Utilities Authority occurring during an unexpired
term of office, a person shall be appointed as a member of the Municipal
Utilities Authority to serve for such unexpired term. The term of each
alternate member shall be five years commencing on February 1 of the year
of appointment; provided, however, that in the event two alternate members
are appointed, their initial terms shall be four and five years respectively.
Alternate members shall be designated at the time of appointment by the
authority appointing them as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2." The
terms of the first alternate members appointed shall commence on the day
of their appointment and shall expire on the fourth or fifth, January 31, next
ensuing after the date of their appointments as the case may be. Alternate
members may participate in discussions of the proceedings but may not
vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member. A vote
shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of
an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which
alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote. A copy of each
resolution appointing a member of the Municipal Utilities Authority, duly
certified by the appropriate officer of the authority, shall be filed in the
Office of the Secretary of State of New Jersey.
§ 2-47.4. Removal. [1971 Code § 2-24.4]
Each member shall hold office for the term for which he was appointed and
until his successor has been appointed and has qualified. A member may
be removed only by the Township Committee and only for inefficiency or
neglect of duty or misconduct in office and after he shall have been given a
copy of the charges against him and, not sooner than 10 days thereafter, had
opportunity in person or by counsel to be heard thereon by the Township
Committee.
§ 2-47.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-47.5
AO:152
§ 2-47.5. Powers. [1971 Code § 2-24.5]
The powers shall be vested in the members thereof in office. A majority
of the entire authorized membership of the Municipal Utilities Authority
shall constitute a quorum at any meeting thereof. Action may be taken
and motions and resolutions adopted by vote of a majority of the members
present, unless the bylaws of the Municipal Utilities Authority require a
larger number.
§ 2-47.6. Conflict of Interest. [1971 Code § 2-24.6]
No member, officer or employee shall have or acquire any interest, directly
or indirectly in the utility system or in any property included or planned to
be included in the utility system or in any contract or proposed contract
for materials or services to be furnished to or used by the Municipal
Utilities Authority. Neither the holding of any office or employment in
the government of any County or municipality or under any Law of the
State nor the owning of any property within the State shall be deemed a
disqualification for membership in or employment by the Municipal Utilities
Authority and members of the Township Committee may be appointed and
may serve as members of the Municipal Utilities Authority.
§ 2-47.7. Elections. [1971 Code § 2-24.7]
The Municipal Utilities Authority upon the first appointment of its members
and thereafter on or after February 1 shall annually elect from among
its members a Chairman and a Vice-chairman who shall hold office until
February 1 next ensuing and until their respective successors have been
appointed and have qualified. The Municipal Utilities Authority may also
appoint and employ, without regard to the provisions of Title 11 of the New
Jersey Statutes Annotated, a Secretary, an Executive Director and a Chief
Engineer and it shall determine their qualifications, terms of office, duties
and compensation. The Municipal Utilities Authority may also appoint and
employ such other agents and employees as it may require and determine
their duties and compensation.
§ 2-47.8. Compensation. [1971 Code § 2-24.8; New; Ord. No. 2004-3
§ 1; Ord. No. 2005-31 § 1]
Members of the Municipal Utilities Authority shall be compensated for the
performance of their duties commencing February 1, 2005, as follows:
a. Chairman - $5,000.00 annual salary
b. All other members - $5,000.00 annual salary
§ 2-47.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-47.8
AO:153
§ 2-48. ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION.
§ 2-48.1. Creation. [1971 Code § 2-25.1]
There is hereby created an Environmental Commission within the Township
for the protection, development or use of the natural resources located
within the territorial limits of the Township pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1.
§ 2-48.2. Appointment; Terms; Compensation. [1971 Code § 2-25.2]
The Mayor in his discretion shall appoint the members of the Environmental
Commission. There shall be seven members, all of whom are citizens and
residents of the Township and one of whom shall also be a member of the
Municipal Planning Board. All appointments shall be for a term of three
years and vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only, in the
same manner as an original appointment. The members shall receive no
compensation for their services.
§ 2-48.3. Alternate Appointments. [Ord. No. 99-40 § 1]
The Mayor may appoint two alternate members. Alternate members shall be
designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor as Alternate No. 1 and
Alternate No. 2. The terms of the alternate members shall be for two years,
except that the terms of the alternate members first appointed shall be two
years for Alternate No. 1 and one year for Alternate No. 2 so that the term of
not more than one alternate member shall expire in any one year. A vacancy
occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the Mayor
for the unexpired term only. An alternate member shall not be permitted to
act on any matter in which he has either directly or indirectly any personal
or financial interest. An alternate member may participate in discussions of
the proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification
of a regular member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular
member may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall
vote first.
§ 2-48.4. Powers of the Commission. [1971 Code § 2-25.3]
The Commission shall have the following powers:
These salaries are to be paid from the fees collected by the Municipal Utilities
Authority.
Members of the Municipal Utilities Authority shall be reimbursed for necessary
expenses incurred in the discharge of their duties; provided, that in the event
that any member of the Authority shall also be employed as an Officer or
Agent of the Authority, then such member shall also receive such additional
compensation for his services as such Officer or Agent as shall be hereafter
determined by resolution of the Authority.
§ 2-47.8 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-48.4
AO:154
§ 2-48.5. Index of Open Areas Maintained. [1971 Code § 2-25.4]
The Commission shall compile and keep an index of all open areas, publicly
or privately owned, including open marshlands, swamps, and other
wetlands in order to obtain information on the proper use of such areas.
§ 2-48.6. Acquisitions. [1971 Code § 2-25.5]
The Commission, with the approval of the Township Committee may acquire
property, both real and personal, in the name of the Township, by gift,
purchase, grant, bequest, devise or lease for any of its purposes, including
but not limited to use as living museums, sites for scientific study, areas
for teaching of natural history and conservation, places of historic or
prehistoric interest and scenic beauty and habitat for rare and endangered
plants and animals and shall administer the same for such purposes subject
to the terms of the conveyance or gift.
Such an acquisition may be to acquire the fee or any lesser interest,
development right, easement, covenant or other contractual right as may
be necessary to acquire, maintain, improve, protect, limit the future use,
or otherwise conserve and properly utilize open spaces and other land and
water areas in the Township.
§ 2-48.7. Exclusive Control. [1971 Code § 2-25.6]
The Environmental Commission shall, subject to approval of the Township
Committee have exclusive control of lands acquired for the purposes herein
a. Promoting the conservation and development of the natural resources
of the Township.
b. Planning, implementing and informing the public about local
conservation programs.
c. Conducting research into the possible use of the open areas of the
Township.
d. Recommending to the Planning Board, plans and programs for inclusion
in a Municipal Master Plan and the development and use of such open
areas.
e. Advertising, preparing, printing and distributing books, maps, charts,
plans and pamphlets which, in its judgment, it deems necessary for its
purposes.
f. Managing donated or purchased lands for conservation purposes and
operating conservation programs.
g. Acting as the coordinating agency of the community on environmental
matters and a liaison between local/environmental needs and regional,
County, State and Federal agencies ministering to those needs.
§ 2-48.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-48.7
AO:155
stated and may adopt suitable rules and regulations for the use thereof and
the conduct of all persons while on or using the same.
§ 2-48.8. Records and Annual Report. [1971 Code § 2-25.7]
The Commission shall keep records of its meetings and activities and shall
make an annual report on or before December 1 and submit the same to
the Township Committee. This report shall be comprehensive and detailed
covering operations, receipts, disbursements and expenditures for the full
year.
§ 2-48.9. Organization. [1971 Code § 2-25.8]
The Mayor shall designate one of the members to serve as Chairman and
Presiding Officer of the Commission. The Commission is authorized to adopt
bylaws governing its procedural operation.
§ 2-48.10. Removal. [1971 Code § 2-25.9]
The Mayor or the Township Committee may remove any member of the
Commission for cause, on written charges served upon the member and
after a hearing thereon at which the member shall be entitled to be heard
in person or by counsel.
§ 2-48.11. Appropriations. [1971 Code § 2-25.10]
The Township Committee shall annually fix, determine and appropriate a
sum sufficient for the care, custody, policing and maintenance of such lands
acquired for the uses and purposes herein stated, and for the expenses of
the Commission, which shall be raised by taxation in the same manner as
other taxes.
§ 2-48.12. Appointment of Clerks and Other Employees;
Compensation. [1971 Code § 2-25.11]
The Commission may appoint a secretary or clerk and such number of
custodians, supervisors and assistants for the lands acquired for the uses
and purposes herein mentioned as they shall think necessary, but the
salaries of all such clerks, custodians, supervisors and assistants shall be
fixed and determined by the Township Committee and, in addition thereto,
the total salaries of all such persons shall be within the limits of funds
appropriated to the Commission.
§ 2-48.13. Review of Development Applications. [Ord. No. 2001-70]
a. The purpose of this subsection is to ensure that environmental review
and protection will be afforded to all applications for development
within the Township of Lakewood.
b. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, the Township of Lakewood has
established an Environmental Commission.
§ 2-48.7 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-48.13
AO:156
§ 2-49. RENT CONTROL BOARD.
§ 2-49.1. Creation. [1971 Code § 2-26.1]
There is hereby created the Township of Lakewood Rent Control Board
hereinafter referred to as Board, consisting of seven members. Members
shall be appointed by the Township Committee and shall serve without
compensation.
§ 2-49.2. Eligibility of Members. [1971 Code § 2-26.2]
Two members shall be appointed from tenants residing in the Township;
two members shall be appointed from landlords owning residential rented
property within the Township or from officers, directors, stockholders,
partners or agents of any corporation, partnership or joint venture owning
residential rented property within the Township; and three members shall
be appointed from residents within the Township who are neither a landlord
nor a tenant.
§ 2-49.3. Terms. [1971 Code § 2-26.3]
Each member of the Board shall serve for a period of one year.
§ 2-49.4. Alternate Members. [1971 Code § 2-26.4]
Two alternate members may be appointed by the Township Committee to
the Board for a term of one year and shall vote on matters before the Board
only in the absence or disqualification of regular members.
c. All applications for development before the Planning Board or the
Zoning Board of Adjustment must be submitted at the same time to the
Township Environmental Commission for review.
d. The application shall contain a brief summary of the description of the
development or project before the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
e. The Environmental Commission shall review any application before the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment and make
recommendations that would impact the environment including but not
limited to open space preservation, water resources management, air
pollution control, solid waste management, noise control, soil and
landscape protection, environmental appearance, marine resources
and protection of flora and fauna.
f. The Environmental Commission shall submit its recommendation to the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment as soon as possible
and no application shall be delayed within the time period allowed for
approval for the failure of the Environmental Commission to act.
§ 2-48.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-49.5
AO:157
§ 2-49.5. Conflict of Interest. [1971 Code § 2-26.5]
No member or alternate member shall be permitted to act on any matter in
which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or financial
interests.
§ 2-49.6. Removal. [1971 Code § 2-26.6]
A member may be removed by the Governing Body for good cause provided
a public hearing is held if so requested.
§ 2-49.7. Vacancy. [1971 Code § 2-26.7]
If any vacancy shall occur, it shall be filled by appointment as above
provided for the unexpired term.
§ 2-49.8. Quorum. [1971 Code § 2-26.8]
A majority of the whole number of regular members of the Board shall
constitute a quorum. If a quorum is not present 1/2 hour after the
designated time for any meeting, the Chairman or Presiding Officer may
declare the meeting adjourned. No decision shall be rendered by the Board
without the affirmative vote of the majority of the quorum.
§ 2-49.9. Chairman and Vice Chairman. [1971 Code § 2-26.9]
Regular members of the Boars shall annually choose a Chairman and Vicechairman
to preside over all meetings of the Board. In the absence of both
the Chairman and Vice-chairman, the majority of the quorum shall appoint
a Chairman Pro Tem from the members present.
§ 2-49.10. Powers. [1971 Code § 2-26.10]
The Rent Control Board shall have and exercise, in addition to other powers
granted herein, all the powers necessary and appropriate to carry out and
execute the purposes of the Rent Control regulations, including but not
limited to, the power:
a. To adopt bylaws governing its procedural operation.
b. To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants to help
them comply with the provisions of the Rent Control regulations,
including all necessary statistical information of the consumer price
index and computation of proper rental increases and tax and service
surcharges;
c. To remedy violations of the Rent Control regulations by adjusting
rentals, ordering rebates or taking any other authorized action to
enforce compliance with the Rent Control regulations.19
19.Editor's Note: Refer to Chapter 14, Rent Control.
§ 2-49.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-49.10
AO:158
§ 2-49.11. Hearings. [1971 Code § 2-26.11]
The Board shall hold a hearing on each application or complaint properly
presented to it.
§ 2-49.12. Assistance. [1971 Code § 2-26.12]
Insofar as may be practicable, the employees and assistants required by
the Board shall be recruited from the public officers and employees of
the Township. From time to time the Board shall make known to the
d. To accept complaints from tenants of illegal rental increases.
e. To accept applications from landlords who are seeking rental increase
based on hardship, unusual expenses, tax surcharge or other
circumstances under which said increase might be allowed after a
hearing.
f. To reduce rents based on landlord's breach of covenants in lease or
implied covenants, such as habitability.
g. To adjust rents based on landlord's subsequent change in position
caused by law or economic conditions.
h. To review applications and investigate complaints if necessary prior to
rendering final decisions in any case.
a. The presiding officer or such person as may be designated by the
presiding officer shall have the power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas, to compel the attendance of witnesses and production of
relevant evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the
parties. The provisions of the "County and Municipal Investigations
Law," N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq. shall apply.
b. The testimony of all witnesses shall be taken under oath or affirmation
by the presiding officer or such person as he shall designate, and the
right of cross-examination shall be permitted to all interested parties,
subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to reasonable
limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
c. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but
the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious
evidence.
d. The Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the proceedings
by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means. The Board
shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate recording in lieu thereof, on
request to any interested party at no cost or a reasonable cost if the
Board so decides.
e. Each decision shall be in writing and incorporated within or attached to
a written resolution of the Board. The decision shall include findings of
fact and conclusions based thereon.
§ 2-49.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-49.12
AO:159
Township Committee its wants in the nature of services by employees and
the Township Committee shall designate which of the employees, if any,
shall render this service.
§ 2-49.13. Eligibility to Vote. [1971 Code § 2-26.13]
No member of the Board or alternate shall be allowed to vote on a case
for which that member has not been present for the full hearing or hearing
concerning the case unless the member testifies under oath that he or
she has listened to a verbatim recording of the case or read a verbatim
transcript of same prior to voting thereon.
§ 2-49.14. Appeals. [1971 Code § 2-26.14]
Both landlords and tenants may appeal the decision of the Board to a court
of competent jurisdiction according to law.
§ 2-49.15. Hearing Procedure; Time Requirements; Prehearing
Conference. [1971 Code § 2-26.17]
It is expressly recognized and therefore the intent of this section that
landlords are entitled to fair and efficient administrative relief upon filing
and application for a rental increase.
§ 2-50. AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA) COMPLIANCE
COMMITTEE AND DISABILITIES COMMISSION.
a. Hearing Procedure; Time Requirements; Prehearing Conference.
Within 15 days after the receipt of a properly filed and completed
application for a rental increase, the Attorney for the Rent Control
Board may schedule a prehearing conference which may include the
landlord, tenants and/or their representatives, for the purpose of
ascertaining facts, specifying issues in dispute, providing names and
reports of expert witnesses, establishing stipulated facts, and
determining whether the application is complete.
The Rent Control Board shall, within 30 days of the prehearing
conference, or within 45 days of the receipt of a properly filed and
completed application for a rental increase, schedule a hearing for the
application.
The Rent Control Board shall, within 60 days following the proper filing
of a completed application for a rental increase, render a decision on
the application.
If, due to no fault of the landlord, the Rent Control Board does not
render a decision on a properly filed and completed application for a
rental increase within 60 days of receipt of same, the landlord shall be
entitled to have any rental increase granted on the application, applied
retroactively to the first rental payment period 30 days after the filing
of the application.
§ 2-49.12 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-50.1
AO:160
§ 2-50.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 98-55 § 2]
To provide services for and improve the lifestyles of those with handicaps
and disabilities.
§ 2-50.2. Compliance Officer. [Ord. No. 98-55 § 2]
The Director of Public Works shall serve as the ADA Compliance Officer.
§ 2-50.3. Membership. [Ord. No. 98-55 § 2; Ord. No. 2008-10 § 1]
There shall be nine members on the Committee who shall be appointed by
the Mayor and serve without remuneration as follows:
Two members, each for a one year term.
Five members, each for a two year term.
Two members, each for a three year term.
Three alternate members, each for a one year term.
All terms commence January 1st of each year.
§ 2-50.4. Chairperson. [Ord. No. 98-55 § 2]
The Chairperson shall be appointed by the Mayor and serve for a one year
term, or until his successor is appointed.
§ 2-50.5. Authority. [Ord. No. 98-55 § 2]
The Committee shall meet from time to time and shall oversee activities
and policies of the Township with regard to those with handicaps and
disabilities. It shall advise the Township Committee to ensure that there
is compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act and all Federal,
State and local laws, rules and regulations for those with handicaps and
disabilities. The Committee shall make recommendations to the Township
Committee that it deems appropriate for the welfare of those with
handicaps and disabilities.
§ 2-51. DISSOLUTION OF THE LAKEWOOD TOWNSHIP AIRPORT
UTILITY.
§ 2-51.1. Dissolution. [Ord. No. 2009-29 § 1]
The LTAA, created by the Township by Ordinance 2002-35 finally adopted
September 5, 2002, be and the same is hereby dissolved, subject to the
terms and conditions hereof.
§ 2-51.2. Transfer of Title to All Facilities. [Ord. No. 2009-29 § 2]
Upon the effective date of the dissolution as set forth in subsection 2-51.5
of this section, all real and personal property, facilities and contracts of the
§ 2-50.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-51.2
AO:161
LTAA and all monies and funds held by or for the LTAA shall be deemed
transferred to and become the property of the Township. The existing
officers of the LTAA are hereby authorized and directed to execute any
documents or instruments necessary to transfer legal title to all real
property, personal property, facilities, contracts and monies and funds to the
Township upon the effective date of the dissolution herein, notwithstanding
the dissolution of the LTAA. All documents and records of the LTAA shall be
delivered to the Township Clerk prior to the effective date of the dissolution.
§ 2-51.3. Payment of All Creditors and Obligees. [Ord. No. 2009-29
§ 3]
Upon the effective date of the dissolution as set forth in subsection 2-51.5
of this section, the Township shall assume all legal obligations of the LTAA,
including paying all existing and outstanding creditors and obligees of
the LTAA. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:5A-20, and in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:2-1 et seq., the Township shall assume responsibility for and payment of
the obligations of the LTAA. The LTAA does not have any outstanding bonds
or notes.
§ 2-51.4. Assumption of Services Provided by the LTAA. [Ord. No.
2009-29 § 4]
Upon the effective date of the dissolution as set forth in subsection 2-51.5
of this section, the Township shall own and operate the Airport previously
owned and operated by the LTAA as a municipal airport.
§ 2-51.5. Effective Date of Dissolution. [Ord. No. 2009-29 § 5]
The dissolution of the LTAA shall take effect simultaneously with the
assumption of the obligations of the LTAA, including all existing and
outstanding indebtedness, by the Township, the delegation to the Township
the assumption of the services previously provided by the LTAA, and the
transfer of all funds from the LTAA to the Township.
§ 2-51.6. Limitation on Actions by LTAA. [Ord. No. 2009-29 § 6]
So as to provide for an orderly transition of the services provided by
the LTAA, Ordinance 2002-35, the ordinance creating the LTAA, is hereby
amended to provide that the LTAA shall not be authorized to issue or
authorize any obligations, to approve or enter into any contracts or to take
any other actions which may impair or affect the Township's operation of
the Airport without the prior consent of the Township as evidenced by a
resolution of the Township Committee; provided, however, that the LTAA
may pay its legally due debt and bills incurred in the ordinary course
without the prior consent of the Township, and, provided further, that this
provision will not affect the LTAA's obligations under its existing contracts.
The LTAA does not have any outstanding bonds, notes or indebtedness.
§ 2-51.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-51.7
AO:162
§ 2-51.7. Authorization of Township and LTAA to Take all Necessary
Action. [Ord. No. 2009-29 § 7]
The Lakewood Township Committee, the Municipal Manager, the Chief
Financial Officer, the Township Clerk and other employees, as directed
by the Municipal Manager and/or the Township Committee, are hereby
authorized and directed to take any and all steps necessary to effectuate the
purposes of this section. The members of the LTAA, its officers, employees,
and counsel are hereby authorized and directed to take all steps necessary
to effectuate the purposes of this section.
§ 2-51.8. Approval of Local Finance Board; Filing. [Ord. No. 2009-29
§ 8]
This section shall be submitted to and approved by the Local Finance Board
in the Division of Local Government Services, New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs prior to final adoption in accordance with the
requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:5A-20 and the final adoption of this section by
the Township shall represent conclusive proof of the fact that this section
has received the approval of the Local Finance Board and following the final
adoption of this section, the Township Clerk shall immediately file a copy of
this section, as finally adopted, with the Local Finance Board and with the
Secretary of State, all in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:5A-20.
§ 2-52. through §2-55 (RESERVED)
§ 2-56. TOWNSHIP OF LAKEWOOD TRANSPORTATION BOARD.
§ 2-56.1. Title. [1971 Code § 11A-1]
This section shall be entitled "Township of Lakewood Transportation
Board."
§ 2-56.2. Established. [1971 Code § 11A-2]
There is hereby established a Township of Lakewood Transportation Board.
§ 2-56.3. Members; Appointment; Terms. [1971 Code §§ 11A-3;
11A-4; Ord. No. § 99-57; Ord. No. 2009-20 § 1]
The Board shall consist of 10 members and two alternates who shall all be
residents of the Township. All members and alternates shall be appointed by
resolution of the Township Committee. Terms of appointment for members
and alternates shall be for three years. Vacancies shall be appointed for the
unexpired terms.
§ 2-56.4. Powers and Duties. [1971 Code § 11A-5]
The Board shall be an advisory board with responsibility to make studies,
conduct research, appear at meetings, advocate and promote the
improvement of public and private transportation facilities within the area
§ 2-51.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-56.4
AO:163
and to advise the Township Committee of their recommendations and
studies thereon. The Board shall not have the power to bind the Township
Committee nor to place credit or create any debt against the Township or
in any manner act as agent for the Township other than in an advisory
capacity.
§ 2-56.5. Compensation. [1971 Code § 11A-7]
The members shall serve without compensation but shall receive their
actual disbursements for all reasonable expenses for performing their
duties when authorized and approved by the Township Committee.
§ 2-56.6. Officers. [1971 Code § 11A-8]
The members of the Board shall annually elect one of their members as
Chairman and any other officers it deems necessary to perform their duties.
The election shall be conducted at the annual reorganization meeting which
should be held within the first three calendar months of each year.
§ 2-57. LAKEWOOD HERITAGE COMMISSION.
§ 2-57.1. Established. [Ord. No. 98-72 § 1]
There is hereby established the Lakewood Heritage Commission,
hereinafter referred to as the "Heritage Commission."
§ 2-57.2. Objectives. [Ord. No. 98-72 § 2]
The major objectives of the Heritage Commission will be to collect, preserve
and disseminate historical and cultural information regarding the heritage
of the Township of Lakewood and to promote the public awareness of the
heritage and culture of the Township of Lakewood.
§ 2-57.3. Purpose. [Ord. No. 98-72 § 3]
The Heritage Commission shall work in cooperation with all Lakewood
agencies to seek Federal, State, County and private financial assistance
to pursue the designation and restoration of historical sites within the
Township and further, to collect and preserve artifacts for the proposed
museum and workshops.
§ 2-57.4. Advisory Capacity. [Ord. No. 98-72 § 4]
The Heritage Commission shall act in an advisory capacity to the Lakewood
Township Committee for all activities heretofore mentioned.
§ 2-57.5. Membership. [Ord. No. 98-72 § 5; Ord. No. 2004-27 § 1]
The membership of the Heritage Commission shall consist of 20 regular
members and six alternate members with a Chairperson to be selected by a
majority of the voting members at an annual reorganizational meeting.
§ 2-56.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-57.6
AO:164
§ 2-57.6. Appointments; Term. [Ord. No. 98-72 § 6; Ord. No. 2004-74
§ 1]
Each member shall be appointed by the Mayor and serve without
remuneration for a three year term. The members shall be appointed in
such a manner so that all terms shall not expire in one year. This also applies
to the alternates.
§ 2-58. COMMISSION ON CIVIL RIGHTS.
§ 2-58.1. Established. [Ord. No. 98-74 § 1]
There is hereby established the Lakewood Township Commission on Civil
Rights.
§ 2-58.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 98-74 § 2]
It is the intention of the Township Committee to ensure that any person
of any race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, gender or sexual
preference, or any person who is physically or mentally challenged, is
granted equal opportunity for employment, accommodations, advantages,
facilities and privileges within the Township without discrimination.
§ 2-58.3. Duties and Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 98-74 § 3]
It shall be the responsibility of the Commission on Civil Rights to promote
equal opportunity and eliminate discrimination and bias because of an
individual's race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, gender or
sexual preference, or who is challenged physically or mentally. The goal of
the Commission is to actively encourage, develop, promote and strengthen
respect for human rights and cultural diversity among the people of
Lakewood Township.
§ 2-58.4. Meetings. [Ord. No. 98-74 § 4]
The Commission on Civil Rights shall meet on a regular basis and report
their progress and recommendations regarding civil rights within the
Township to the Township Committee.
§ 2-58.5. Members. [Ord. No. 98-74 § 5]
The Commission on Civil Rights shall consist of seven members. Each
member of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall serve
without remuneration for a four year term. Initial appointments shall be
made in a manner so that all terms shall not expire in one year, but rather
that the terms of not more than two members shall expire in any given year.
Thereafter, all terms shall be for a four year period.
§ 2-59. through §2-75. (RESERVED)
§ 2-57.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-59
AO:165

ARTICLE XX
Policies and Procedures
§ 2-76. FEES FOR MISCELLANEOUS SERVICES AND COPIES OF
PUBLIC DOCUMENTS.
§ 2-76.1. Fees for Miscellaneous Services. [1971 Code § 2-22.1; Ord.
No. 2004-64 § 1; Ord. No. 2007-10 § 1; Ord. No. 2009-4 § 1; Ord. No.
2013-5; Ord. No. 2016-19; Ord. No. 2017-29]
The following fees shall be charged for the following services provided by
Township Officials:
§ 2-76.2. Inspection of Public Records. [1971 Code § 2-22.2]
Public records of the Township shall be open for inspection by members of
the public as provided by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1. Inspections shall be made only at
reasonable times as determined by the Department Head during business
hours and without interference to the conduct of the affairs of the office or
other place where such records are kept or maintained.
a. Permit to purchase pistols, revolvers, or firearms, $2 each. Issuance of
firearms purchaser identification card, $5 each.
b. Police escort services, $24 dollar fee.
c. (Reserved)
d. Certified copies of birth, marriage, fetal death, domestic partnership or
civil union records, $10 each.
1. Additionally, the Registrar of Vital Statistics shall collect a fee of
$10 for processing each correction.
2. Certifications of birth, marriage, fetal death, domestic partnership
or civil union records, $5 each.
e. Certified copy of death certificate, $20 for the first copy, $2 for each
additional copy.
f. Official searches for municipal liens (tax searches) or for improvements
authorized but not assessed or for a certificate as to approval of
subdivision, a fee of $10 each.
g. Continuation of an official search for municipal liens or for
improvements authorized but not assessed for a certificate as to
approval of subdivision within three years from the date of the original
search, $2 per calendar year.
h. For duplicate tax bills, $5 each.
i. Letters of good conduct involving Police records check, $5 fee.
§ 2-76 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-76.3
AO:167
§ 2-76.3. Procedures and Fees for Purchasing Copies of Public
Records. [1971 Code § 2-22.3; Ord. No. 2000-34; Ord. No. 2005-13
§ 1; Ord. No. 2005-101 § 1; Ord. No. 2009-37 §§ 1,2; Ord. No.
2010-45; Ord. No. 2010-79]
Requests for copies of records available pursuant to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1, the
Open Public Records Act, shall be requested in accordance with the
requirements of that law from either the Township Clerk's office or the
Police Department. Copies of records may be purchased for the fees set
forth below. If a fee is not prescribed in this subsection, the fee shall be the
actual cost of duplicating the record.
a. Standard-Sized Paper Documents.
1. 8 1/2 x 11 in size: $0.05 per page.
2. 8 1/2 x 14 in size: $0.07 per page.
b. Large-Sized Paper Documents and Maps.
1. Zoning Map: $0.07 per page if the map is copied by the Township or
the actual cost of reproduction if it is sent to an outside agency.
2. Street Map: $0.07 per page if the map is copied by the Township or
the actual cost of reproduction if it is sent to an outside agency.
3. Site Plan: actual cost.
4. Subdivision Plan: actual cost.
5. Tax Maps: actual cost.
6. Engineering Plans: actual cost.
c. Preprinted Documents.
1. Copy of the Code Book: Actual cost charged by publisher.
d. Police Reports and Photographs.
1. Police Accident Reports: same as paragraph a above, if requested
and picked up in person.
2. Police Accident Reports, When Copies Are Requested Other Than
in Person: $5.00 for the first three pages and $1.00 per page for
each additional page, as established by N.J.S.A. 39:4-131.
3. Photographs. Copies of color photographs shall be at actual cost.
e. Electronic Records.
1. Copy of Videotape. Tape supplied by the municipality: actual cost.
2. Copy of Audiotape. Tape supplied by the municipality: actual cost.
§ 2-76.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-76.3
AO:168
3. Copy of Electronic Document or Database. The following fees cover
the cost of copying existing files to a floppy disk or CD. Any
requests for software conversions shall be subject to the special
service charge described in paragraph g below. For security
reasons, the use of a floppy disk or CD provided by the requestor is
prohibited.
(a) Floppy disk: $0.40.
(b) CD: $0.40.
f. Microfilm. Actual Cost
g. A special service charge shall be imposed, in addition to the actual cost
of duplicating the record, where the nature, format, manner of collation
or volume of printed matter is such that it cannot be reproduced by
ordinary document-copying equipment in ordinary business size or
where such record involves an extraordinary expenditure of time and
effort to accommodate the request. The requestor shall have the
opportunity to review and object to the special service charge prior to it
being incurred.
h. Conversion of Records from One Medium to Another. Cost of
duplication plus special service charges as follows:
1. Conversion of paper record to electronic form: actual cost
2. Conversion of electronic files from one software product to
another: actual cost.
3. If the request for a record is: (a) not in a medium not routinely used
by the Township; (b) not routinely developed or maintained by the
Township; or (c) requires substantial amount of manipulation or
programming of information technologies, the Township will
impose a special charge based on the cost for extensive use of
information technology or for labor cost of personnel providing the
services that is actually incurred by the Township or attributable to
the Township for the programming, clerical and supervisory
assistance required, or both. The requestor shall have the
opportunity to review and object to the special service charge prior
to it being incurred.
i. Applicable postage shall be added for any and all records requested by
mail.
j. A deposit shall be paid prior to filling any request where it is estimated
that the information requested will cost in excess of $5.00 to reproduce.
The amount of the deposit shall equal the total estimated cost of filling
the request.
k. For purposes of this subsection, "actual cost" shall mean the cost of
materials and supplies used to make a duplicate, or the charges
imposed upon the Township by an outside agency.
§ 2-76.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-76.3
AO:169
§ 2-76.4. Fees for Emergency Medical Services. [1971 Code § 2-30d.;
Ord. No. 2006-12 § 1; Ord. No. 2008-26 § 1; Ord. No. 2010-36; Ord.
No. 2014-7]
l. Vital Statistics. The fee for certified copies of birth, marriage, death and
domestic partnership certificates shall be: $10.00.
m. Police Services.
1. The fee for a letter of good conduct from the Lakewood Police
Department shall be: $10.00.
2. The fee for fingerprinting by the LPD shall be: $18.00 per card plus
fees charged by the State of New Jersey.
3. Photographs. Copies of color photographs shall be at actual cost.
n. The Township shall charge a returned NSF check fee for any checks
paid to the Township of $25.
o. The fee for Township Contract Bid Packages shall be $25 for each
simple bid specification set and $50 for bid specification sets that
include blueprints or plans or bid specification packages that consist of
more than 25 pages.
p. All requests for discovery in matters pending in the Lakewood
Municipal Court shall be submitted through the Municipal Prosecutor
and the fees charged will be determined by the Municipal Court.
a. Basic Life Support Services — Fee Schedule.
1. The base rate of $800 per transport shall include the dispatch of
two EMT's; services of basic life support; emergency ambulance
transportation to the following health care facilities:
(a) Kimball Medical Center;
(b) Ocean Medical Center;
(c) Community Medical Center;
(d) Centra State Medical Center;
(e) Jersey Shore University Medical Center (in the event that a
Level I Trauma Center is needed).
b. A mileage charge of $10 per mile shall be added to the base rate.
c. The Township shall not balance bill the deductibles and co-pays for
Lakewood residents including those covered by Medicaid/Medicare,
nor bill those Lakewood residents for payment obligations without
insurance coverage.
§ 2-76.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-76.5
AO:170
§ 2-76.5. Fees, Penalties and Procedures for the Office of the Tax
Collector and Chief Financial Officer. [Ord. No. 98-7 §§ 1-7; Ord. No.
2000-21; Ord. No. 2010-31 § 1]
a. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to establish certain fees,
penalties, and procedures necessary to allow the office of the Township
Tax Collector to operate in a more efficient and productive manner.
b. Service Charge for Checks Returned for Insufficient Funds. Pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:5-18, the Chief Financial Officer and/or the Tax Collector are
authorized to impose a "return check fee" for checks which are not
honored by the bank, in an amount not to exceed $20, in addition to any
fee which may be imposed upon the Township by the banking institution
due to the return of the item.
c. Property Tax Refunds. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17.1, the Tax
Collector is authorized without further action on the part of the
Township Committee to process any tax refund of less than $10 and/or
to process the cancellation of any property tax refund or delinquency of
less than $10.
d. Penalties. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-67 the Tax Collector is authorized to
impose a 6% end of the year penalty upon those accounts whose tax
arrears, interest and municipal charges exceed $10,000 in any fiscal
year.
e. Tax Title Certificates. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-61 the Tax Collector is
authorized to impose upon the owner or other person having a right of
redemption the following additional sums to redeem a certificate:
1. 2% on any tax title certificate amount between $200 and $5,000;
2. 4% on any tax title certificate amount which exceeds $5,000 up to
$10,000; and
3. 6% on any tax title certificate amount which exceeds $10,000.
f. Municipal Tax Sale Certificates. The Tax Collector and the Township
Clerk are authorized to sign and cancel Municipal Tax Sale Certificates
in lieu of the Mayor's signature and the signature of the Mayor shall not
be necessary to cancel the Municipal Tax Sale Certificates.
g. Duplicate Tax Bills. The Tax Collector is authorized to charge a fee to a
bank, mortgage institution or any other mortgage company or
institution requesting from the Tax Collector a duplicate tax bill. The fee
shall be in the amount of a maximum of $5 for a first duplicate and a
maximum of $25 for each subsequent duplicate of the same tax bill in
the same calendar year.
h. Duplicate Tax Sale Certificate.
1. New Jersey legislation permits a duplicate Tax Sale Certificate to
take the place of one that has been destroyed or lost upon approval
§ 2-76.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-76.5
AO:171
§ 2-76.6. Fee for the Use of Township Municipal Building at 231
Third Street During Weekends. [Ord. No. 98-26]
The fee for use of the Lakewood Township Municipal Building located at 231
Third Street on weekends shall be determined as follows and shall be paid
in the following manner:
and resolution of the Township Committee. The new Tax Sale
Certificate shall state that it is a duplicate of the original, that
the original was destroyed or lost and shall state the date of the
original Certificate and the date of the Tax Sale upon which the
same was issued and the name and title of the officer who issued
same.
2. The fee not to exceed $100 shall be charged by the Township for
each duplicate certificate.
3. The Tax Sale Certificate shall be forwarded to the Township Clerk
who shall attach a copy of same to the resolution authorizing and
approving same.
4. An applicant for a duplicate Tax Sale Certificate shall cause to be
forwarded to the Township Committee for their consideration an
affidavit duly notarized affirming that the original Tax Sale
Certificate was lost or destroyed.
i. Requests by Parties Entitled to Redeem. Each party entitled to redeem
is entitled to two free redemption calculations per calendar year. A $50
fee for each redemption calculation thereafter within the calendar year
shall be charged to each party entitled to redeem. Any and all requests
for redemption calculations shall be made in writing to the Tax
Collector.
Neither the Tax Collector nor the Township of Lakewood is liable if the
redemption calculation is incorrect.
j. Requests by Third Party Lienholders. A $50 fee for each redemption
calculation shall be charged to each third party lienholder. Any and all
requests for redemption calculations shall be made in writing to the Tax
Collector.
a. The applicant shall submit to the Municipal Manager a notice of
application for use of the Municipal Building during weekend periods.
b. The application shall outline the purpose for which the applicant
requests use of the Municipal Building as well as an estimation by the
applicant of the number of hours the Municipal Building shall be used
by the applicant, and a specification of the intended portion of the
building (i.e. auditorium and/or foyer; or meeting room[s]) which
applicant desires to use.
§ 2-76.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-76.6
AO:172
§ 2-76.7. Fees for Use of the Township Community Center. [Ord. No.
2001-99; Ord. No. 2003-40 § 1]
The purpose of this subsection is to establish a fee for the use of the
Township Community Center during certain hours.
c. The Municipal Manager shall forward the application to the Township
Committee who shall, in their discretion, approve or disapprove the use
of the building.
d. The Municipal Manager shall calculate, based upon the estimation, the
cost of custodial fees necessary for the period of time during which
applicant shall use the Municipal Building.
e. The Municipal Manager will obtain from the applicant a deposit, in the
amount as calculated above, which deposit shall cover the cost of the
custodial fees during the period of applicant's use of the Municipal
Building.
f. Applicant shall be entitled to a return of the deposit in the event
applicant cancels and does not use the Municipal Building.
g. In the event applicant uses the Municipal Building for a period longer
than has been estimated by the Municipal Manager, applicant shall be
required to reimburse the Township of Lakewood for those expenses
exceeding the deposit necessary to cover the cost of the custodian for
the excess time used by the applicant in the Municipal Building.
h. The fee associated with the applicant's use of the building shall be
calculated based upon the hourly rate of the custodian for weekend
duties.
i. The Township Committee shall have the right, at any time prior to
applicant's use, to cancel the approval with a return of deposit moneys
to applicant.
j. Any non-profit corporation or organization based or primarily located in
Lakewood Township shall be entitled to apply to the Township
Committee for an exemption from any fee or deposit requirement as set
forth in this subsection.
A non-profit corporation shall be defined as any entity organized under
the provision of N.J.S.A. 15A:1-1 et seq. A non-profit organization shall
be defined as any entity organized for any purpose as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 15A:2-1 (a).
a. There is no charge for the use of the Township Community Center
during normal Township work days, Monday through Friday, from 9:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
b. There will be a fee of $20 per hour or any part thereof for the use of the
Township Community Center on Saturdays, Sundays, Township
§ 2-76.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-76.7
AO:173
§ 2-76.8. Tax Map/GIS Database Update Fees. [Ord. No. 2015-33;
Ord. No. 2015-44]
Holidays, or for use during hours other than 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on
Monday through Friday.
c. Any request for use of the Township Community Center as specified in
this subsection must be in writing to the Director of the Community
Center or the designee of the Director of the Community Center who
will record the hours and collect the fee.
d. The record of the hours and the fee shall be submitted to the Township
on the next available working day.
a. Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose of this subsection to impose upon
developers the costs incurred by the Township in updating the
municipal tax map/GIS database as a result of the approval of lot
consolidations or street vacations. Said costs are directly related to the
development procedure and thereby the Township determines that such
costs should be borne by the property owner.
Each property owner requesting a street vacation or enacting a lot
consolidation which results in the revision of any existing lot lines, and/
or other alterations to the tax map/GIS database, shall be responsible
for paying all reasonable charges incurred by the Township Engineer in
updating said tax map/GIS database. These costs shall include, but not
be limited to, update to the GIS database, revisions to existing tax map
plates, creation/addition of new tax map plates, appropriate revisions to
the Key Map(s), reprographic services for applicable Township, County
and State submission copies, as well as any reasonable shipping and
handling fees involved.
b. Fees. Upon approval by the Township Committee of a street vacation or
upon receipt of a lot consolidation deed by the Tax Assessor, the
property owner shall be required to submit the following flat fees to the
Township Clerk:
1. $55.00 per lot or per change for each lot/tax map revision due to
deed discrepancies, lot line adjustments, easement detailing,
ownership labeling, acreage calculation and labeling, street name
changes and other minor revisions;
2. Fees for the Processing of Street Vacation Requests.
The purpose of this paragraph is to defray the cost for professional
review and administrative services in the processing of requests for
street vacations.
(a) The processing and review of street vacation requests involves
professional engineering and legal review as well as
administration and publication costs.
§ 2-76.7 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-76.8
AO:174
§ 2-76.9. Lakewood Shuttle Bus. [Ord. No. 2018-44]
§ 2-76.10. Vehicle Wash Fee. [Ord. No. 2018-45]
§ 2-77. APPROVAL OF CLAIMS.
§ 2-77.1. Presentation. [1971 Code § 2-27.1]
Any person making a claim for payment from the Township shall first submit
a detailed statement of the claim to the responsible executive agency,
(b) There is hereby established a fee of $1,750.00 for the review
and processing of each street vacation request received by the
Township of Lakewood.
(c) An initial deposit of $500.00 (nonrefundable) is required to be
paid at the time of the request or application for a street
vacation.
(d) Should the Township respond by a first reading of an
Ordinance vacating a street so requested, the applicant shall
place $1,250.00 by certified check in escrow with the
Township.
(e) If the street vacation is approved by a second reading and
publishing of a municipal ordinance, the escrow deposit of
$1,250.00 will remain with the Township. Should the governing
body not approve the street vacation request, the $1,250.00
held by the Township in escrow shall be returned to the
applicant.
a. There is hereby created within the Township of Lakewood a short
distance transportation system known as the Lakewood Shuttle.
b. The Lakewood Shuttle shall operate wholly within the Township of
Lakewood.
c. The buses for the Lakewood Shuttle shall be operated and maintained
by the Department of Public Works.
d. The fare for each ride shall be $1.00 per person for one way.
a. The Township of Lakewood has vehicle washing services located at the
Department of Public Works.
b. On occasion, other government agencies use the Township's vehicle
washing services.
c. There is hereby established a fee of $45.00 per use for each time
another government agency uses the vehicle washing services.
d. Billing will be done on a quarterly basis and the fees will be collected by
the Department of Public Works.
§ 2-76.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-77.1
AO:175
specifying the particulars of the claim, and a certification of the party that
the claim is a true and accurate bill. No bill, claim or demand shall be
considered for payment unless the voucher has attached to it or includes
a certification of the Municipal Manager and any municipal official
responsible for that function or of the Department Head or his duly
designated representative, having personal knowledge of the facts that the
goods have been received by, or the services rendered to the Township, and
that those services or goods are consistent with any existing contract or
purchase order. The Treasurer shall have the duty to audit, warrant and
make recommendations on all claims and bills.
§ 2-77.2. Consideration by Township Committee. [1971 Code
§ 2-27.2]
The bill or claim duly certified shall be presented to the Township Clerk
for inclusion in the agenda of the next immediate formal meeting of the
Township Committee and it shall be the duty of the Clerk to examine
all bills or claims submitted for payment in order to ascertain if proper
administrative and appropriate accounts charged procedures have been
followed. All claims or bills to be considered by the Township Committee
shall be listed systematically by Department breakdown without preference,
and the list shall be made available to every member of the Township
Committee prior to formal action by that body.
§ 2-77.3. Approval; Disapproval. [1971 Code § 2-27.3]
Claims shall be considered by the Township Committee which shall approve
the same, except that the Township Committee may reject any claim
presented to it stating the reason for such rejection. Any disapproval claim
shall be referred back to the Township Clerk with such instructions as the
Township Committee may give at the time of disapproval.
§ 2-77.4. Record. [1971 Code § 2-27.4]
It shall be the duty of the Township Clerk to record all claims in the
official minutes or through an appropriate claims register, indicating that
the Township Committee has by formal action approved the same with
appropriate record of any claim disapproved or rejected. All records
pertaining to approved and disapproved bills or claims shall be available for
public inspection.
§ 2-77.5. Payment. [1971 Code § 2-27.5]
After the Clerk has certified that the claims have been approved, he shall
turn the same over to the Treasurer, who shall forthwith prepare the
necessary checks for the payment thereof, which checks shall be signed
by the Mayor, the Township Clerk, and thereafter signed by the Treasurer.
After preparing checks for the payment of claims, the Treasurer shall record
them in proper books of account and thereafter mail the checks to the
claimants.
§ 2-77.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-77.6
AO:176
§ 2-77.6. Exceptions. [1971 Code § 2-27.6]
Exceptions to payment procedures as outlined above may apply to the
routine payment of payroll, statutory charges, health benefit, debt
amortization, property purchases by Township, regulated by closing dates
and special performance deposit refunds approved by the Municipal
Manager. In all such instances supporting data shall be maintained and
accurate accounting and payments processes followed by the Treasurer.
§ 2-78. AFFIRMATIVE ACTION EQUAL OPPORTUNITY PROGRAM.
§ 2-78.1. Purpose; Policy. [1971 Code § 2-29.1]
In order to insure that equal employment opportunities are afforded to all
through the development of an Affirmative Action Program, applicable to all
regardless of race, creed, color, sex, religion, or national origin, it is hereby
ordained to be the public policy of the Township of Lakewood to provide
equal opportunity for employment and business opportunity for all persons,
partnerships, companies and corporations; and to prohibit discrimination
in employment and all forms of business practices because of race, color,
religion, sex, ancestry or national origin and to promote the full realization
of equal opportunity as above stated through a positive and continuing
program within each Department, Division, Agency or component of the
Township. Such policy of equal opportunity of employment and business
opportunity is hereby made applicable to every contractor, subcontractor
or bidder holding, or hereafter seeking, public contracts with the Township
and is intended to provide all businesses in the Township with equal
opportunity to participate in the filing of no bid purchase orders of the
Township up to the legal limits. This policy of equal opportunity for
employment and business in the Township shall apply to every aspect of
municipal employment policy and practice.
§ 2-78.2. Definitions. [1971 Code § 2-29.2]
As used in this section:
BIDDER — Shall mean any person, partnership, corporation, association or
going venture who has submitted prescribed bid documents to the Township
seeking award of a public contract.
CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT — Shall mean any public contract for the
construction, rehabilitation, alteration, conversion, extension, or repair of
buildings, sidewalks, grounds, parking lots or other improvements to real
property.
CONTRACTOR — Shall include any person, partnership, corporation,
association or joint venture seeking to be awarded a Township of Lakewood
contract and shall include every subcontractor under such contract.
DEPARTMENT HEAD — Shall mean an individual who is the head of any
Department, Division, Agency or component of the Township.
§ 2-77.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-78.2
AO:177
DISCRIMINATION — Shall mean to distinguish, differentiate, or separate
on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, ancestry or national origin.
EMPLOYEE — Shall not include any individual employed by his parents,
spouse, or child, or in the domestic service of any person.
NONBID — Shall mean any public contract let for construction or purchase
of material without the taking of bids in accordance with law.
PERSON — Shall mean and include one or more individuals, partnerships,
associations, organizations, corporations, labor organizations, legal
representatives and other organized groups of persons.
PROJECT SITE REPORT — Shall mean the statistical work force breakdown
in the trade classifications of the contractor and subcontractors.
PUBLIC CONTRACT — Shall mean any contract awarded by the Township
for work, labor, services, supplies, equipment, materials or any combination
of the foregoing.
SUBCONTRACTOR — Shall include any person, partnership, corporation,
association or joint venture which supplies any of the work, labor, services,
supplies, equipment, materials or any combination of the foregoing under a
contract with the contractor.
TREASURER OR AUDITOR — Shall mean a public officer of the municipal
corporation charged with duties in relation to the fiscal affairs of such
corporation. The principal duties shall be to examine and audit collections
of the public money, to complete records and to report the financial
situation from time to time.
§ 2-78.3. Heads of Departments and Agencies; Responsibilities for
Program. [1971 Code § 2-29.3]
The head of each department and agency in the Township shall establish
and maintain a positive program of equal employment opportunity for all
employees and applicants for employment within their jurisdiction in
accordance with the policy set forth in subsection 2-78.1.
§ 2-78.4. Public Contracts; Equal Employment Opportunity Clause.
[1971 Code § 2-29.4]
All public contracts hereinafter entered into by the Township of Lakewood
shall incorporate an equal employment opportunity clause which shall read
as follows:
a. Clause Provisions.
1. The contractor shall not discriminate against any employee or
applicant for employment because of race, color, religion, sex,
ancestry, or national origin. The contractor shall take affirmative
action to insure that applicants are employed, and that employees
are treated during employment, without regard to their race, color,
religion, sex, ancestry or national origin.
§ 2-78.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-78.4
AO:178
2. As used herein, the word "treated" shall mean and include, without
limitation, the following: recruited, whether by advertising or other
means; compensated, whether in the form of rates of pay or other
forms of compensation; selected for training, including
apprenticeship; promoted; upgraded; demoted; downgraded;
transferred; laid off; and terminated.
3. The contractor agrees to, and shall post in conspicuous places,
available to employees and applicants for employment, notices to
be provided by the Township setting forth the provisions of this
nondiscrimination clause.
b. The contractor shall in all classifications including trainees on any
contracted project with the Township of Lakewood have a working
affirmative action plan. No contractor having traditionally deprived
employees in all classifications of his work force of less than a
reasonable percentage shall receive a contract from the Township of
Lakewood, unless his affirmative action plan shall actualize this goal at
50% completion of contracted projects of over 60 days. However, in no
instance, shall the work force be comprised of less than 30% of
individuals traditionally classified as deprived, if such individuals have
the necessary skills and are able and willing to work.
c. The contractor shall, in all solicitations or advertisements for
employees placed by or on behalf of the contractor, state that all
applicants will receive consideration for employment without regard to
race, color, religion, sex, ancestry or national origin.
d. The contractor shall send to each labor union or representative of
workers with which they have a collective bargaining agreement or
other contract or understanding, a notice advising the labor union or
workers' representative of the contractors' commitments under the
Equal Employment Opportunity Ordinance of the Township of
Lakewood and shall post copies of the notice in conspicuous places
available to employees and applicants for employment.
e. It shall be no excuse for noncompliance that the union, with which the
contractor has a collective bargaining agreement providing for
exclusive referral, failed to refer traditionally deprived persons.
f. The contractors shall furnish all information and reports required by
the Township pursuant to paragraphs a through j inclusive, and shall
permit inspection of their books and records for purpose of
investigation to ascertain compliance with the program.
g. The contractors shall file and shall cause their subcontractors, if any, to
file compliance reports with the Township of Lakewood in the form and
to extent prescribed by the Township. Compliance reports filed at such
times as directed shall contain information as to the employment
practices, policy, programs and statistics of the contractor and their
subcontractors.
§ 2-78.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-78.4
AO:179
§ 2-78.5. Contract Compliance Requirements. [1971 Code § 2-29.5]
h. The contractor shall take such action with respect to any subcontractor
as the Township may direct as a means of enforcing the provisions of
paragraphs a through j herein, including penalties and sanctions for
noncompliance.
i. The contractor shall include the provisions of paragraphs a through j of
this equal employment opportunity clause in every subcontract or
purchase order so that such provisions shall be binding upon each
subcontractor or vendor.
j. Penalties for Noncompliance. During hearing procedures, dealing with
noncompliance, all contract payments shall be withheld and, if it is
determined after opportunity for hearing on the record, that the
contractor or subcontractor has failed to comply with any portion of the
programs as herein stated and described, that finding shall subject the
offending party to any or all of the following penalties:
1. Continued withholding of all future payments under the public
contract to the contractor in violation, until it shall be determined
that the contractor or subcontractor is in compliance with the
provisions of the contract.
2. Refusal of all future bids for any public contract with the Township
of Lakewood or any of its departments or divisions until such time
as the contractor or subcontractor shall demonstrate that he has
established and shall carry out the policies of the program as
herein outlined.
3. Cancellation of the public contract and declaration of forfeiture of
the performance bond.
4. In cases in which there shall be substantial or material violation or
the threat of substantial or material violation of the compliance
procedure or that which may be provided for by the contract,
appropriate proceedings may be brought to enforce those
provisions.
a. The Office of Contract Compliance shall establish any and all necessary
supplemental documents required to implement effectively the
Township's Affirmative Action section. All notices to prospective
bidders, published on behalf of the Township, shall include, as a part of
the contract specifications, the condition that all bidders shall be
required to submit an affirmative action plan and to comply with the
equal employment opportunity clause. Reports required herein shall be
submitted in duplicate to the Township Engineer. Each bidder shall file
as part of bid documents an affirmative action plan for implementing
the policy of this section, employment information reports, or other
reports as may be required by the Township.
§ 2-78.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-78.5
AO:180
§ 2-78.6. Pre-Contract Award Conference. [1971 Code § 2-29.6]
Following the receipt and review of the affirmative action plan and the
employment information submitted by the bidders, and prior to award of a
contract, the apparent low responsible bidder shall be required to attend a
pre-award conference called by the contracting agency. At the conference
the Township Engineer shall determine whether or not the apparent low
responsible bidder has complied with the policy of the ordinance set out
in its various sections, and shall submit the findings and recommendations
thereon to the contracting agency receiving bids, or other agencies he may
deem appropriate.
§ 2-78.7. Project Site Reports. [1971 Code § 2-29.7]
Where a construction contract exists, a project site report in a form defined
by the Township Engineer shall be completed and submitted by the
contractor not more than 30 days from the beginning of work on the site,
and the Township Engineer shall conduct such periodic on-site reviews
as are deemed necessary. Such project site reports shall include such
information as to the employment practices and statistics of the contractor
and each subcontractor, and shall be in such form as the Township Engineer
may prescribe. Where the term of the contract exceeds 30 days, such
project site reports shall be submitted once each 45 days, or more
frequently if the Township shall determine that such submittal is deemed
necessary for a continuing evaluation of the work force composition.
Subcontractors shall complete and submit such project site reports to the
contractor for transmittal to the Township Engineer.
§ 2-78.8. Intergovernmental Cooperation. [1971 Code § 2-29.8]
If specific discriminatory practices are found to exist in the administration
and enforcement of this section, in addition to the sanctions that may be
imposed as provided by the terms of the contract, the Municipal Manager
shall forward all pertinent information to the appropriate Federal, State and
local agencies.
§ 2-78.9. Contract Disposition; Review by Municipal Manager.
b. The contractor shall identify all of his subcontractors and shall disclose
where they are buying all of their supplies before approval of the
subcontractors. The contractor shall cooperate with those appropriate
training agencies as designated by the Township Engineer in providing
on and off-site training for persons employed in the project and shall
provide on-site job opportunities to basic and advanced trainees
referred to them by the Township Engineer. The total cost of the
training on and off-site programs, including fringe benefits and the cost
of off-site schooling, shall be paid for by the contractor. The cost of such
training shall be included in the price bid.
§ 2-78.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-78.9
AO:181
§ 2-79. PAYMENT OF TAXES AND LIENS REQUIRED PRIOR TO
PAYMENT OF FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS.
§ 2-79.1. Insurance Claims; Payment of Tax Liens. [1971 Code
§ 13-10.1]
Insurance companies are hereby prohibited from making a payment to a
claimant in excess of $2,500 for fire damages on any real property located
within the Township of Lakewood pursuant to any fire insurance policy
issued or renewed after the adoption of this section and after the filing of
this section with the State Commissioner of Insurance, until such time as
all taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens or charges due and
payable appearing on the official certificate of search shall have been paid
either by the owner of such real property or by the insurance company.
§ 2-79.2. Committee Agreement with Owner to Pay Liens. [1971
Code § 13-10.2]
The Township Committee, by resolution, may enter into agreement with
the owner of any fire damaged property to pay in full all delinquent taxes,
assessments or other municipal liens by installments pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:5-19 for the redemption of the tax sale lien by installment payments
pursuant to Article 7 of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of the New Jersey Statutes,
if the Township Committee is satisfied that the claim for fire damages is
to be used to restore or improve the fire damaged property. An insurance
company receiving a certified copy of a resolution of agreement from the
Governing Body is authorized to make full payment on the claim to the
insured person.
§ 2-80. through §2-95. (RESERVED)
a. If a contractor shall fail to cooperate in reaching mutually satisfactory
solutions to his failure to comply with this section, or to implement
contract compliance agreements previously made, the Municipal
Manager shall review such cases to determine:
1. Whether further efforts or alternative approaches are desirable,
depending upon the nature of the problem.
2. Whether any of the penalties set forth in paragraph j, subsection
2-78.4 of this revision, are appropriate to the case.
b. If the Municipal Manager shall determine that the contractor has
violated or has failed to comply with the equal employment and
business opportunity requirements of the contract, after affording such
contractor a reasonable time to correct the situation, and where
negotiations have been of no avail, he shall make a finding under
paragraphs a1 or a2 of this subsection, and shall transmit such findings
and recommendations thereon to the Township Committee, the
contracting agency, the Treasurer and Auditor, the Township Attorney
and any other agencies he may deem appropriate.
§ 2-78.9 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-80
AO:182
ARTICLE XXI
Lakewood Development Corporation
§ 2-96. LAKEWOOD DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION.20
§ 2-96.1. Established; Purpose. [Ord. No. 97-31]
The Township of Lakewood, pursuant to the powers designated in N.J.S.A.
52:27H-67, hereby establishes the Lakewood Development Corporation.
The purposes for which this corporation is formed are (i) to promote,
encourage and assist in the industrial, commercial and economic
development of the Lakewood Township Urban Enterprise Zone; (ii) to
publicize through all manner of information media, the advantages and
benefits of plant and business location within the Lakewood Township
Urban Enterprise Zone; (iii) to foster and promote the zone development
plan for the Lakewood Township Urban Enterprise Zone; (iv) to engage in
buying, selling, leasing, and improving lands and tenements in the Township
of Lakewood; (v) to enter into contracts, agreements and studies with
the Township of Lakewood, Ocean County, the State of New Jersey, or
the Federal Government or its departments and agencies to further the
purposes of this Corporation; (vi) to enter into contracts with the Township
of Lakewood for the acquisition of improved or unimproved lands in the
Township Urban Enterprise Zone; (vii) to maintain offices, bank accounts,
issue checks and drafts, and employ all necessary professional
administrative personnel to carry out and effectuate the purposes of this
Corporation; (viii) to own, purchase or lease motor vehicles, office
equipment and all other personal property necessary to carry out the
purposes of this Corporation; and (ix) to accept by way of grant, gift, device
or otherwise, any money of other real or personal property from any person,
firm, foundation, corporation or governmental agency to help further the
purposes of this Corporation.
§ 2-96.2. Powers. [Ord. No. 97-31]
To effectuate its purposes, the Lakewood Development Corporation shall
have the power to (i) sue and be sued, complain and defend and participate
as a party or otherwise in any judicial, administrative, arbitrative, or other
proceeding, in its corporate name; (ii) have a corporate seal which may
be altered at pleasure and to use the seal by causing it, or a facsimile to
be impressed or affixed or in any other manner reproduced; (iii) take and
hold by lease, gift, purchase, grant, devise or bequest any property, real or
personal, necessary or desirable for attaining the objects and carrying into
effect the purposes of the Corporation and to purchase, lease or otherwise
acquire, own, hold, improve, use and otherwise deal in and with, real
or personal property, or any interest therein, wherever situated subject,
however, to any alteration of modification made by general law as to the
amount of real and personal property to be held by the Corporation; (iv) sell,
20.Editor's Note: The Certificate of Incorporation can be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk. It is designated as Schedule A to Ordinance No. 97-31.
§ 2-96 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-96.2
AO:183
convey, mortgage, create a security interest in, lease, exchange, transfer,
and otherwise dispose of its property and assets; (v) purchase, subscribe
for, or otherwise acquire, own, hold, vote, use, employ, sell, exchange,
mortgage, lend, create a security interest in, or otherwise dispose of, and
otherwise use and deal in and with, shares or other interests in, or
obligations of, other domestic or foreign corporate entities, associations,
partnerships, or individuals, or direct or indirect obligations of any domestic
or foreign government or instrumentality thereof; (vi) make contracts and
guarantees and incur liabilities, borrow money, issue its bonds, and secure
any of its obligations by mortgage of or creation of a security interest in
its property, franchise and income; (vii) lend money, invest and reinvest
its fund, and take and hold real and personal property as security for the
payment of funds so loaned or invested; (viii) conduct its activities, carry
on its operations, and have offices and exercise the powers set forth herein;
(ix) elect or appoint officers, employees and agents of the Corporation, and
define their duties and fix their compensation, provided that the hiring,
termination and/or discipline of employees shall be within the authority
and discretion of the Executive Director; (x) make and alter bylaws for
the administration and regulation of the affairs of the corporation; (xi) pay
pensions and establish pension and deferred compensation plans, and plans
of similar nature for and to furnish medical services, life, sickness, accident,
disability or unemployment insurance and benefits; (xii) participate with
others in any corporate entity, partnership, limited partnership, joint
venture or other association of any kind or in any transaction, undertaking
or arrangement which the participating corporation would have power to
conduct by itself, whether or not that participation involves sharing or
delegation of control with or to others.
§ 2-96.3. Appointment to Board of Trustees; Terms. [Ord. No. 97-31;
Ord. No. 2011-12 § 1]
The Board of Trustees of the Lakewood Development Corporation shall
consist of seven regular members. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27H-67, the
Board of Trustees shall include representatives of the Township Committee,
members of the business community thereof, and members of Lakewood
Township community organizations, and the total membership shall be
broadly representative of the businesses and communities within Lakewood
Township. Lakewood residency or ownership of a business within Lakewood
Township shall be required for service on the Board of Trustees. Two
Township Committee Members designated by the Township Committee at
the annual reorganization meeting shall serve on the Board of Trustees. The
Municipal Manager, or an employee of Lakewood Township designated by
the Municipal Manager, shall serve as an alternate member and he shall
serve coterminous with his respective appointment as Municipal Manager.
Whenever the Township Committee consists of members from more than
one political party, a Committee Member from each political party shall be
designated to serve on the Board of Trustees.
Each public member shall be appointed for a term of two years, except for
initial appointments which shall follow the effective date of this section.
§ 2-96.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-96.3
AO:184
Initial appointments shall be made so as to provide for staggered expiration
dates. The two Township Committee Members serving on the Board of
Trustees shall serve one year terms and shall serve by virtue of their office.
Each Trustee shall serve for term consistent with his or her appointment or
until his/her successor has been appointed.
Appointments of the members shall be made by a majority vote of the
Committee at the annual reorganization meeting of the Township
Committee or at such other meeting as determined by the Township
Committee. Any vacancy of a public member may be filled by a majority
vote of the Township Committee at any regularly scheduled meeting of the
Township Committee. The new member or members shall serve until the
scheduled expiration of the term of the member being replaced. The Board
of Trustees shall amend its bylaws to be consistent with this section.
§ 2-96.4. Officers. [Ord. No. 97-31]
The Officers of the Corporation shall consist of a Chairman, Vice-Chairman,
and a Secretary/Treasurer.
a. Chairman. The Chairman shall be a member of the Board of Trustees,
who shall be elected for a one year term at the annual meeting of the
Board of Trustees. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the
Board of Trustees. Except as otherwise authorized by resolution of the
Board of Trustees, the Chairman shall sign all contracts, documents or
other instruments on behalf of the Corporation. At each meeting, the
Chairman shall submit such recommendations and information as he
may consider proper considering the business affairs and policies of the
Corporation.
b. Vice-Chairman. The Vice-Chairman shall be a member of the Board of
Trustees, who shall be elected for a one year term at the annual
meeting of the Board of Trustees. The Vice-Chairman shall perform the
duties of the Chairman in the absence or incapacity of the Chairman;
and in the case of the resignation or death of the Chairman, the Vice-
Chairman shall perform such duties as are imposed upon the Chairman
until such time as a new Chairman becomes available to the
Corporation.
c. Secretary/Treasurer. The Secretary/Treasurer shall be either a member
of the Board of Trustees or the Executive Director, who shall be elected
for a one year term at the annual meeting of the Board of Trustees. In
his capacity as Secretary/Treasurer, he shall keep the records of the
Corporation, shall act as Secretary of the meetings of the Corporation,
and shall record all votes and keep a record of the proceedings of the
Trustees in a minute book or journal to be kept for such purpose and
shall perform all duties incident to the office of Secretary/Treasurer.
The Secretary/Treasurer shall keep the seal in safe custody and shall
have the power to affix such seal to all contracts or instruments
authorized to be executed by the Board of Trustees.
§ 2-96.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-96.4
AO:185
§ 2-96.5. Executive Director; Qualifications. [Ord. No. 97-31]
The Executive Officer of the Corporation shall have the title "Executive
Director." The Executive Director shall be appointed by the Board of
Trustees subject to the approval of the Township Committee for a term
not to exceed two years and shall be paid a salary to be determined by
the Trustees and approved by the Township Committee. The Executive
Director shall have general supervision over the business and affairs of
the Corporation, subject to the direction of the Board of Trustees. The
Executive Director shall be primarily responsible for all daily operations of
the Corporation and for the communication and execution of all decisions
reached by the Board of Trustees. No member of the Board of Trustees may
serve concurrently as the Executive Director, but the Executive Director
may, if elected by the Board of Trustees, serve as the Corporation's
Secretary/Treasurer.
The Executive Director shall select and employ such administrative and
clerical personnel as are needed to carry out the daily operations and
activities of the Corporation with the consent of the Board of Trustees.
The Executive Director shall be a graduate of an accredited college and
he shall have acceptable skills through work experience and business
administration, marketing, accounting, finance, economics, or planning.
The Executive Director shall have a knowledge of governmental procedures
and shall have, through training or education, marketing skills and the
ability to learn the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zone Law sufficiently and
at a level to effectively carry out the duties of the position. He shall have
the ability to learn and understand operating procedures and practices, the
ability to understand and complete all forms and filing required by the New
Jersey Urban Enterprise Zone Authority, and the ability to learn the abstract
technical material and present it in an understandable fashion to the Board
of Trustees.
The Board of Trustees may, in its discretion, develop a further job
description for the Executive Director, in consultation with same, and
The Secretary/Treasurer shall have the care and custody of all funds
of the Corporation and shall deposit the same in the name of the
Corporation in such bank or banks as the Trustees may select. Any
two of the Secretary/Treasurer, Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall sign
all orders and checks for the payment of money and shall pay out
and disburse such money under the direction of the Trustees. The
Secretary/Treasurer shall keep regular books of account showing
receipts and expenditures and shall render to the Board of Trustees
of the Corporation, at each regular meeting (or more frequently when
requested), an account of the transactions of the Corporation and of the
financial condition of the Corporation. All persons with the authority
to sign orders and checks pursuant to the Bylaws of the Corporation,
including the Secretary/Treasurer, shall provide a bond for the faithful
performance of his duties with the cost of such bond being paid for by
the Corporation.
§ 2-96.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-96.5
AO:186
include in that job description a definition of tasks to be performed, which
job description shall be approved by a resolution of the Township
Committee of the Township of Lakewood.
§ 2-96.6. Recording Secretary. [Ord. No. 97-31]
The Board of Trustees may designate a person who is not a member of the
Board and who is not the Secretary/Treasurer to act as Recording Secretary
to the Board. The Recording Secretary shall be supervised by and serve at
the pleasure of the Executive Director.
§ 2-96.7. Annual Meeting. [Ord. No. 97-31]
The annual meeting of the Board of Trustees shall take place at 8:00 p.m.
on the second Tuesday in July in Conference Room C of the Lakewood
Township Administration Building, 231 Main Street, Lakewood, New Jersey.
The Board of Trustees may be a majority vote change the time, place or
date of the annual meeting at least 30 days prior to the second Tuesday in
July. If the Board of Trustees chooses to alter the time, place or date of the
annual meeting, written notice will be given to all members of the Board of
Trustees at least seven days prior to the revised annual meeting, and the
Secretary of the Corporation shall provide notice of the revised meeting to
the Township Clerk and to the official newspapers in accordance with the
Open Public Meetings Act.
§ 2-96.8. Regular Meetings. [Ord. No. 97-31]
Regular meetings of the Corporation shall be held monthly at such time,
place and date as may be determined by resolution of the Board of Trustees.
§ 2-96.9. Special Meetings. [Ord. No. 97-31]
Special meetings of the Board of Trustees may be called at any time by the
Chairman, or by at least four members of the Board of Trustees, or by the
Executive Director.
§ 2-96.10. Notice of Meetings. [Ord. No. 97-31]
If the Board of Trustees adopts a schedule of regular meetings at the
annual meeting, or at any subsequent monthly meeting of the Corporation,
the Secretary shall provide to each Trustee a written list of the monthly
meetings immediately after the schedule has been approved by the
Trustees. In the event that a schedule of monthly meetings if not approved
by the Board of Trustees, the Secretary shall provide each Trustee with
written notice of each regular meeting at least seven days prior to the date
on which such regular meeting is scheduled. Notice of any special meetings
may be given verbally to each Trustee at least 48 hours in advance of
any such special meeting, together with an agenda of the business to be
discussed at such special meeting.
§ 2-96.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-96.10
AO:187
All annual, regular and special meetings shall be held in accordance with
the Open Public Meetings Act, N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
§ 2-96.11. Quorum. [Ord. No. 97-31]
No business of the Corporation shall be transacted, undertaken or voted
upon unless a quorum of the Trustees is present at such meeting. A quorum
shall consist of seven Trustees. Alternate Trustees shall be counted in order
to determine whether a quorum is present. When a quorum is present, the
acts of the majority of the members present at a meeting shall be sufficient
to conduct and approve all ordinary business of the Corporation. However,
modification of the zone boundaries, proposals for projects to receive money
from the Zone Assistance Fund, the hiring of the Executive Director and the
hiring of professional, technical and consultant personnel shall require the
affirmative vote of the Township Committee. Amendments to the Bylaws of
the Corporation shall require the affirmative vote of 2/3 of the entire Board
of Trustees and the approval of the Township Committee. If a quorum is not
present at any meeting, the majority of the members present may adjourn
the meeting to such date, time and place with the Township of Lakewood as
they may determine. Notice of the date, time and place of such adjourned
meeting shall be given to all absent members, together with notice of the
fact that the meeting had to be adjourned because of a lack of quorum.
If any member of the Board of Trustees is absent from three consecutive
regularly scheduled Corporation meetings without valid justification, said
Trustee may be removed by resolution of the Township Committee.
§ 2-96.12. Project Approval Process. [Ord. No. 97-31]
a. Conceptual Approval. Prior to preparing a formal project proposal for
submission to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zone Authority, the
Executive Director shall obtain conceptual approval from the Township
Committee. A presentation shall be provided to the Township
Committee describing the nature and scope of the proposed project, as
well as the anticipated costs and benefits.
b. Formal Project Review and Approval. Upon receipt of conceptual
approval from the Township Committee, the Executive Director shall
draft a detailed project proposal and disseminate copies thereof to the
members of the Board of Trustees and the Township Committee. The
Executive Director shall attend the next meeting of each body in order
to address any questions or concerns relating to the proposed project,
and shall cause corporate counsel to prepare a draft project proposal
resolution for consideration and action by each body.
c. Submission to New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zone Authority. Upon
receipt of formal approval from the Board of Trustees and the Township
Committee, the Executive Director shall submit the project proposal,
together with certified resolutions of approval and such related
documentation as may be required to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zone Authority for review and approval.
§ 2-96.10 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-96.12
AO:188
§ 2-96.13. Committees. [Ord. No. 97-31]
The Chairman of the Board of Trustees may, from time to time, establish
such committees and subcommittees and confer upon them such powers as
he deems appropriate for the conduct of the Corporation's business. The
Chairman may, in his discretion, include persons on such committees who
are not members of the Board of Trustees to provide information and ideas,
but such non-Trustee members shall not have the authority to vote or act on
behalf of the Board.
The Standing Committees of the Board of Trustees shall be a Finance
Committee, an Economic Development Committee and a Labor Committee.
Standing Committees are recognized annually. Appointments of Trustees to
the Standing Committees shall be the responsibility of the Chairman and
shall take place at the reorganization meeting of the Board of Trustees.
d. Exemptions for Project Loans Not Exceeding $250,000. The approval
process set forth above shall not apply to project loans for amounts not
exceeding $250,000.00, provided, however, that:
1. The Executive Director shall present the Township Committee with
a list of proposed loans together with the name of borrower,
amount, purpose, loan terms, number of jobs anticipated, and
location of business with respect to each proposed loan at least
seven days prior to the next scheduled meeting of the Township
Committee; and
2. Project loan approval shall be authorized by resolution of the Board
of Trustees and the Township Committee.
e. Other Projects. With regard to projects other than those described
above, the Executive Director shall present the Township Committee
with a list of all proposed projects, together with such information as
may be required for the Township Committee to understand the
duration, nature, cost, anticipated benefits, risks, interested parties and
other relevant details at least seven days prior to the next scheduled
meeting of the Township Committee. No formal action shall be taken
with respect to any such project until same is authorized by resolution
of the Board of Trustees and the Township Committee.
a. Finance Committee. The Finance Committee shall consist of five
members, at least three of which shall also be members of the Board of
Trustees. The Chairman of the Board of Trustees shall appoint the
membership of the Committee, including a Chairman and Vice-
Chairman.
The Finance Committee shall review all loan applications made to the
Finance Programs. The Finance Committee may reject by resolution
any loan application which the Committee deems incomplete or
unsatisfactory, or which does not meet the guidelines of the loan
program. Loan applications which the Finance Committee regards
§ 2-96.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-96.13
AO:189
favorably or which the Loan Committee is undecided on, shall be
recommended to the Board of Trustees for approval or rejection of
the Board. The Finance Committee shall also have the authority to
recommend new and/or modified eligibility criteria, guidelines and/
or procedures for the revolving loan programs and such other
responsibilities as are deemed necessary and appropriate by the Board
of Trustees.
Meetings of the Finance Committee may be called by the Executive
Director, Committee Chairman, or in his absence, the Committee Vice-
Chairman.
A majority of the Finance Committee members shall constitute a
quorum for the purpose of acting on any loan application. All actions
of the Finance Committee shall be decided by a majority vote of those
committee members present at the meeting. Appropriate records of all
such actions shall be maintained.
b. Economic Development Committee. The Economic Development
Committee shall consist of five members, at least three of which shall
also be members of the Board of Trustees, and shall include
representation from the municipal government. The Chairman of the
Board of Trustees shall appoint the membership of the Committee,
including a Chairman and Vice-Chairman.
The Economic Development Committee shall serve in an advisory
capacity with relation to monitoring, administration, and
implementation of the Urban Enterprise Zone Program. This will
include recommendations with regard to use of funding and program
development. The Committee will be bound by the guidelines of the
New Jersey Urban Enterprise Zone Authority. All recommendations
of the Committee shall be presented to the Governing Body of the
Township of Lakewood and the Board of Trustees for approval or
rejection.
Meetings may be called by the Executive Director, Committee
Chairman, or in his absence, the Committee Vice-Chairman.
A majority of the Economic Development Committee shall constitute
a quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting of the
Committee. Appropriate records of all such actions shall be maintained.
c. Labor Committee. The Labor Committee shall consist of five members,
at least three of which shall also be members of the Board of Trustees,
and shall include representation from the municipal government. The
Chairman of the Board of Trustees shall appoint the membership of the
Committee, including a Chairman and Vice-Chairman.
The Labor Committee shall serve in an advisory capacity with relation
to monitoring, administration, and implementation of Employment and
Training Programs, such as the Joblinks Program. This will include
recommendations with regard to use of funding and program
§ 2-96.13 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-96.13
AO:190
§ 2-96.14. Amendments to the Bylaws. [Ord. No. 97-31]
The Bylaws of the Lakewood Development Corporation may be amended
by a 2/3 vote of the full membership of the Board of Trustees at any
regularly scheduled monthly meeting of the Board, provided a copy of the
proposed amendments shall have been sent to each member of the Board
and Township Committee at least seven days prior to the meeting date on
which the proposed amendments are to be voted upon, and provided further
that such amendment is approved by resolution of the Township Committee.
§ 2-96.15. Budget. [Ord. No. 97-31]
The Executive Director is authorized and directed to prepare and submit
to the Municipal Manager budget requests affecting the Corporation. The
Municipal Manager shall forward copies of such requests to the Township
Committee. Additionally, the Executive Director shall prepare long and
short term recommendations as to the needs and goals of the Corporation.
These recommendations will normally be prepared in connection with the
annual and capital budgets, but may be submitted as separate memoranda.
The Executive Director shall also provide such documentation as shall be
required by the Department of Finance with respect to project funding in
order to prepare the necessary Chapter 159 resolutions. All expenditures
shall be made through the Department of Purchasing and the Department of
Finance of the Township of Lakewood in conformity with existing Township
policy, forms and procedure.
All proceeds realized by the Corporation from the sale of real property
acquired with Township of Lakewood funds or obligations shall be delivered
to the Township of Lakewood without delay.
§ 2-96.16. Fiscal Year. [Ord. No. 97-31]
The fiscal year of the Corporation shall begin on the first day of July, each
year, except that the first fiscal year of the Corporation shall begin on the
date of Incorporation.
employment development. This Committee shall facilitate more
effective training and employment services. All recommendations of the
Committee shall be presented to the Board of Trustees for approval or
rejection of the Board.
Meetings may be called by the Executive Director, Committee
Chairman, or in his absence, the Vice-Chairman.
A majority of the Labor Committee shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business at any meeting of the Committee. Appropriate
records of all such actions shall be maintained.
§ 2-96.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 2-96.17
AO:191
§ 2-96.17. Audit. [Ord. No. 97-31]
At the close of each fiscal year, the books and records of the Corporation
shall be audited by a certified public accountant who shall be hired by the
Board for such a purpose. A copy of such annual audit shall be presented to
the Board of Trustees at a regular monthly meeting and a copy of said audit
shall also be submitted to the Township Clerk. A copy of the audit shall also
be filed with all governmental agencies which may require such filing.
§ 2-96.18. Indemnification. [Ord. No. 97-31]
The Corporation shall, to the fullest extent now or hereafter permitted by
law, indemnify any person made, or threatened to be made, a party to any
action, suit, or proceeding by reason of the fact that he (or a person who is
a legal or personal representative of heir or legatee) is or was a Director,
Trustee, or Officer of the Corporation, against liability, judgments, charges,
fines, amounts paid in settlement and other reasonable expenses, including
attorney's fees.
§ 2-96.17 LAKEWOOD CODE § 2-96.18
AO:192
Chapter 3
POLICE REGULATIONS
§ 3-1. LOITERING.
§ 3-1.1. Definitions. [1971 Code § 4-3.1]
As used in this section:
LOITERING — Shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and
shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing or walking about
aimlessly, and shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around."
PARENT OR GUARDIAN — Shall mean any adult person having care or
custody of a minor, whether by reason of blood relationship, the order of
any court or otherwise.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any place to which the public has access
and shall include any street, highway, road, alley, or sidewalk. It shall
also include the front or within a reasonable vicinity of any store, shop,
restaurant, tavern or other place of business, and public grounds, areas,
parks, as well as parking lots or other vacant private property not owned
by or under the control of the person charged with violating this section,
or in the case of a minor, not owned or under the control of his parent or
guardian.
§ 3-1.2. Certain Types of Loitering Prohibited. [1971 Code § 4-3.2]
No person shall loiter in a public place in such a manner as to:
§ 3-1.3. Refusal to Obey Orders of a Police Officer. [1971 Code
§ 4-3.3]
Whenever any Police Officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment,
decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is
likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in subsection 3-1.2 he may,
if he deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety,
order that person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave
after being ordered to do so by a Police Officer shall be guilty of a violation
of this section.
a. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace.
b. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
c. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
d. Obstruct, molest, or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place. This paragraph shall include the making of unsolicited remarks
of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or which are calculated to
annoy or disturb the person to, or in whose hearing they are made.
§ 2-96.18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-1.4
AO:193
§ 3-1.4. Loitering by Minors. [1971 Code § 4-3.4]
No parent or guardian of a minor under the age of 18 years shall knowingly
permit that minor to loiter in violation of this section.
§ 3-1.5. Notice of Violation. [1971 Code § 4-3.5]
Whenever any minor under the age of 18 years is charged with a violation of
this section, his parent or guardian shall be notified of this fact by the Chief
of Police or any other person designated by him to give such notice.
§ 3-1.6. Presumption. [1971 Code § 4-3.6]
If at any time within 30 days following the giving of notice as provided in
subsection 3-1.5, the minor to whom such notice relates again violates this
section, it shall be presumed in the absence of evidence to the contrary
that the minor did so with the knowledge and permission of his parent or
guardian.
§ 3-2. CURFEW FOR MINORS. [1971 Code § 4-4]
It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian having the custody or control
of any child up to 17 years of age to permit him to be on any public street,
highway or other public place in the Township between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless he is accompanied by his parent, guardian or any
other adult person with the consent of the child's parent or guardian.
§ 3-3. OBSCENE CONDUCT PROHIBITED.
§ 3-3.1. Definitions. [1971 Code § 4-26.1]
As used in this section:
AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC — Shall mean that the matter or performance
may be purchased or attended on a subscription basis, on a membership fee
arrangement or for a separate fee for each item or performance.
DISSEMINATE — Shall mean to transfer possession of, with or without
consideration.
KNOWINGLY — Shall mean being aware of the character and the content of
the material.
MATERIAL — Shall mean any book, magazine, newspaper or other printed
or written material or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture
or other pictorial representation or any statue or other figure, or any
recording, transcription or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction
or any other articles, equipment or machines.
NUDITY — Shall mean the showing of the human male or female genitals or
pubic area with less than a fully opaque covering.
OBSCENE — Shall mean that to the average person applying contemporary
community standards:
§ 3-1.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-3.1
AO:194
PERFORMANCE — Shall mean any preview, play, show, skit, film, dance or
other exhibition performed before an audience.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, partnership, firm, association,
corporation or other legal entity.
PROMOTE — Shall mean to cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist.
SERVICE TO PATRONS — Shall mean the provision of services to paying
guests in establishments providing food and beverages; including but not
limited to hostessing, hat checking, cooking, bartending, serving, table
setting and clearing, waiter and waitressing and entertaining.
§ 3-3.2. Prohibited Conduct. [1971 Code § 4-26.2]
The predominant appeal of the matter taken as a whole, is to prurient
interest; i.e. a shameful or morbid interest in sexual conduct, nudity or
excretion; and
a.
The matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive manner sexual
conduct regulated (by the applicable State statute); and
b.
The work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or
scientific value.
c.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
1. Knowingly disseminate, distribute or make available to the public
any obscene material; or
2. Knowingly engage or participate in any obscene performance made
available to the public; or
3. Knowingly engage in commerce for commercial gain with materials
depicting and describing explicit sexual conduct, nudity or
excretion, utilizing displays, circulars, advertisements and other
public sales efforts that promote such commerce primarily on the
basis of their prurient appeal; or
4. Provide service to patrons in such a manner as to expose to public
view:
(a) The genitalia, pubic region, buttocks, perineum, or anal region
of any person;
(b) Any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of
or simulates the genitals, buttocks, perineum, anal region or
pubic region; or
(c) Any portion of the female breast at or below the areola thereof;
or
5. Knowingly promote the commission of any of the above listed
unlawful acts.
§ 3-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-3.3
AO:195
§ 3-3.3. Notice of Obscene Material or Action. [1971 Code § 4-26.3]
§ 3-3.4. Types of Proceedings. [1971 Code § 4-26.4]
a. Actual notice of the obscene nature of such material, performance or
activity may be given to a person involved in or responsible for such
from any law enforcement officer on the basis of information lawfully
gathered and supplied to him by the Police Department or from citizens.
1. The notice shall be in writing and delivered by mail or in person to
the alleged offender.
2. The notice shall state that:
(a) The activity engaged in falls within the prohibitions of Section
3-1;
(b) If such activity has not ceased within seven calendar days, the
Township will take appropriate legal action; and
(c) A declaratory judgment proceeding as described in subsection
3-3.4 is available if a person engaged in the challenged activity
wishes to initiate the legal determination of whether the
activity is in fact obscene.
b. A person who promotes any obscene activity as prohibited in subsection
3-3.2 in the course of business is presumed to do so with knowledge of
its content and character.
a. Declaratory Judgment.
1. Any person receiving notice in writing under subsection 3-3.3a that
a specified activity is obscene may bring an action against the
Township for a declaratory judgment to determine whether the
activity is obscene.
2. If it is adjudged and declared by the appropriate Court that the
activity is obscene, then the Township Attorney may cause the
publication of the judgment in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Township and upon the publication all persons residing or
doing business in the Township will be presumed to have actual
notice of the nature of the activity.
b. Criminal Prosecution.
1. Any duly authorized law enforcement officer may cause criminal
charges to be brought against any person presently engaging in or
who has engaged in any prohibited activity in violation of Section
3-3.
2. If notice has been given pursuant to subsection 3-3.3a, then
criminal charges may be brought only after seven calendar days
after receipt of the notice.
§ 3-3.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-3.4
AO:196
§ 3-3.5. Evidence; Defenses. [1971 Code § 4-26.5]
§ 3-3.6. Violations; Penalties. [1971 Code § 4-26.6; New]
§ 3-4. CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON PUBLIC OR
PRIVATE PROPERTY.21
§ 3-4.1. Prohibited and Unlawful Conduct. [1971 Code § 4-2.1]
Any person who shall consume alcoholic beverages as follows is in violation
of this section:
§ 3-4.2. Exceptions. [1971 Code § 4-2.2]
Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 3-4.1, the Mayor and
Township Committee may, by resolution, permit the consumption of
alcoholic beverages in any of the places designated in subsection 3-4.1 in
connection with special events or observances which have been authorized
by the Mayor and Township Committee.
c. Proceedings authorized by this section shall be in addition to any other
provided by law.
a. Expert affirmative evidence that the materials or activities are obscene
is not required when the materials or activities themselves are
presented as evidence.
b. It shall be an affirmative defense in any prosecution under this section
that allegedly obscene material was disseminated, or presented for a
bona fide scientific, medical, educational, governmental or judicial
purpose by a physician, psychologist, teacher, clergyman, prosecutor or
judge.
a. Whoever violates this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to
the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
b. Upon conviction, in addition to any other penalty imposed for a violation
of this section, the municipal authority may, in its discretion, revoke the
business license of the offender, and for a second violation shall revoke
the business license of such person.
a. While in or on a public street, public sidewalk, public parking lot, public
boardwalk, public beach, public park or recreation area or in any public
conveyance.
b. In a private motor vehicle while the vehicle is on any public street, lane
or parking lot.
c. While upon private property of another, without the permission of the
owner or person having authority to grant such permission.
21.Editor's Note: See also Chapter 8, Section 8-13 for permits for special events in parks.
§ 3-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-4.3
AO:197
§ 3-4.3. Special Permits. [1971 Code § 8-8.3; New]
Special permits or licenses for the consumption of alcoholic beverages
on public property or in public parks, in connection with a special event
shall be obtained from the Township Clerk after approval by the Township
Committee.
§ 3-4.4. Regulations. [1971 Code § 8-8.2; New; Ord. No. 2006-41 § 1]
§ 3-4.5. Presumption. [1971 Code § 8-8.4]
Any person who empties a glass or other container in order to prevent the
inspecting or arresting officer or other appropriate official from making a
determination as to the alcoholic content of beverage in the container shall
be presumed to have had a container having a beverage with an alcoholic
content which presumption shall be rebuttable by competent evidence.
§ 3-4.6. Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages by Persons Under the
Legal Age.22 [1971 Code § 8-6; New]
No person under the legal age shall consume or have in his possession any
alcoholic beverages in any public place or quasi-public place.
No person under the legal age shall consume or have in his possession
any alcoholic beverage while in a motor vehicle on any public street or
highway, or while in a motor vehicle in any public or quasi-public place in
the Township.
No person of legal age shall give, convey, sell or transfer any alcoholic
beverages to any person under the legal age in any public or quasi-public
place within the Township.
§ 3-4.7. Possession or Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages by
Underage Persons on Private Property. [Ord. No. 2001-32]
a. No person(s) shall carry about in his/her hand or on his/her person any
open and unsealed container containing alcoholic beverages in any
public place, as defined in subsection 3-1.1, regardless of whether or
not the container is clearly exposed or contained in a bag or other
cover.
a. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, it shall be unlawful for
any person under the legal age who, without legal authority, knowingly
possesses or knowingly consumes an alcoholic beverage on private
property.
b. The provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit an underage person
from consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with
a religious observance, ceremony or rite or consuming or possessing an
22.Editor's Note: Regulations for Persons Under the Legal Age can also be found in Chapter
6, Section 6-6.
§ 3-4.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-4.7
AO:198
§ 3-5. INTERFERENCE WITH RETAIL OR WHOLESALE BUSINESS
PRACTICES.
§ 3-5.1. Prohibition. [Ord. No. 2012-30]
No person shall purposely interfere with, hinder, disturb or obstruct any
retail or wholesale business operation, function or activity, nor shall any
person purposely interfere with, hinder, disturb or obstruct any retail or
wholesale business owner, employee, agent or personnel acting in the
furtherance of the interests of that business, with the intent to prevent,
undermine or otherwise obstruct the lawful retail or wholesale practices
of that business. This section does not apply to conduct considered lawful
competitive economic practices.
§ 3-5.2. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2012-30]
Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to the penalty as stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-6. LITTER.23
§ 3-6.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2005-92 § 1]
The purpose of this section is to establish requirements to control littering
in the Township of Lakewood, so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 3-6.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2005-92 § 1]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a
parent, guardian or relative who has attained legal age to purchase and
consume alcoholic beverages.
c. The provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit possession of
alcoholic beverages of any person while actually engaged in the
performance of employment by a person who is licensed by Title 33 of
the New Jersey Statutes.
d. Penalty. Any person convicted of a violation of this subsection shall be
punished by a fine of $250 for a first offense and $350 for any
subsequent offense. In addition to the aforementioned penalty any
person convicted under this subsection may be subject to a suspension
or postponement for six months of the driving privilege of the
defendant.
23.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1971 Code §§ 4-1.1 — 4-1.9.
§ 3-4.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-6.2
AO:199
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
LITTER — Shall mean any used or unconsumed substance or waste material
which has been discarded or is no longer usable, whether made of
aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper, or other natural or synthetic
material, or any combination thereof, including, but not limited to, any
bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can,
any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material or
any garbage, trash, refuse, debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn
or garden waste, newspapers, magazines, periodicals or discarded reading
material, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging or
construction material or any trash, wastepaper or garbage lying about, but
does not include the waste of the primary processes of mining or other
extraction processes, logging, sawmilling, farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — Shall mean a container suitable for the depositing
of litter.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 3-6.3. Prohibited Acts and Regulated Activities. [Ord. No. 2005-92
§ 1]
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public, commercial or private
property other than in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow
such litter to remain.
b. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this section, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this section.
c. It shall be unlawful for any person to discard, drop or place along any
street or road, or off any right-of-way, any litter as defined in this
section, or any household or commercial solid waste, rubbish, refuse, or
junk, in any place not specifically designed for the purpose of solid
waste storage or disposal.
d. It shall be unlawful for any residential, private or commercial property
owner to permit open or overflowing waste disposal receptacles on his/
her property.
e. No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other
public place the accumulation of any litter from any building or lot or
from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalks and area in front of the
property free of litter, garbage cans and receptacles; provided,
§ 3-6.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-6.3
AO:200
§ 3-6.4. Streets, Sidewalks and Curbs. [Ord. No. 2005-92 § 1]
It shall be the duty of any owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or person in
charge of any structure, whether residential, private or commercial, to keep
and cause to be kept the sidewalk, curb or any parking area abutting the
building or structure free from litter obstructions or nuisances of any kind
and keep sidewalk, curbs, areaways, backyards or courts and alleys free
from litter, solid waste or other offensive material.
§ 3-6.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2005-92 § 1]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Police Department of
the Township of Lakewood.
§ 3-6.6. Violations and Penalty. [Ord. No. 2005-92 § 1]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
section shall be subject to one or more of the following: a fine not to exceed
$1,000; imprisonment in the County jail for a term not to exceed 90 days or
community service for a period not to exceed 90 days, for each and every
violation. If the violation is of continuing nature, each and every day during
which it continues constitutes a separate and distinct offense.
§ 3-7. HANDBILL DISTRIBUTION.
§ 3-7.1. Definitions. [1971 Code § 4-10.1]
As used in this section:
DISTRIBUTION — Shall mean free distribution or delivery.
PRINTED MATTER — Shall mean cards, circulars, handbills, leaflets,
magazines, newspapers, notices and pamphlets.
§ 3-7.2. Permit Required. [1971 Code § 4-10.2]
No person shall distribute within the Township any printed matter or
samples of merchandise without obtaining a permit for distribution from the
Township Clerk approved by the Chief of Police. The permit shall be issued
without charge to any person of good repute who makes written application
therefor. The application shall be signed by the person desiring to engage
in distribution and by the person on whose account the distribution is
intended to be made, and shall be accompanied by a copy or duplicate of
however, that this provision shall not apply to those periods of time
fixed by the Township Committee for the collection of leaves, garbage
and litter.
f. No person shall load, drive or move any truck or other vehicle unless
such vehicle is constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or
litter from being blown or deposited upon any street or other public or
private place or property.
§ 3-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-7.2
AO:201
the printed matter or sample of merchandise to be distributed, and shall
contain a designation of the date or dates on which it is intended to make
the distribution, and an agreement to comply with all the regulations of this
chapter.
§ 3-7.3. Regulations for Handbill Distribution. [1971 Code § 4-10.3]
§ 3-7.4. Exceptions. [1971 Code § 4-10.4]
This section shall not apply to the distribution of printed matter or samples
of merchandise that have been previously ordered or requested by the
owner or occupant of the premises where the distribution is made, or to the
distribution of printed matter or samples of merchandise by mail.
§ 3-8. SHOPPING CARTS.
§ 3-8.1. Definitions. [1971 Code § 4-12.1]
As used in this section:
a. No printed matter or samples of merchandise shall be placed, thrown or
discarded by any person on any public street, park or other public
place; or on the lawn or in the yard appurtenant to any dwelling house
or other building, or on any field or other open space.
b. No person shall distribute any printed matter or samples of
merchandise by placing in or on, or by attaching the same to, any
automobile, truck or other motor vehicle.
c. No person distributing any printed matter or samples of merchandise
shall, by ringing door bells, knocking on doors or windows or by other
means, call or summon the occupant of any dwelling house or other
building for the purpose of distributing any printed matter or samples
of merchandise to the occupant.
d. No printed matter or samples of merchandise shall be distributed by
any person at any dwelling, house or other building unless it is
delivered into the hands of a person there offering to receive the same,
or is placed in the slot or receptacle provided on the premises for the
receipt of printed matter. If distribution cannot be made in either
manner, the printed matter or samples of merchandise may be
distributed by placing and leaving the same outside on the premises in
such manner as to be readily seen and taken up by a person entering
the dwelling, house or building and in a manner as not to be blown into
or upon the yard or lawn of the premises, or into or upon any street.
e. No person shall distribute any printed matter or samples of
merchandise on the premises of any dwelling, house or other building
known to be vacant by the person distributing the printed matter or
samples of merchandise.
§ 3-7.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-8.1
AO:202
CART — Shall mean a hand-drawn or propelled vehicle or wheeled
container made of metal, wood, or other material which are generally
provided by merchants for carting or carrying merchandise or foodstuffs to
automobiles or other places.
§ 3-8.2. Use Regulations. [1971 Code § 4-12.2]
§ 3-9. ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES.24
§ 3-9.1. Hazard Established. [1971 Code § 4-17.1]
Automobiles or parts thereof left standing in an unlicensed and unusable
state which are accessible to children, rodents, vermin, and insects or which
create an unsightly appearance constitute a hazard and condition inimical
to the public health, welfare and safety.
§ 3-9.2. Definitions. [1971 Code § 4-17.2]
As used in this section:
PROPERTY — Shall mean any real property within the Township which is
not a street or highway.
STREET OR HIGHWAY — Shall mean the entire width between the
boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is
open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
VEHICLE — Shall mean a machine propelled by power, other than human
power, designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads, runner
or slides, and to transport persons or property or pull machinery, and shall
include, without limitation, automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, tractor,
buggy and wagon.
§ 3-9.3. Abandonment of Vehicles Prohibited. [1971 Code § 4-17.3]
No person shall abandon any vehicle within the Township and no person
shall leave any vehicle at any place within the Township for such time and
under such circumstances as to cause such vehicle to reasonably appear to
have been abandoned.
a. The owner of shopping carts used in connection with any retail business
and intended for use by patrons in carrying articles of merchandise
shall clearly designate on each cart the name and address of the owner.
b. It shall be unlawful for an owner to permit any cart to be left
unattended or abandoned on any public street or public place within
the Township.
c. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a cart from the property of
any retail establishment.
24.Editor's Note: See also Board of Health Section BH3-2, Abandoned Vehicles.
§ 3-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-9.4
AO:203
§ 3-9.4. Wrecked, Non-operating or Junked Vehicles on Street
Prohibited. [1971 Code § 4-17.4]
No person shall leave any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked or
junked vehicle on any street or highway within the Township.
§ 3-9.5. Disposition of Wrecked or Discarded Vehicles. [1971 Code
§ 4-17.5]
No person in charge or control of any property within the Township,
whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall allow any
partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked, junked or discarded vehicles
to remain on such property longer than 48 hours; and no person shall leave
any such vehicle on any property within the Township for a longer time than
48 hours; except that this subsection shall not apply with regard to a vehicle
in an enclosed building, a vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise
operated in a lawful place and manner, when necessary to the operation of
such business enterprise, or a vehicle in an appropriate storage place or
depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by the Township.
§ 3-9.6. Impounding of Vehicles. [1971 Code § 4-17.6]
The Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department designated by
him is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left at any
place within the Township which reasonably appears to be in violation of
this section or lost, stolen or unclaimed. The vehicle shall be impounded
until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with applicable statutes.
The Chief of Police or any member of the Police Department acting for him
shall notify the registered and legal owner in writing by personal service
or by certified mail, at the last known address of the owner, of the removal
of the vehicle and the reason for the same, and the location of the vehicle.
The vehicle shall be retained and impounded until the owner or his duly
authorized agent has paid the cost of such taking and removal, together
with a garage charge of $2 for each and every day the vehicle is retained
and impounded.
§ 3-10. DRUG-FREE SCHOOL ZONES.
§ 3-10.1. Adoption of Map. [1971 Code § 4-22.1; Ord. No. 96-55 § 1;
Ord. No. 2003-9 § 1]
In accordance with and pursuant to the authority of L. 1988, c. 44 (R.S.
2C:35-7), the Drug-Free School Zone Map produced on or about October
17, 2002 by William T. Birdsall, P.E., Birdsall Engineering, Inc., Township
Engineer, is hereby approved and adopted as an official finding and record
of the location and areas within the Township of property which is used
for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any elementary or
secondary school or school board, and of the areas on or within 1,000 feet
of such school property.
The map shall consist of 29 sheets, one for each school named below:
§ 3-9.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-10.1
AO:204
Alpha School.
Yeshiva K'Tana of Lakewood.
Bais Faiga.
Bais Kaila High School.
Calvary Academy.
Ella G. Clarke School.
Clifton Avenue Grade School.
High School Ball Fields.
Holy Family School.
Lakewood Cheder School.
Bezalel Yeshiva/Francis Opatut Junior High School.
Lakewood High School.
Lakewood Middle School.
Oak and Spruce Street Schools.
Ocean Day School.
Tashbar of Lakewood.
Ohr Chodosh.
Bais Shaindel High School.
Lakewood Community Center.
Bnos Isroel School.
Lakewood Educational Institute.
Mesivtah Pe'Er Hatorah.
School for Children with Hidden Intelligence.
Uta-Congregation Torah.
Bais Faiga Annex School.
Bais Rochel.
Talmud Torah of Lakewood.
Yeshiva Tifereth Torah.
Bais Yaakov High School of Lakewood.
§ 3-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-10.2
AO:205
§ 3-10.2. Official Finding and Boundaries. [1971 Code § 4-22.2]
The Drug-Free School Zone Map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 3-10.1 shall continue to constitute an official finding and record
as to the location and boundaries of areas on or within 1,000 feet of
property owned by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or
school board which is used for school purposes until such time if any that
this section shall be amended to reflect any additions or deletions with
respect to the locations and boundaries of school property and drug-free
school zones.
§ 3-10.3. Notification of Changes. [1971 Code § 4-22.3]
The school board, or the chief administrative officer in the case of any
private or parochial school, is hereby directed and shall have the continuing
obligation to promptly notify the Township Engineer and the Township
Attorney of any changes in the location or boundaries of any property owned
by or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board and
which is used for school purposes.
§ 3-10.4. Copy of Map on File. [1971 Code § 4-22.4]
The Township Clerk shall receive and keep on file the originals of the map
approved and adopted pursuant to subsection 3-10.1 and to provide at a
reasonable cost a true copy thereof to any person, agency or court which
may request a copy, along with certification that the copy is a true copy of
the map approved and adopted and kept on file. A true copy of the map and
of this section shall be provided without cost to the Court Clerk and to the
Office of the Ocean County Prosecutor.
§ 3-10.5. Additional Matters. [1971 Code § 4-22.5]
The following additional matters are hereby determined, declared, recited
and stated:
a. It is understood that the map approved and adopted pursuant to
subsection 3-10.1 was prepared and is intended to be used as evidence
in prosecutions arising under the criminal laws of this State, and that
pursuant to State law, such map shall constitute prima facie evidence of
the following:
1. The location of elementary and secondary schools within the
Township;
2. The boundaries of the real property which is owned by or leased to
such schools or a school board;
3. That such school property is and continues to be used for school
purposes; and
4. The location and boundaries of areas which are on or within 1,000
feet of such school property.
§ 3-10.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-10.5
AO:206
§ 3-11. FALSE ALARMS.
§ 3-11.1. Purpose. [1971 Code § 4-23.1]
The purpose of this section is to regulate and provide penalties for false
alarms in the Township of Lakewood, the control of which is within the
responsibilities of the user, owner or the person that maintains such alarm
systems.
§ 3-11.2. Definitions. [1971 Code § 4-23.2]
As used in this section:
ADMINISTRATIVE FEE OR FEE — Shall mean the fee payable to the
Township of Lakewood for excessive false alarm activations or other
violations as set forth in subsection 3-11.3.
ALARM SYSTEM — Shall mean assembly of equipment and devices
designed to signal the presence of an emergency or hazard requiring urgent
attention and to which Police or Fire Department or any other services may
be expected to respond.
FALSE ALARM — Shall mean any alarm or signal of an alarm system
actuated by inadvertence, negligence, intentional or unintentional act of a
person other than an intruder, and shall include as well, alarm caused by
malfunctioning of the alarm device or other relevant equipment, but shall
b. Except as is otherwise expressly noted on the face of the approved and
adopted map, all of the property depicted on the map approved and
adopted herein as school property was owned by, or leased to, a school
or school board and was being used for school purposes as of February
28, 1992, that being after the effective date of L. 1987, c. 101 (C.
2C:35-7).
c. Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7, a prosecutor is not
precluded from introducing or relying upon any other evidence or
testimony to establish a violation of the offense defined in that statute,
including use of a map or diagram other than the one approved and
adopted pursuant to subsection 3-10.1. The failure of the map approved
herein to depict the location and boundaries of any property which is, in
fact used for school purposes and which is owned by or leased to any
elementary or secondary school or school board, whether the absence
of such depiction if the result of inadvertent omission or the result of
any changes in the location and boundaries of such property which have
not yet been incorporated into a revised approved map, shall not be
deemed to be an official finding and record that such property is not
owned by or leased to a school or school board, or that such property is
not used for school purposes.
d. All of the requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-7 concerning the
preparation, approval and adoption of a drug-free school zone map have
been complied with.
§ 3-10.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-11.2
AO:207
not include alarms caused by malfunction of the alarm console or police
device, or acts of God.
LOCAL ALARM — Shall mean any alarm or device which, when actuated,
produces a signal not connected to another source, such as store burglar
alarms actuating bell devices.
SUBSCRIBER — Shall mean a person who buys, leases or otherwise obtains
an alarm signaling system and thereafter either contracts with or hires an
alarm business to monitor and/or service the alarm device or performs such
service himself.
TOWNSHIP ALARM ADMINISTRATOR. — The Chief of Police shall be
responsible for the enforcement of this section and any administrative
duties regarding the regulation and control of alarm systems in the
Township of Lakewood.
§ 3-11.3. Violations: Assessment of Fines and Court Costs. [1971
Code § 4-23.3; Ord. No. 2009-60 § 1; Ord. No. 2010-8 § 1]
§ 3-11.4. Enforcement. [1971 Code § 4-23.5; Ord. No. 2009-60 § 1;
Ord. No. 2010-8 § 1]
The enforcement of this section shall be by Lakewood Township law
enforcement officers or Lakewood Township Police personnel designated by
the Chief of Police and shall be under the jurisdiction of the Municipal Court
of the Township of Lakewood.
a. In the event of a false alarm, any person having knowledge thereof shall
immediately notify the Police Department. The Chief of Police shall
cause an investigation to be made and keep a record of all false alarms.
b. False alarms shall result in the following fines being imposed:
1. For the first, second and third alarm in the same 12 month period, a
written warning shall be issued.
2. For the fourth alarm in the same 12 month period, each such false
alarm shall subject the property owner or tenant to a $50 fine plus
court costs.
3. For the fifth and subsequent alarm in the same 12 month period,
each such false alarm shall subject the property owner or tenant to
a $100 fine plus court costs.
4. No violation shall be assessed to any property owner, tenant or
person that maintains an alarm system as provided for and defined
herein during the first 30 days of installation and actuation.
5. It shall be unlawful for any alarm device, dial alarm or other
audible alarm to ring or put forth any other sound for a period in
excess of 15 minutes. Any such occurrence shall result in a fine of
$100 plus court costs.
§ 3-11.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-12
AO:208
§ 3-12. BINGO AND GAMES OF CHANCE PERMITTED ON
SUNDAYS. [1971 Code § 6-9]
The Township hereby adopts the provisions of N.J.S.A. 5:8-1 et seq.,
subsequent to the approval heretofore granted by the voters of the
Township. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 5:8-31, certain games known as bingo or
lotto shall be permitted to be conducted by license on the first day of
the week, commonly known and designated as Sunday, unless it shall be
otherwise provided in the license for the holding, operating, and conducting
of the game or games.
§ 3-13. BICYCLES.
§ 3-13.1. Intent and Purposes for Regulations. [1971 Code
§ 11-21.1]
The Township of Lakewood finds and declares that the provisions of this
section were enacted for the following reasons:
§ 3-13.2. Scope. [1971 Code § 11-21.2]
§ 3-13.3. Definitions. [1971 Code § 11-21.3]
As used in this section:
BICYCLE — Shall mean any two wheeled vehicle having a rear drive wheel
which is solely human powered and having a seat height of 25 inches or
greater when the seat is in the lowest adjustable position.
BICYCLIST — Shall mean a person operating or in actual physical control of
a bicycle, including a person on foot walking a bicycle.
a. To provide for the registration of all bicycles owned or operated by
residents of this Township;
b. To facilitate the identification and location of bicycles reported stolen or
missing;
c. To assist the Police Department in its efforts to prevent the theft of
bicycles.
a. The registration requirements of this section shall apply to all bicycles
owned by residents of this Township, except those bicycles owned and
held for sale by residents engaged in the business of buying or selling
new or used bicycles.
b. Unless otherwise indicated, all other provisions of this section shall
apply to all bicycles operated within the jurisdictional boundaries of the
Township.
c. Any provisions of this section in conflict with Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey are superseded thereby.
§ 3-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-13.3
AO:209
BIKE LANE — Shall mean that portion of a roadway which has been
designated by striping, signing and pavement markings for the preferential
or exclusive use of bicyclists.
BIKE PATH — Shall mean a bikeway physically separated from motorized
vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and either within the highway
right-of-way or within an independent right-of-way.
FIT OPERATING CONDITION — Shall mean: all moving parts shall be in
good functioning order; the frame shall be structurally sound; the tires shall
be properly inflated; and the bicycle shall comply with all the requirements
of this section as well as Chapter 4, Article 3 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey, as amended.
FRAME NUMBER — Shall mean an identifying number permanently
stamped or cast on the frame of a bicycle or moped.
OPERATING A BICYCLE — Shall mean the use or putting into action or
causing to function of a bicycle, including the walking of a bicycle by a
person.
PEDESTRIAN — Shall mean a person afoot.
RESIDENT — Shall mean a person who resides in the Township for longer
than 60 days.
ROADWAY — Shall mean that portion of a highway designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, excluding the sidewalk.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean that portion of a highway designed or ordinarily
used for pedestrian traffic.
SIDEWALK BICYCLE — Shall mean a bicycle as defined herein which shall
have two or more tandem wheels, which wheels are less than 15 inches
in diameter. Sidewalk bicycles shall not be required to meet any of the
requirements of this section, and the registration and licensing of such
sidewalk bicycles shall be voluntary.
VEHICLE — Shall mean every device in, upon or by which any person
or property is or may be transported upon a highway excepting devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks
or motorized bicycles.
§ 3-13.4. Registration of Bicycles. [1971 Code § 11-21.4]
a. It shall be unlawful for any person residing within the Township to
operate a bicycle upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within
the Township without having registered such bicycle and having
secured a registration number on the frame within 14 days of his
purchase thereof.
b. No bicycle shall be registered pursuant to this section unless it displays
a frame number. No person engaged in the business of selling new or
used bicycles at retail within the Township shall buy or sell any new or
used bicycles unless the bicycle has a frame number. At the owner's
§ 3-13.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-13.4
AO:210
§ 3-13.5. Procedure for Registration. [1971 Code § 11-21.5]
§ 3-13.6. Transfer of Ownership. [1971 Code § 11-21.6]
request the Police Department shall permanently stamp or cast a frame
number on the owner's bicycle.
a. All bicycles regulated by this section shall be registered upon purchase
or transfer of ownership.
b. Application for a registration number and registration certificate shall
be made to the Police Department, Traffic and Safety Bureau, upon a
form approved by the Township Committee, and the registration card
and number shall be issued as herein provided.
c. A license fee for each bicycle is hereby fixed at $1 and shall be paid at
the time a registration tag is applied for. The application shall be signed
by the owner and shall state the full name and address of the owner of
the bicycle, the name of the manufacturer, the serial number of the
frame thereof, the approximate date when the owner obtained title
thereto, and if not new, when obtained. If the owner is a person under
18 years of age, the signature shall be witnessed and the application
countersigned by a parent of the owner and shall contain a certification
by the parent or guardian that the applicant is capable of operating
same and is familiar with the laws of the State of New Jersey relative to
the operation of bicycles.
d. Upon the issuance of registration card and number after compliance by
the applicant with the requirements herein set forth, the Police
Department, Traffic and Safety Bureau, shall issue to the applicant a
registration card and shall place the registration number on the frame
thereof. The bicycle, together with the registration card issued to the
owner, shall be subject to inspection at all times by any member of the
Police Department. The registration card may be kept by the owner at
the owner's usual place of residence and need not be on the person of
the owner at all times.
e. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to provide or furnish
false or misleading information concerning a bicycle or the ownership
of a bicycle for the purpose of securing or attempting to secure the
registration of the bicycle.
a. A registration decal and its accompanying registration card shall
automatically become void upon the transfer of ownership of the bicycle
from the owner listed on the registration card to another person. Within
five days after such a transfer of ownership, the owner listed on the
registration card shall notify the Police Department of the transfer and
shall surrender his registration card at any police station.
b. The owner of a bicycle registered pursuant to this section shall notify
the Police Department of any change of name or address within 15 days
§ 3-13.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-13.6
AO:211
§ 3-13.7. Altering Licenses. [1971 Code § 11-21.7]
§ 3-13.8. Bicycle Laws. [1971 Code § 11-21.8]
after the change. Upon his surrender of his existing registration card to
the Police Department, the owner shall receive a new registration card
reflecting the change of name and/or address.
c. Upon the dismantling of a bicycle registered pursuant to this section,
the owner shall remove the registration decal, surrender his
registration card to the Police Department and notify the Police
Department that the bicycle shall no longer be operated within the
Township.
d. The purchaser or receiver of the transferred bicycle shall secure a
registration in the manner provided in this section.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously, remove,
destroy, mutilate or alter the number of any license issued pursuant to
this section. Offenders shall be liable for such penalties as contained in
this section.
b. The registration card issued to the owner shall be subject to inspection
at all times by any member of the Police Department. The registration
card may be kept by the owner at the owner's usual place of residence
and need not be on the person of the owner at all times.
c. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to operate within the
Township a bicycle displaying an expired registration decal or a decal
rendered void upon transfer of ownership of the bicycle.
d. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to attach a
registration decal to any bicycle other than the one for which the plate
was issued.
e. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to remove a
registration decal from a bicycle except upon its expiration or upon a
transfer of ownership of the bicycle or in the event the bicycle is
dismantled and no longer operated within the Township.
f. Lost, mutilated or stolen registration cards and/or plates shall be
replaced at police stations for an additional fee of $1. Reasonable proof
of ownership of the bicycle and reasonable proof of such loss,
mutilation or theft must be provided prior to the issuance of a duplicate
registration card and/or decal.
a. Compliance; Safety Rules. Every person operating a bicycle subject to
the provisions of this section shall comply with all the provisions of
Chapter 4, Title 39, of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey, as amended,
with applicable ordinances of the Township of Lakewood and with all
the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder. The Chief of Police
shall cause to be promulgated and issued to each licensee a printed
§ 3-13.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-13.8
AO:212
§ 3-13.9. Safety Inspection Requirements. [1971 Code § 11-21.9]
§ 3-13.10. Rental Agencies. [1971 Code § 11-21.10]
Any rental agency in the Township shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent
unless the bicycle is registered and a registration license is obtained.
§ 3-13.11. Violations and Penalties. [1971 Code § 11-21.11]
copy of the safety rules of Article 3, Chapter 4 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey, as amended.
b. Hitching on Vehicles. No person riding upon any bicycle shall attach the
same or himself to any vehicle upon the roadway, and no operator of any
vehicles shall knowingly allow any person riding upon any bicycle to
attach the same or himself to the vehicle.
a. Inspection. The Police Department may inspect any bicycle on any
public way or place at any time to ascertain whether it has been
registered, or to determine whether the bicycle is in proper mechanical
condition to be operated safely; and in the event a bicycle is being used
or operated without proper registration or is in such condition as to be
unfit for safe operation, the offender shall be liable for the penalties as
contained in this section unless otherwise provided in Title 39 of the
Revised New Jersey Statutes.
b. No bicycle shall successfully complete a safety inspection unless it
complies with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 39:4-10, 39:4-11, and
39:4-11.1.
a. Any person under the age of 18 years who violates any of the provisions
of this section shall for the first offense be reprimanded by the Chief of
Police or his designated representative, in writing, addressed to his
parents or guardian. For a second offense, the offender's registration
card will be suspended for a fixed period of time or his bicycle
impounded at the discretion of the Chief of Police or his designated
representative. For a third or subsequent offense, the Chief of Police or
his designated representative may, in his discretion, impound the
bicycle of the offender and may charge the offender as a juvenile
delinquent in the Ocean County Juvenile Court, where the offense is
deemed to be a serious matter.
b. Any person 18 years of age or over violating any provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction, in addition to the suspension or
revocation of the registration as herein mentioned, be subject to a fine
not to exceed $25 or to imprisonment, not to exceed 10 days, or to both
fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the Judge before whom such
person may be convicted.
c. Impounding of Bicycles. A bicycle being operated without having
obtained a registration, or being operated contrary to the provisions of
§ 3-13.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-13.11
AO:213
§ 3-14. PROSTITUTION.
§ 3-14.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 98-70]
As used in this section:
KNOWN PROSTITUTE OR PROCURER — Shall mean a person who within
one year previous to the date of arrest for violation of this section has
within the knowledge of police authority been convicted of an indictable
or disorderly persons offense for either N.J.S.A. 2C:34-1 et seq. or N.J.S.A.
2C:14-4 et seq.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean an area to which the public has access,
including but not limited to streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks,
driveways, parking lots, motor vehicles (whether moving or not) and
buildings open to the general public, including those which serve food
or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to
buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
§ 3-14.2. Loitering for the Purpose of Prostitution. [Ord. No. 98-70]
A known prostitute or procurer is guilty of loitering for the purpose of
prostitution when he or she remains in or wanders about in a public place
and engages in conduct that, under the circumstances, manifests the
requisite purpose of prostitution or promoting prostitution as defined in
N.J.S.A. 2C:34-1.
§ 3-14.3. Presumption of Requisite Purpose. [Ord. No. 98-70]
The requisite purpose is presumed where a know prostitute or procurer:
Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes, may be impounded by the Police
Department until such time as the owner meets the said provisions
and is not to be returned except upon payment of $2. Any bicycle
not claimed within 90 days will be sold at public auction. All moneys
received for registration, recovery or sale of impounded bicycles shall
be remitted by the Chief of Police to the Township Treasurer.
a. Repeatedly beckons to or stops pedestrians or motorists in a public
place;
b. Repeatedly attempts to stop or repeatedly attempts to engage
passersby in conversation;
c. Repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by
hailing, waving of arms or any other bodily gesture; or
d. Circles in an area in a motor vehicle and repeatedly beckons to,
contacts or attempts to stop pedestrians.
§ 3-13.11 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-14.4
AO:214
§ 3-14.4. Burden of Proof as to Prior Conviction. [Ord. No. 98-70]
The burden of proof as to the existence of any prior conviction shall be by
the preponderance of the evidence, and the Court shall, pursuant to the
Rules of Evidence, take judicial notice of its own records and the records of
the Superior Court of New Jersey.
§ 3-14.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 98-70; New]
Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to the penalty as stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-15. NO SOLICITATION FROM PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
§ 3-15.1. Declaration. [Ord. No. 2010-02 § 1]
It is the intention of the Township Committee to protect the health, safety
and welfare of motorists and pedestrians using sidewalks, streets and other
public rights-of-way within the Township, and persons standing on or in
close proximity to said public rights-of-way, from the dangers of obstruction,
distraction and delays of traffic caused by the solicitation of employment
by pedestrian from or directed to operators or occupants of motor vehicles
while utilizing the Township's public rights-of-way, or by the offer of
employment to pedestrians by the operators or occupants of motor vehicles
while utilizing the Township's public rights-of-way.
§ 3-15.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2010-12 § 1]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMPLOYMENT — Shall mean services, industry or labor performed by a
person for wages or other compensation under any contract of hire, written
or oral, express or implied.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, company, corporation, association,
business or legal entity.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean all of the areas dedicated to public
use for public street purposes and shall include roadways, parkways,
highways, streets, medians, sidewalks, parking areas, curbs, slopes, and
areas of land between the sidewalk and the curb, which are also known as
"utility strips."
SOLICIT OR SOLICITATION — Shall mean any request, offer, enticement or
action which announces the availability for or of employment, or a request,
offer, enticement or action which seeks to offer or secure employment.
Examples of behavior which constitute solicitation of employment include
but are not limited to waving arms, making hand signals, shouting to
someone in a vehicle, jumping up and down, waving signs soliciting
employment pointed at persons in vehicles, approaching vehicles, standing
in the public right-of-way while facing vehicles in the roadway or entering
the roadway portion of a public right-of-way for the purpose of seeking
§ 3-14.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-15.2
AO:215
employment, shouting to or addressing someone by an occupant of a vehicle
for the purpose of offering employment. A solicitation shall be deemed
complete when made, whether or not an employment relationship is
created, a transaction is completed or an exchange of money or property
takes place.
§ 3-15.3. Unlawful Acts—Pedestrians. [Ord. No. 2010-12 § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person standing within or adjacent to any public
right-of-way within the Township of Lakewood to stop or attempt to stop any
motor vehicle utilizing said public right-of-way for the purpose of soliciting
employment of any kind from the occupants of said motor vehicle.
§ 3-15.4. Unlawful Acts—Operators of Motor Vehicles. [Ord. No.
2010-12 § 1]
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle utilizing a public
right-of-way within the Township of Lakewood to stop or stand within or
adjacent to said public right-of-way or any area designated as either a
traffic land or a no-standing or no-stopping zone for the purpose of soliciting
employment or accepting a solicitation of employment from a pedestrian.
§ 3-15.5. Lawful Acts. [Ord. No. 2010-12 § 1]
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the following:
§ 3-15.6. Penalties for Offenses. [Ord. No. 2010-12 § 1]
Any violation of this section is punishable by a fine of $250 for each offense.
§ 3-16. (RESERVED)
§ 3-17. (RESERVED)25
a. Service-related activities such as taxicabs, limousine service, public
transportation vehicles, towing operations, ambulance service and
similar uses.
b. Nothing shall prohibit a business or property owner from soliciting
employment at or upon the property owner's private property;
provided, however, that automobiles, recreational vehicles, trailers,
trucks and other vehicles do not constitute a business property exempt
from the provisions of this section.
c. Solicitation of employment in certain areas of municipal parking lots
specifically designated by the Township Committee for such purpose.
25.Editor's Note: Prior material codified regarding fireworks was repealed by Ord. No.
2018-17.
§ 3-15.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-18
AO:216
§ 3-18. PROHIBITION OF TOBACCO SALES TO MINORS AND BY
VENDING MACHINES.
§ 3-18.1. Prohibition of Tobacco Sales to Minors. [Ord. No. 99-32
§ 1]
§ 3-18.2. Identification Required. [Ord. No. 99-32 § 2]
It shall be unlawful for a tobacco retailer to sell or permit to be sold tobacco
to any individual without requesting and examining identification from the
purchaser positively establishing the purchaser's age as 18 years or greater,
unless the seller has some other conclusive basis for determining the buyer
is over the age of 18 years.
§ 3-18.3. Prohibition of Tobacco Vending Machines and Self-Service
Tobacco Displays. [Ord. No. 99-32 § 3]
§ 3-18.4. Removal of Tobacco Vending Machines and Self-Service
Tobacco Displays. [Ord. No. 99-32 § 4, adopted 7/8/99]
All tobacco vending machines and self-service tobacco displays made
unlawful by the terms of this section shall be removed within 30 days from
the effective date of this section.
§ 3-18.5. Definitions. [Ord. No. 99-32 § 5]
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Ocean County Health
Department, and may be referred to herein as the "Department".
HEALTH OFFICE — Shall mean the Administrative Officer of the Ocean
County Health Department.
LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Shall mean any member of the
Lakewood Township Police Department or any other municipal police
department or the New Jersey State Police.
a. It shall be unlawful to sell tobacco to a person under 18 years of age.
b. Sign requirements: not less than a six inch by eight inch (6" x 8") sign
shall be posted in a conspicuous place near each cash register in all
retail establishments which sell tobacco products containing the
following language:
SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO MINORS UNDER THE AGE OF
18 IS PROHIBITED BY LAW. Legal proof of age must be shown. A
person who sells or offers to sell a tobacco product to a person under
18 years of age may be prosecuted in accordance with state and local
ordinances.
a. It shall be unlawful to offer for sale or to sell tobacco through a tobacco
vending machine in the Township of Lakewood.
b. Self-service tobacco displays are prohibited in all retail establishments.
§ 3-18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-18.5
AO:217
PERSON — Shall mean an individual, partnership, cooperative, association,
corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any
other legal entity.
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAYS — Shall mean any racks, stands or other display
devices from which a customer may take tobacco products directly with only
payment to be made to the tobacco retailer.
TOBACCO — Shall mean any product made from the tobacco plant for the
purpose of smoking, chewing, inhaling and other personal use including
cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
TOBACCO RETAILER — Shall mean any person or entity that operates a
store, stand, booth, concession, or place at which sales of tobacco are made
to purchasers for consumption or use. This shall also mean a person or
entity that owns, operates or uses a vending machine and/or a vending
machine location.
VENDING MACHINE — Shall mean any automated, self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses cigarettes or other tobacco products.
§ 3-18.6. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 99-32 § 6]
§ 3-18.7. Violations; Penalties. [Ord. No. 99-32 § 8]
a. Whenever the Health Officer or his/her designee or a law enforcement
officer reasonably believes there exists a violation of this section, such
officer or designee may issue a summons and complaint not later than
60 days after discovery of the alleged violation. The complaint shall be
written and shall state with reasonable particularity the nature of the
violation, including reference to the subsection of this section alleged to
have been violated. The complaint shall be delivered personally or sent
by Certified Mail to the alleged violator.
b. The Health Officer, designee or law enforcement officer charged with
enforcement of this section, after giving proper identification, may
inspect any matter, thing, premise, place, person, record, vehicle,
incident, or event as necessary.
c. It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, willfully oppose, verbally
abuse or otherwise obstruct the Health Officer, designee or law
enforcement officer, who may request the assistance of the Lakewood
Township Police Department, or other police agency or peace officer
when necessary to execute his or her official duty in a manner
prescribed by law.
d. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of the section.
a. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person
violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $100, nor more than $500 for
each offense. A complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court or
§ 3-18.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-18.7
AO:218
§ 3-18.8. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 99-32 § 9, adopted 7/8/99]
The provisions of this section shall take effect immediately upon its final
passage and publication according to law.
§ 3-18.9. Filing of Certified Copies of Regulations. [Ord. No. 99-32
§ 10]
A certified copy of the within section be forwarded by the Township Clerk to
the following:
§ 3-19. OPERATION OF CERTAIN MOTOR VEHICLES.
§ 3-19.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2003-46 § 1]
As used in this section:
MOTORCYCLE — Shall man any two-wheeled, motor-propelled apparatus
licensed by the State of New Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles for
operation upon the public highways.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — Shall mean a pedal bicycle having a helper motor
characterized in that either the maximum piston displacement is less than
50 cc. or said motor is rated at no more than 1.5 brake horsepower and said
bicycle is capable of a maximum speed of no more than 25 miles per hour
on a flat surface.
MOTORIZED SPORTBIKE — Shall mean:
before such other judicial officer having authority under the laws of the
State of New Jersey.
b. Each sale of tobacco to a minor shall constitute a separate violation.
Each day that a tobacco vending machine or self-service tobacco
display remains on any premises or tobacco is sold without the required
sign, shall constitute a separate distinct offense.
c. The Ocean County Health Department may suspend the Retail Food
Establishment License of any person convicted of violation of this
section, for a period of not more than three days, pursuant to the
authority of the Health Department to license and regulate food
establishments as provided by N.J.S.A. 26:3-31(C).
a. Municipal Manager.
b. Chief Financial Officer.
c. Code Enforcement Officer.
d. Chief of Police.
e. Township Attorney.
f. Ocean County Health Department.
§ 3-18.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-19.1
AO:219
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Shall mean all lands in the Township of Lakewood
not defined as public property or part of the road system as accepted
hereinbefore.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Shall mean lands owned or leased by the Township
of Lakewood, the Board of Education of the Township of Lakewood, or
any other equivalent public body, but specifically excluding therefrom any
roadways being used for public transportation and being part of the
accepted road system of the Township, the County or the State of New
Jersey.
UNLICENSED OPERATOR — Shall mean the operator of any motor vehicle
who does not hold a special license issued by the State of New Jersey
Department of Motor Vehicles, permitting the operation of a motorcycle on
the public highways, or the operator of any motorized sportbike who does
not hold a valid New Jersey license. Unlicensed operator shall also mean
the operator of any watercraft required to be licensed by Federal or State
regulations.
§ 3-19.2. Acts Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2003-46 § 1]
It shall be unlawful to:
Any two, three or four-wheeled bicycle or similar apparatus motor
propelled or having a helper motor and commonly referred to, among
other designations, as a moped, minibike, go-cart, all-terrain vehicle,
trailbike, quad, or vehicle, the like, which by its nature is not authorized
to be licensed by the State of New Jersey Department of Motor Vehicles
for use upon the public highways, notwithstanding the fact that
licensing of the same in some instances may not be required for
operation upon the pubic roadways.
a.
A snowmobile and any similar sport vehicle which is motor-propelled
and traverses the terrain by means of treads, tracks or the like, all as
contrasted to wheels.
b.
a. Operate a motor vehicle of any type, a motorized sportbike, motorcycle,
or motorized bicycle, as defined herein, upon public or private property,
with or without permission of the landowner, during the period of one
hour before sunset or two hours after sunrise.
b. Operate a motorized sportbike, motorcycle, or motorized bicycle, as a
licensed or unlicensed operator, on private property other than with the
written consent of all of the owners of the property. When such written
consent has been obtained, the operator shall keep the same on his
person for display to the authorities. The failure to disclose such written
consent shall constitute a violation hereunder.
c. Operate a motorized sportbike, motorcycle, or motorized bicycle on
public or private property other than in accordance with the general
regulations set forth in subsection 3-19.3 of this section.
§ 3-19.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-19.2
AO:220
§ 3-19.3. General Regulations. [Ord. No. 2003-46 § 1]
The following regulations shall apply to the operation of a motorized
sportbike, motorcycle, or motorized bicycle operated on public or private
property, other than the property of the immediate family of which the
operator is a member.
d. Operate a motorized sportbike, motorcycle, or motorized bicycle on
public or private property in such a way as to harass, worry or disturb
farm animals, domestic livestock or further or destroy or damage crops
or cropland.
e. Operate a motorized sportbike, motorcycle, or motorized bicycle on
public or private property without the same being in proper operating
condition, which is hereby defined as the presence of all original
operating equipment specified therefor by the original manufacturer,
with the same in operating condition at least equal to the
manufacturer's requirements for the proper operation thereof or the
equivalent thereof.
f. Operate a motorized sportbike, motorcycle, or motorized bicycle on
public or private property in a careless, reckless or negligent manner so
as to endanger the safety or property of any person or public or private
property.
a. No person operating a motorized sportbike, motorcycle, or motorized
bicycle shall ride without maintaining full control of such motorized
sportbike, motorized bicycle, or motorcycle, or remove both hands from
the handlebar.
b. No person operating a motorized sportbike, motorcycle, or motorized
bicycle shall carry any other person, except in a place designated
therefor and equipped therefor as part of the original manufacture for
the purpose, and in no event shall a rider be carried on the handlebar
thereof.
c. It shall not be unlawful for any public employee or other party with an
appropriate permit to operate motor vehicles, motorized sportbikes,
motorcycles, or motorized bicycles, as defined herein, in the locations
for the purpose of maintaining, repairing or doing work upon the lands
for the public good.
d. This section shall not be applicable to any recognized organization
which has obtained permission from the Township administration to use
the lands for the sole purpose of holding organized and supervised
rallies, races and/or meets.
e. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle equipped with
a muffler cutout, muffler bypass or similar device.
§ 3-19.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-19.4
AO:221
§ 3-19.4. Impoundment; Duration; Cost. [Ord. No. 2003-46 § 1]
Any Police Officer may, at his discretion:
§ 3-19.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2003-46 § 1; Ord. No.
2004-44 § 1]
Any person, partnership, corporation or other entity who violates any
provision of this section shall be subject to one or more of the following
penalties; no more than $1,000 or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days
or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, notwithstanding
the foregoing the Court may order any motorized sportbike, motorcycle or
motorized bicycle in violation of any provision of this section to be forfeited
to the Township of Lakewood. In the event that the statutes of the State
are amended to provide greater penalties, this subsection may be construed
to authorize and permit the imposition of the maximum fine, imprisonment
or community service. The purpose of this penalty clause is to provide the
maximum penalty permitted by law.
§ 3-20. PROTECTIVE CUSTODY OF CERTAIN PERSONS ARRESTED
FOR DUI.
§ 3-20.1. Authorization to Provide Protective Custody. [Ord. No.
2004-21 § 1]
The Lakewood Township Police Department be and hereby is authorized to
provide protective custody to persons arrested for operating a motor vehicle
under the influence of alcoholic beverages, any chemical substance, or any
controlled dangerous substance in violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.
§ 3-20.2. Facility to Hold in Protective Custody. [Ord. No. 2004-21
§ 2]
The Lakewood Township Police Department be and hereby is authorized to
hold in protective custody those persons aforesaid at an appropriate police
a. Impound any motorized sportbike, motorcycle, or motorized bicycle
operated on public or private property alleged to be a violation of this
section, either by virtue of its operation and use contrary to the
provisions of this section or by virtue of its operation by an unlicensed
operator.
b. Impound any motorized sportbike, motorcycle, or motorized bicycle
operating on the public roadways or waterways in violation of any thenapplicable
State statute or any regulation validly promulgated by any
State agency having jurisdiction. Violators whose vehicles are
impounded would pay the standard towing and storage fees as per the
Township towing ordinance. The expense of impoundment shall be in
addition to any other fine or penalty levied or collected under the terms
of this section.
§ 3-19.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-20.2
AO:222
or other facility to monitor the person's condition until the person is no
longer a danger to himself or others.
§ 3-20.3. Release of Person Held in Custody. [Ord. No. 2004-21 § 3]
The person held in protective custody is no longer considered a danger to
himself or others when the person's blood alcohol concentration is less than
0.05% and the person is no longer under the influence of any intoxicating
liquor, narcotic, hallucinogenic, or habit-forming drug to the extent that the
person's facilities are impaired.
§ 3-20.4. Time Limit for Holding. [Ord. No. 2004-21 § 4]
No person shall be held in protective custody for a period of more than eight
hours without being offered an appropriate hearing.
§ 3-20.5. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2004-21 § 5]
The Police Department may release the person or provide an appropriate
alternative to protective custody due to age, health or safety of the arrested
person.
§ 3-21. PARKING OF MOTOR VEHICLES ON UNPAVED SURFACE OF
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.
§ 3-21.1. Prohibitions. [Ord. No. 2004-39 §§ 1, 2]
§ 3-21.2. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2004-39 §§ 3, 4]
§ 3-21.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2004-39 §§ 5—7]
a. It shall be unlawful for anyone to park a motor vehicle on any
residential property on an area that is an unpaved surface of the
property of the residential dwelling. This shall include but is not limited
to the front yard setback of the residential property.
b. It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant or occupant of any residential
dwelling to permit a motor vehicle to be parked on any unpaved surface
of the property of the residential dwelling.
a. This section shall not apply to approved existing driveways that are
paved, compacted, or gravel.
b. This section shall not apply to residential property under construction
or renovation which prevents a driveway from occupancy.
a. Vehicles found in violation of this section shall be towed at the vehicle
owner's expense.
b. All violators of this section shall be subject to a penalty of $250 for each
violation or 30 days community service or both.
§ 3-20.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-21.3
AO:223
§ 3-22. NOISE.
§ 3-22.1. Noise Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2005-50 § 1]
It shall be unlawful for a person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any loud, unnecessary, offensive or unusual noise or any noise
which does or is likely to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort,
repose, health, peace or safety of others.
§ 3-22.2. Definition of Noise. [Ord. No. 2005-50 § 2]
Without intending to limit the generality of subsection 3-22.1, the following
acts are hereby declared to be examples of loud, disturbing, offensive and
unnecessary noise in violation of this section:
§ 3-22.3. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2005-50 § 3]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be fined for each
offense not more than $1,000 nor more than 30 days incarceration. Each
violation shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 3-22.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2005-50 § 4]
The provisions of this section shall be under the jurisdiction of the Municipal
Court of the Township of Lakewood to enforce, to include law enforcement
officers and Township inspectors.
§ 3-23. DEFACING PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
§ 3-23.1. Defacement. [Ord. No. 2010-58]
It shall be unlawful for any person, organization, or entity to erect, post,
paste, paint, glue, write, draw, chalk, stamp, stick, print, nail, staple, tack,
attach or affix by any means whatsoever any handbill, poster, card, notice,
marker, placard, bumper sticker, gummed label, sign, advertisement,
c. Each and every day in which a violation of this section exists shall
constitute a separate violation subject to penalty.
a. Radios; Televisions; Phonographs; Computers; Compact Discs. The
playing, use or operation of any radio receiving set, television, musical
instrument, phonograph, computer, compact disc, or other machine or
device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to
disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring inhabitants or with
louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for persons who
are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which the machine or device is
operated and who are voluntary listeners. The operation of such a set,
instrument, phonograph, computer, compact disc, machine or device so
that it is clearly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building,
structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence
of a violation of this section.
§ 3-21.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-23.1
AO:224
inscription, figure, mark, symbol, lettering, name, sticker or any other
material upon any public sidewalk, building, curb, gutter, wall, flagstone,
tree, lamp post, awning post, telegraph pole, telephone pole, public utility
pole, public garbage bin, bus shelter, bridge abutment, highway fence,
barrel, box, parking meter, mailbox, traffic signal control device, traffic
stanchion, traffic sign (including pole), tree box, tree pit protection device,
bench, traffic barrier, hydrant, public pay telephone, picnic tables,
playground equipment, or any other public property or on private property
except by permission of the owner or authorized agent of the owner of such
property.
§ 3-23.2. Unlawful to Authorize Defacement. [Ord. No. 2010-58]
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly authorize or employ any
person to cause the erecting, posting, plastering, painting, gluing, writing,
drawing, chalking, stamping, sticking, printing, nailing, stapling, tacking,
or attaching or affixing by any means whatsoever of any handbill, poster,
card, notice, marker, placard, bumper sticker, gummed label, sign,
advertisement, inscription, figure, mark, symbol, lettering, name, sticker
or any other material not exempt pursuant to the subsection 3-23.3 herein
upon any public sidewalk, building, curb, gutter, wall, flagstone, tree, lamp
post, awning post, telegraph pole, telephone pole, public utility pole, public
garbage bin, bus shelter, bridge abutment, highway fence, barrel, box,
parking meter, mailbox, traffic signal control device, traffic stanchion,
traffic sign (including pole), tree box, tree pit protection device, bench,
traffic barrier, hydrant, public pay telephone, picnic tables, playground
equipment, or any other public property or on private property except by
permission of the owner or authorized agent of the owner of such property.
§ 3-23.3. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2010-58]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any handbill, poster, card,
notice, marker, placard, bumper sticker, gummed label, sign,
advertisement, inscription, figure, mark, symbol, lettering, name, sticker,
rubber strip, wire, line or any other material posted by or under the
direction or authorization of the Mayor, Township Committee, or any
Township department or agency. The provisions of this section shall also not
apply to any sign that is permitted or governed by any sign ordinance of the
Township then in effect.
§ 3-23.4. Rebuttable Presumption. [Ord. No. 2010-58]
For purposes of this section, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that
the person, firm, corporation, or other entity whose name, telephone
number, address, photograph, or other identifying information appears on
any handbill, poster, card, notice, marker, placard, bumper sticker, gummed
label, sign, advertisement, inscription, figure, mark, symbol, lettering,
name, sticker or any other material on any item or structure described in
subsection 3-23.1 of this section violated this section by either (i) erecting,
posting, plastering, painting, gluing, writing, thawing, chalking, stamping,
§ 3-23.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-23.4
AO:225
sticking, printing, nailing, stapling, tacking, or attaching or affixing, or (ii)
directing or permitting an agent, employee or other individual under such
persons control to engage in such activity.
§ 3-23.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2010-58]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Police Department of
the Township of Lakewood.
§ 3-23.6. Violations and Penalty. [Ord. No. 2010-58]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
section shall be subject to one or more of the following: a fine not to exceed
$1,000; imprisonment in the County jail for a term not to exceed 90 days or
community service for a period not to exceed 90 days, for each and every
violation. If the violation is of continuing nature, each and every day during
which it continues constitutes a separate and distinct offense.
§ 3-24. URINATION IN PUBLIC PLACES.
§ 3-24.1. Prohibition. [Ord. No. 2006-20 § 1]
It shall be unlawful for anyone to urinate in any public place.
§ 3-24.2. Definition. [Ord. No. 2006-20 § 1]
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any place with which the public has access,
including but not limited to a public street, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk,
bridge, alley, plaza, park, recreation or shopping area, public transportation
facility, vehicles used for public transportation, parking lot or any other
public building, structure or area.
§ 3-24.3. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2006-20 § 1]
Anyone convicted of an offense under this section shall be subject, upon
conviction, to penalties set forth in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 3-25. BICYCLE PARKING RACKS.
§ 3-25.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2010-57]
BICYCLE PARKING RACK — Shall mean a rack for the storage, parking and
securing of bicycles.
§ 3-25.2. Intent and Purpose. [Ord. No. 2010-57]
a. The uncontrolled placement and tethering or securing of bicycles in
public rights-of-way and semi-public rights-of-way, on or to public
property, presents an inconvenience and danger to the safety and
welfare of persons using such rights-of-way, including pedestrians and
persons entering and leaving vehicles and buildings.
§ 3-23.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-25.2
AO:226
§ 3-25.3. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. No. 2010-57]
b. Bicycles so located on public property as to cause an inconvenience or
danger to persons using public rights-of-way and semi-public rights-ofway,
and as to cause an unsightly appearance, constitute public
nuisances.
c. These factors constitute unreasonable interference with and
obstruction of the use of the public rights-of-way and semi-public rightsof-
way, are injurious to health, offensive to the senses, and constitute
such an obstruction of the free use of property as to interfere in the
comfortable enjoyment of life and property by the entire community.
d. The Township Committee recognizes, however, that many residents use
bicycles as a primary means of transportation as well as for recreational
purposes, as a means to visit the downtown business district and that
adequate facilities need to be in place for the safe and secure parking
storage of these bicycles. These competing interests require a
reasonable accommodation, which can be satisfactorily achieved
through this section, designed to provide for the placement of bicycle
parking racks and to regulate the place and manner of bicycle parking
on public property and in public rights-of-way and semi-private rightsof-
way in the Township.
e. The provision and prohibitions hereinafter enacted are for the purpose
of securing and promoting the general welfare of persons in the
Township in their use of public rights-of-way and semi-public rights-ofway
and other public property through the regulation of bicycle parking
in the Township so as to:
1. Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience;
2. Ensure no unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic including ingress to, or egress from, any place of
business, or from the street to the sidewalk, use of the sidewalk,
use of public parks or property;
3. Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of public
sidewalks, poles, traffic signs and signals, hydrants, mailboxes,
trees, and similar appurtenances, and access to locations used for
public transportation purposes;
4. Reduce visual blight on the public rights-of-way and semi-public
rights-of-way, protect the aesthetics and value of surrounding
properties, and protect the quiet enjoyment of public areas;
5. Reduce exposure of the Township to personal injury or property
damage claims and litigations.
6. Protect and safeguard bicycles from vandalism, damage or theft.
§ 3-25.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-25.3
AO:227
§ 3-25.4. Bicycle Parking Rack Locations. [Ord. No. 2010-57]
For the public convenience, the Township will cause bicycle parking racks
to be placed throughout the municipality, and with emphasis on areas where
bicycles have historically been parked. Interested persons may obtain a list
of the locations of all Township bicycle racks from the Township Clerk. Any
merchant may apply to the Code Enforcement Officer for a permit to erect
a bicycle rack in front of or adjacent to the merchant's place of business. In
determining whether to issue the permit, the size, shape and location of the
bicycle rack must be acceptable to the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 3-25.5. Violation—Penalty. [Ord. No. 2010-57]
Any person who shall be guilty of a violation of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of $100 plus court costs for each
violation.
§ 3-26. UNAUTHORIZED CAMPING ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE
PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
a. No person shall park, tether or secure a bicycle upon or to any
sidewalks, poles, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, trees, and
similar appurtenances or on or in any public rights-of-way and semipublic
rights-of-way or in any other fashion on or to anything other than
a bicycle parking rack installed for that purpose, except that bicycles
may be parked on private property with the consent of the property
owner.
b. All bicycles discovered by the Township to have been tethered or
secured upon or to any sidewalks, poles, traffic signs or signals,
hydrants, mailboxes, trees, and similar appurtenances or on or in any
public rights-of-way and semi-public rights-of-way or in any other
fashion on or to anything other than a bicycle parking track installed for
that purpose, abandoned or otherwise left on public streets, sidewalks,
public property or on private property without the consent of the owner
shall be seized and impounded by the Township. The owner of such
bicycles may claim them from the Township by paying the sum of $50
per bicycle, or an amount to be established by the Township by
resolution from time to time, for each bicycle claimed, to cover the
municipal retrieval costs, and, in addition thereto, shall pay $1 per day,
or an amount to be established by the Township by resolution from time
to time, for storage of each such bicycle. All such bicycles unclaimed
after a period of six months shall be sold, in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:14-157, at public auction as unclaimed
property.
c. In order to claim a bicycle from impound, the owner must identify the
bicycle by make, color or in a fashion sufficient to identify the bicycle.
The Township shall not be responsible for any bicycle impounded or
released to a person claiming to be the owner thereof.
§ 3-25.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-26.1
AO:228
§ 3-26.1. Definitions.
CAMP — Shall mean to reside or dwell temporarily in a place, with shelter.
Shelter - Shall mean and includes, without limitation, any tent, tarpaulin,
lean-to, sleeping bag, bedroll, blankets, or any form of cover or protection
from the elements other than clothing. Reside or dwell shall mean and
includes, without limitation, conducting such activities as eating, sleeping,
or the storage of personal possessions.
DESIGNATED HUMAN SERVICE OUTREACH WORKER — Shall mean any
person designated in writing by the manager of the Ocean County
Department of Human Services to assist law enforcement officers as
provided in subsection 3-26.3, Enforcement, regardless of whether the
person is an employee of the Department of Human Services.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — Shall mean, by way of illustration, any street, alley,
sidewalk, pedestrian mall, bike path, town square, greenway, vacant land,
woodland, or any other structure or area encompassed within the public
right-of-way; any parkway, parking lot; or any other grounds, buildings, or
other facilities owned or leased by the Township or by any other public
owner, regardless of whether such public property is vacant or occupied and
actively used for any public purpose.
§ 3-26.2. Acts Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2013-24]
It shall be unlawful to:
§ 3-26.3. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2013-24]
a. Camp upon any private property without the express written consent of
the property owner or the owner's agent.
b. Camp upon any public property except in any park or recreation area
where camping has been expressly allowed by the officer or agency
having the control, management and supervision of the park or
recreational area.
a. The provisions of this section shall be under the jurisdiction of the
Municipal Court of the Township of Lakewood to enforce, to include law
enforcement officers and Township inspectors.
b. No law enforcement officer or Township inspector shall issue a citation,
make an arrest or otherwise enforce this section against any person
unless:
1. The officer orally requests or orders the person to refrain from the
alleged violation of this section and, if the person fails to comply
after receiving the oral request or order, the officer tenders a
written request or order to the person warning that if the person
fails to comply the person may be cited or arrested for a violation of
this section; and
§ 3-26.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-26.3
AO:229
§ 3-27. PROHIBITING OPEN FIRES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
§ 3-27.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2013-20; Ord. No. 2013-66]
The Township Committee of the Township of Lakewood recognizes that
all open burning can contribute to a deterioration of air quality and may
be injurious to human health and welfare. It is also recognized that open
burning must be strictly regulated to adequately protect the health, welfare,
and safety of the public. It is the goal of this ordinance to restrict open
burning on public property in the Township of Lakewood in order to protect
the public health.
§ 3-27.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2013-20; Ord. No. 2013-66]
Open burning shall include the ignition of a fire by any fuel source, the
permitting or causing of ignition or the allowing or causing of a fire to
continue whether contained within or outside of any type of heating,
cooking or other stove apparatus.
§ 3-27.3. Acts Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2013-20; Ord. No. 2013-66]
Except as expressly allowed in subsection 3-27.4 of this section, no person
shall conduct open burning, as such term is defined in this section, at any
time on any public property in the Township of Lakewood.
§ 3-27.4. Acts Allowed. [Ord. No. 2013-20; Ord. No. 2013-66]
The following types of open burning shall be permitted on public property:
2. The officer attempts to ascertain whether the person is in need of
medical or human services assistance, including, but not limited to,
mental health treatment, drug or alcohol rehabilitation, or
homeless services assistance. If the officer determines that the
person may be in need of medical or human services assistance, the
officer shall make reasonable efforts to contact and obtain the
assistance of a designated human service outreach worker, who, in
turn, shall assess the needs of the person and, if warranted, direct
the person to an appropriate provider of medical or human services
assistance in lieu of the person being cited or arrested for a
violation of this section. If the officer is unable to obtain the
assistance of a human services outreach worker, if the human
services outreach worker determines that the person is not in need
of medical or human services assistance or if the person refuses to
cooperate with the direction of the human services outreach
worker, the officer may proceed to cite or arrest the person for a
violation of this section so long as the warnings required by
paragraph (1) of this subsection have been previously given.
a. Open burning in conjunction with holiday, religious or festive
celebrations not exceeding two days in length and provided that a
§ 3-26.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-27.4
AO:230
§ 3-27.5. Enforcement, Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2013-20;
Ord. No. 2013-66]
§ 3-28. DISPOSAL OF POLICE PRISONER PROPERTY. [Ord. No.
2015-65]
permit for such open burning has been issued by the Ocean County Fire
Marshal.
b. Campfires, outdoor grills fueled by any source, and fireplaces for the
recreational preparation of food in public parks as permitted under
subsection 8-7.7.
c. 1. Propane fueled heating or cooking apparatus used within the
confines of the area known as "Tent City" until there are no longer
any occupants at which time this exemption will lapse.
2. All propane fueled heating or cooking stoves or other apparatus
shall be subject to inspection by Lakewood Township prior to any
use at Tent City.
a. The Ocean County Fire Marshal or his designee, the Lakewood
Township Police Department, the Lakewood Township Inspection
Department and any other authorized official of the Township of
Lakewood are authorized to enforce the provisions of this section.
b. Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or government
entity who or which violates any of the provisions of this Ordinance
shall be deemed to be responsible for a municipal infraction that shall
be punishable by fine not to exceed $1,000. Each day that a violation of
this section exists or continues shall constitute a separate violation.
c. In addition to the above enforcement procedures, the Township is
authorized to commence a civil action to obtain injunctive and other
appropriate relief or to pursue any other remedy authorized by law.
a. Occasions arise when an arrest or detainment of a prisoner by the
Lakewood Township Police Department will result in the prisoner
leaving personal property at police headquarters.
b. It is not the responsibility of Lakewood Township to safeguard
abandoned or neglected property or to notify persons that property has
been left at the Lakewood Police Department.
c. It is the responsibility of the prisoner or the prisoner's designee to
retrieve the property from the Lakewood Police Department.
d. Property left in the Lakewood Township Police Department by persons
detained or arrested by the Lakewood Township Police Department
shall be destroyed after 30 days of receipt of the same by the Township.
§ 3-27.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 3-29
AO:231
§ 3-29. PROHIBITING THE POSSESSION OF WEAPONS AT FIRST
ENERGY PARK.
§ 3-29.1. Weapons Prohibited at First Energy Park. [Ord. No.
2016-26]
§ 3-30. CODE BLUE WARMING CENTER. [Ord. No. 2019-16]
a. The purpose of this section is to ensure the health, safety and welfare of
those persons attending events at First Energy Park in the Township of
Lakewood.
b. For purposes of this section, weapon means anything readily capable of
lethal use or of inflicting serious bodily injury. The term includes, but is
not limited to, all firearms, any components that can be readily
assembled to a weapon, gravity knives, switchblade knives, daggers,
dirks, stilettos or other dangerous knives, billies, blackjacks,
bludgeons, metal knuckles, sandclubs, slingshots, cesti or other similar
leather bands studded with metal filings or razor blades imbedded in
wood, stun guns and any weapon or other device which projects,
releases, or emits teargas or any other substance intended to produce
temporary physical discomfort or permanent injury through being
vaporized or otherwise dispensed in the air.
c. It shall be illegal for anyone to possess a weapon at First Energy Park or
the surrounding parking lots contiguous to or adjacent to First Energy
Park.
d. This prohibition shall not apply to Lakewood Township Police Officers
assigned to duty at First Energy Park.
e. Ticket holders or visitors to First Energy Park who are currently active
or former members of Federal, State, Municipal law enforcement or
members of the military who are carrying a concealed firearm under
HR218, S1132 are exempt from this section as long as they are not
acting in an official security manner.
f. Currently active members of Federal, State, Municipal law enforcement
and Active Duty Military who are visiting First Energy Park while on
official duty are exempt from this section.
g. Any person found guilty of violating this section shall be subject to
incarceration of not more than 30 days or a $1,000 fine or both.
a. The Code Blue Warming Center for the Township of Lakewood is
established to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
Lakewood during certain weather conditions.
b. The purpose of this section is to establish the Lakewood Community
Center as the Code Blue Warming Center of the Township of Lakewood
and to authorize the Chief of Police and/or his/her designee to declare a
Code Blue event.
§ 3-29 LAKEWOOD CODE § 3-30
AO:232
Chapter 4
GENERAL LICENSING
[Editor's Note: See also Chapter 6, Alcoholic Beverage Control;
Chapter 5, Animal Control; Chapter 9, Taxicabs; Chapter 3, Police
Regulations for towing operators; Chapter 31 for excavations and
Chapter 15, for rooming house and boarding house licenses.]
§ 4-1. GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS.
§ 4-1.1. Purpose. [1971 Code § 6-1.1]
The purpose of this section is to provide a uniform set of procedures for
administering the issuance, renewal and revocation of licenses issued by
the Township Clerk.
§ 4-1.2. Applications and Application Fee. [1971 Code § 6-1.2; Ord.
No. 2010-13 § 1]
All applications for licenses shall be accompanied by the required
fee,26which fee shall be nonrefundable. Applications shall be made to the
Township Clerk upon forms provided by the Township Clerk and shall
contain the following information:
c. The Chief of Police and/or his/her designee is hereby authorized to
declare a Code Blue Event for the Township's Code Blue Warming
Center, when the weather in the municipality is 35 degrees Fahrenheit
or lower, regardless of precipitation conditions.
a. Name and permanent and local address of the applicant. If the
applicant is a corporation, the name and address of its registered agent.
b. If the licensed activity is to be carried on at a fixed location, the address
and description of the premises.
c. If a vehicle is to be used, its description including the license number.
d. If the applicant is employed by another, the name and address of the
employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship.
e. The days of the week and the hours of the day during which the licensed
activity will be conducted.
f. A description of the nature of the business and the goods, property or
services to be sold or supplied.
g. A statement as to whether the applicant has been convicted of any
crime or has violated any municipal ordinance other than traffic
offenses and, if so, the date and place of conviction, the nature of the
offense, and the punishment or penalty imposed.
26.Editor's Note: The license fees can be found in Subsection 4-2.6.
§ 3-30 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.2
AO:233
§ 4-1.3. Investigation of Applicants. [1971 Code § 6-1.3; Ord. No.
2010-13 § 1]
Each applicant shall be referred to the Chief of Police or a Police Officer
designated by him, who shall investigate for the protection of the public the
applicant's business responsibility, moral character and ability to properly
conduct the licensed activity. The applicant shall pay to the Lakewood
Police a fee of $35 for the investigation which fee is nonrefundable. This
investigation also shall include a fingerprint check performed by a company
designated by the Lakewood Police. The applicant will pay the cost of
the fingerprint check directly to the company performing the check. The
investigator's written report shall be filed with the Township Clerk within 10
business days, with extensions if reasonably necessary, after the application
has been filed. If the investigator decides that the applicant's character,
ability or business responsibility are unsatisfactory, or the products,
services or activity are not free from fraud, the investigator shall disapprove
the application and the Township Clerk shall refuse to issue the license
and shall so notify the applicant. Otherwise, the Township Clerk shall issue
the license immediately, provided the required license fees have been paid
except in cases where approval of the Township Committee is required. In
the case of an application for a solicitor's, peddler's, or canvasser's license,
the license may be issued immediately subject to the investigation. In the
event of the refusal of the issuance of a license, the applicant may appeal to
the Township Committee for hearing. The appeal must be filed, in writing,
with the Township Clerk within 14 days after notification of the refusal. The
Township Committee shall hold its hearing within 10 days thereafter. The
decision of the Township Committee shall be final.
§ 4-1.4. Contents of License. [1971 Code § 6-1.4]
Licenses shall be in a form which the Township Committee shall prescribe
by resolution, and shall contain the following information:
h. Appropriate evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant so that an investigator may properly
evaluate his character and responsibility.
i. Applications by partnerships shall be signed by all partners with the
information required by this subsection supplied in detail as to each
partner, and applications of corporations shall have attached individual
statements containing all of the information required by this subsection
relating to each employee or agent who shall engage in the licensed
activity, and shall be signed by each employee or agent.
a. The name and address of the licensee.
b. The number and type of the license and the nature of the licensed
activity.
c. The address at which the licensed activity is conducted, if the activity is
carried on at a fixed location.
§ 4-1.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-1.4
AO:234
§ 4-1.5. Records of Licenses. [1971 Code § 6-1.5]
The Township Clerk shall keep a record of all licenses issued under this
chapter. The record shall be in a form prescribed by resolution of the
Township Committee and shall contain the same information as is required
by Subsection 4-1.4 to be contained in the license. It shall also indicate the
amount of the fee paid for the licenses, the date upon which payment was
received, the date of the issuance of the license, whether the license is a
new license or a renewal, and any other information which the Township
Committee may, by resolution, require.
§ 4-1.6. Display of License. [1971 Code § 6-1.6]
When the licensed activity is conducted at a fixed location, or from a vehicle,
the license shall be prominently displayed at the location or on the vehicle.
In all other cases the licensee shall have the license in his possession at
all times and shall display it upon the request of any Police Officer or any
person with whom he is doing business.
§ 4-1.7. Term of License; Transfer. [1971 Code § 6-1.7]
No license under this chapter shall be issued for more than one year, and
all licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year, except where otherwise
provided by this chapter. All licenses for established businesses shall be due
and payable on July 1 each year at the office of the Township Clerk. Any
license not otherwise specified in this chapter may be issued after April 1 to
expire June 30 upon payment of 1/2 of the amount fixed as the fee for one
year. No license shall be transferable.
§ 4-1.8. Suspension and Revocation of License. [1971 Code § 6-1.8]
Any license or permit issued by the Township may be suspended or revoked
by the Township Committee after notice and a hearing for any of the
following causes:
d. If the licensed activity is conducted from a vehicle, the make, model and
license number of the vehicle.
e. The expiration date of the license.
f. Any other appropriate information which the Township Committee may,
be resolution, require.
a. Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a permit or license.
b. Fraud, misrepresentation or other dishonesty in the conduct of the
licensed activity.
c. A violation of any provision of this Code.
d. Conviction of the licensee for any criminal offense or disorderly
person's offense involving moral turpitude.
§ 4-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-1.8
AO:235
§ 4-1.9. Notice of Hearing on Suspension or Revocation of License.
[1971 Code § 6-1.9]
Notice of hearing for the suspension or revocation of a license or permit
shall be given in writing by the Township Clerk. The notice shall specifically
set forth the grounds upon which the proposed suspension or revocation is
based and the time and place of the hearing. It shall be served by mailing
a copy to the licensee at his last known address by certified mail, return
receipt requested, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing.
§ 4-1.10. Hearings, Determination. [1971 Code § 6-1.10]
At the hearing the licensee shall have the right to appear and be heard, to
be represented by an attorney, to present witnesses in his own behalf, to
cross-examine opposing witnesses and to have a permanent record made of
the proceedings at his own expense. The Township Committee shall revoke
or suspend the license if it is satisfied by a preponderance of the evidence
that the licensee is guilty of the acts charged.
§ 4-1.11. Reinstatement of Revoked Licenses. [1971 Code § 6-1.11]
The Township Committee may issue another license to a person whose
license has been revoked or denied as provided in this section if after
hearing it is satisfied by clear and convincing evidence that the acts which
led to the revocation or denial will not occur again; otherwise, no person
whose license has been revoked or denied, nor any person acting for him,
directly or indirectly, shall be issued another license to carry on the same
activity.
§ 4-1.12. Township Committee Power to Make Rules and
Regulations. [1971 Code § 6-1.12]
The Township Committee may, by resolution, make rules and regulations
which interpret or amplify any provision of this chapter or for the purpose of
administering the provisions of this chapter or making them more effective.
No regulation shall be inconsistent with or alter or amend any provision
of this chapter and no regulation shall impose any requirement which is
in addition to or greater than the requirements that are expressly or by
implication imposed by any provision of this chapter.
e. Conduct of the licensed activity whether by the licensee, or his agents
or employees in an unlawful manner or in a manner that constitutes a
breach of the peace or a menace to the public health, safety or general
welfare.
f. Whenever a license has been issued immediately upon an application,
pending the results of the investigation provided for by this chapter,
such license may be summarily revoked if the result of the investigation
is such as would have resulted in denial of the application.
§ 4-1.8 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-1.13
AO:236
§ 4-1.13. Licensing Official. [1971 Code § 6-1.13; Ord. No. 2006-70
§§ 1,2]
§ 4-1.14. Township Clerk to Maintain Records and Reports. [1971
Code § 6-1.14]
The Township Clerk shall file semiannually with the Township Committee a
report showing the number of licenses granted by classes and the amount
of fees received. Each report shall state the number and class of licenses
suspended if any, and the reasons for such suspension.
§ 4-1.15. Deposit of Fees. [1971 Code § 6-1.15]
The Township Clerk shall daily deposit license fees collected to the credit
of the Township Treasurer in the depository designated by the Township
Committee.
§ 4-1.16. Assistance in Enforcement of Regulations. [1971 Code
§ 6-1.16; Ord. No. 2003-24 § 1]
§ 4-2. BUSINESS LICENSES.
a. The Township Clerk shall issue and grant licenses and collect license
fees, which shall be payable at the office of the Township Clerk.
b. The Township Clerk shall furnish a surety bond to the Township, the
amount of which shall be fixed by the Township Committee by
resolution, for the faithful performance of his duties with respect to the
issuance of licenses.
c. Legalized Games of Chance.
1. The purpose of this subsection is to authorize the Township Clerk of
the Township of Lakewood and/or the Clerk's designee to approve
legalized games of chance applications.
2. Upon receipt of a completed legalized games of chance application,
the Township Clerk and/or the Clerk's designee shall review the
aforesaid application in accordance with the applicable rules
governing the same. If the same is acceptable, the Township Clerk
and/or the Clerk's designee shall issue the applicable license for
the game of chance as provided by law.
a. The Township Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to require the
Board of Health, Police Department, Department of Code Enforcement
and Zoning or other departments of the Township to make such
investigations as are necessary to the proper enforcement of all
licensing regulations prescribed in this Code.
b. The Township Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to utilize the
Police Department as is necessary to execute and enforce all licensing
regulations prescribed by this Code.
§ 4-1.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-2.1
AO:237
§ 4-2.1. Definitions. [1971 Code § 6-2.1]
As used in this section:
BUSINESS — Shall mean any lawful means of earning a livelihood by
profession, trade or occupation for profit. It shall include the place or
places, premises or vehicle in which such profession, trade, or occupation is
conducted.
NONPROFIT-MAKING VENDOR — Shall mean a person who sells goods or
services the proceeds of which are devoted exclusively to the purposes of
a philanthropic, charitable or religious society provided said person acts as
an agent without pay.
PEDDLER — Shall mean a person commonly referred to as a peddler or
hawker, who travels from place to place, or from house to house, carrying
goods, wares and merchandise for the purpose of sales and delivery to
consumers.
SOLICITOR OR CANVASSER IN INTERSTATE COMMERCE — Shall mean a
person selling services or goods at retail when the goods are shipped from
outside the State directly to the purchaser or first to the solicitor or agent
for delivery to the purchaser.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — Shall mean a person commonly referred to as
a transient merchant or itinerant vendor who engages in merchandising
business in the Township with intent to close out or discontinue such
business within a period of one year from date of commencement, and
occupies a room, building, tent, lot or other premises for the purpose of
selling goods, wares, merchandise or services, subject to the regulations of
§ 4-3.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT PEDDLER — Shall mean a person who engages
in business as a transient merchant, and in pursuance thereto becomes a
peddler or hires a peddler.
§ 4-2.2. License Required. [1971 Code § 6-2.2]
It shall be unlawful for any person designated in this section to sell or
dispose of, or to offer to sell or dispose of, any goods, wares, merchandise,
or render any services for fees within the Township without first registering
and obtaining a license and paying the required license fee.
§ 4-2.3. Exemptions from License. [1971 Code § 6-2.3]
This section shall not apply to:
a. Those persons specifically exempt from payment of license fee as
provided by statute or court order.
b. Any blind person who is a resident of this Township.
c. Any person selling fruits, vegetables and farm products raised or grown
by him.
§ 4-2.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-2.3
AO:238
§ 4-2.4. Separate Places of Business. [1971 Code § 6-2.4]
No person shall transact any business under a license granted under this
section except the business for which the license was specifically granted.
A separate license shall be obtained for each branch establishment or place
of business.
§ 4-2.5. Issuance of License. [1971 Code § 6-2.5]
§ 4-2.6. License Fees. [1971 Code § 6-2.6; New; Ord. No. 2000-75
§ 1; Ord. No. 2001-79 § 1; Ord. No. 2001-80; Ord. No. 2009-33 § 1;
Ord. No. 2011-7 § 1]
The following businesses and activities are required to be licensed and shall
pay the following license fees, unless otherwise designated.
LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE
Township of Lakewood
Business Fee
1. Auction (Other than by real estate brokers) $215
2. Bicycles (rentals and/or sales) $175
3. Business Retail and/or Unclassified Business of
every type, Wholesale-Storage-Service, etc.
Flat fee $125
4. Coin Operated Devices See Subsection 4-4.6
5. Contractors and Subcontractors: License issued
for one of the following disciplines only:
Aluminum Products $60
Bulkhead and Piling $60
Canvas Goods $60
Exempted persons shall make application to the Township Clerk for a permit
and upon payment of the one ($1) dollar application and filing fee, shall
receive their license from the Township Clerk within 30 days after the
application is filed.
a. Upon compliance with the provisions of this section and other
provisions of this chapter pertaining to business licenses, and payment
of the license fee, the Township Clerk shall issue a license to the
applicant within 14 days after application is filed.
b. When a business having more than one separate classification or type of
business is conducted as a unit under a single ownership and on the
same premises, the charge for the license fee shall be the charge for the
classification having the highest fee, except when otherwise provided in
this section.
§ 4-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-2.6
AO:239
LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE
Township of Lakewood
Business Fee
Carpet Installation $60
Demolition $60
Fencing $60
Fiber glass $60
Flooring $60
Framing Contractor $60
General Contractors/Registered Builders $60
Glass $60
Insulation $60
Landscaping $60
Masonry $60
Moving/Hauling $60
Ornamental Ironwork $60
Painting/Papering $60
Paving $60
Plastering and Sheetrock $60
Roofing/Siding $60
Signs $60
Tile Work $60
Other contractors and subcontractors not
licensed by State statute or municipal ordinance
$50
6. Food Handling Establishments: Restaurants,
luncheonettes, coffee shops, lunch stands,
concession booths or stands in hotels alone or in
connection with any other business or equivalent:
Up to 50 seats $85
51 to 100 seats $125
101 to 200 seats $125
Over 200 seats $125
7. Handyman $60
8. Junk Yards See Subsection 4-8.3
9. Lumber Yards $265
10. Massage Parlor and Masseuse License See § 4-7
§ 4-2.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-2.6
AO:240
LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE
Township of Lakewood
Business Fee
11. Rooming Houses:
1 to 5 rooms $60
Each additional room $5
12. Guest Houses:
1 to 5 rooms $60
Each additional room $5
Boarding Houses:
1 to 5 rooms $60
Each additional room $5
Bed and Breakfast:
1 to 5 rooms $85
Each additional room $4
13. Special Sales (Limit to 30 days) $60
14. Towing Operators See Subsection 4-6.6
15. Vending Machines and Newspaper Boxes $10
16. Auto and Truck Rentals $125
17. Master HVAC Mechanic License
Application fee $25
Annual license and renewal fee $150
18. Taxicab License and Driver's License See Chapter 9
19.
a. Limousine Annual Fee
b. Motor Vehicle Card Fee
$75
$50
20. Peddlers, Hawkers, Vendors, Transient
Merchants:
See § 4-3.
$215
§ 4-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-2.6
AO:241
LICENSE FEE SCHEDULE
Township of Lakewood
Business Fee
21. Garage Sales, Yard Sales. Garage sales and
yard sales shall not be permitted more than three
days per year from June 1 through May 31 of any
year to dispose of unwanted or excess household
items, which may include but not necessarily be
limited to: bicycles, beach chairs, bedding,
furniture, accessories. Repetitive sales of these or
other items at garage sales or yard sales shall be
deemed a commercial operation, and shall not be
permitted except as authorized by other
appropriate regulations of the Township of
Lakewood.
$5
22. Bowling Alleys, Box Alleys or Skeeball Alleys
First two alleys $20
Each additional alley $5
23. Circus (unless charitable, etc.) Each day $60
24. Livery Stables with Horses or Carriages for
Hire, including Riding Academies
More than 30 stalls
$35
$60
All licenses not renewed by August 15th of the renewal year shall be subject
to a late fee of $10 in addition to the fees set forth above.
§ 4-3. TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS.
§ 4-3.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2011-24; Ord. No. 2013-23; Ord. No.
2014-49]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ITINERANT MERCHANTS OR TRANSIENT VENDORS — Shall be defined
in the category of hawker, peddler, solicitor, canvasser or junk dealer, as
herein set forth.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR — Shall mean a kosher mobile food vendor and a
non-kosher mobile food vendor.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR, KOSHER — Shall mean any person, whether a
resident of the Township of Lakewood, in the County of Ocean, or not, who,
with a motor vehicle only, goes from place to place or from street to street
offering for sale prepared or packaged kosher food, beverages and dairy
products. The use of carts shall not be permitted. A kosher mobile food
license shall be required for each vehicle operating as a kosher mobile food
§ 4-2.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-3.1
AO:242
vendor. A kosher mobile food vendor licensee shall not remain stationary
in one location for a period of time in excess of 12 hours. For purposes
of this section, a kosher mobile food vendor shall be deemed to occupy a
stationary location if the vendor remains within 1,000 feet of a location
within the applicable time period. No more than 11 kosher mobile food
vendor licenses shall be issued by the Township Clerk and be outstanding
at any one time. A kosher mobile food vendor shall be certified kosher
by a certifying body either from within the community or outside of the
community that is recognized by the Jewish community of Lakewood.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR, NON-KOSHER — Shall mean any person,
whether a resident of the Township of Lakewood, in the County of Ocean, or
not, who, with a motor vehicle only, goes from place to place or from street
to street offering for sale prepared or packaged non-kosher food, beverages
and dairy products. The use of carts shall not be permitted. A non-kosher
mobile food license shall be required for each vehicle operating as a nonkosher
mobile food vendor. A non-kosher mobile food vendor licensee shall
not remain stationary in one location for a period of time in excess of 12
hours. For purposes of this section, a non-kosher mobile food vendor shall
be deemed to occupy a stationary location if the vendor remains within
1,000 feet of a location within the applicable time period. No more than
14 non-kosher mobile food vendor licenses shall be issued by the Township
Clerk and outstanding at any one time.
PEDDLER OR HAWKER — Shall mean any person, whether a resident of
the Township of Lakewood, in the County of Ocean, or not, who goes from
house to house, from place to place or from street to street conveying
or transporting goods, wares, food, foodstuffs or merchandise of any kind
and offering or exposing the same for sale or making sales and delivering
articles to purchasers or any person who offers or exposes such items for
sale from a motor vehicle or conveyance of any kind.
PERSON — Shall mean any partnerships, partner corporations, associations
or corporations or persons. This section shall also include any person who
distributes circulars or any other matter from house to house in the
Township of Lakewood in the County of Ocean.
SOLICITOR OR CANVASSER — Shall mean any person, whether a resident
of the Township of Lakewood, in the County of Ocean, or not, who goes
from house to house, from place to place or from street to street soliciting
or taking or attempting to take orders for sale of services, goods, wares
or merchandise, including magazines, books, periodicals, photographs or
personal property of any nature whatsoever, for future delivery or for
services to be performed in the future, whether or not such individual has,
carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject for such order or whether
or not he is collecting advance payments on such orders.
§ 4-3.2. License Required. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
It shall be unlawful for any hawkers, peddlers, canvassers, solicitors, mobile
food vendors or junk dealers, as defined in this section, to engage in any
such business or operation in the Township of Lakewood, in the County of
§ 4-3.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-3.2
AO:243
Ocean, without having first obtained a license therefor in compliance with
the provisions of this section, and in any event only in accordance with the
terms and provisions of this section and only in parts or locations of the
Township of Lakewood, in the County of Ocean, as permitted herein.
§ 4-3.3. Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
The terms of this section shall not be held to include the acts of persons
selling personal property at wholesale to dealers, and nothing contained
herein shall be held to prohibit any sale required by statute or by order of
any court.
§ 4-3.4. Application Requirements. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
a. Applicants for a license under this section must file with the Township
Clerk a sworn application, in writing, which shall give the following
information:
1. The name and physical description of the applicant.
2. The complete permanent home and local address, and telephone
number of the applicant.
3. A description of the nature of the business and the goods, services
or wares to be sold.
4. If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
the credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship.
5. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired and
the days of the week and the hours of the day within which said
business will be conducted.
6. The source of supply of the goods or property or services proposed
to be sold, where such goods, services or products are located and
the method of delivery.
7. Two recent photographs of the applicant which shall be
approximately two by two (2 x 2) inches showing the head and
shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner.
8. Appropriate evidence as to the good character and business
responsibility of the applicant as will enable the Township of
Lakewood and its agents to properly evaluate such character and
business responsibility.
9. A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance,
other than traffic violations, the nature of the offense and the
punishment or penalty assessed therefor.
10. Applicant shall purchase and maintain a policy of commercial
general liability insurance, including personal injury and property
§ 4-3.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-3.4
AO:244
§ 4-3.5. Charitable Solicitations; Permit Requirements. [Ord. No.
2011-24]
damage, in the amount of not less than $300,000 per occurrence,
$100,000 per person and casualty insurance in the amount of
$50,000 on property.
11. Certificate of liability insurance naming the Township as an
additional insured. Each policy must be paid in full until the end of
the then current licensing year. The licensing year is July 1 thru
June 30.
12. Federal Employer Tax Identification Number.
13. Proof of satisfactory inspection by the Ocean County Board of
Health.
14. Copy of Sales Tax Certificate.
b. The applicant shall be fingerprinted if requested by the Township Clerk,
who shall determine whether said fingerprints are necessary for proper
identification, which fingerprint record shall be immediately processed
for classification and identification. The applicant will pay $41 to the
State of New Jersey for the fingerprinting.
c. At the time of filing the application, a fee of $35 shall be paid to the
Lakewood Police to cover the costs of the background investigation.
d. No license shall be issued until the application shall have been
approved by the Township Clerk, allowing adequate time for
investigation of facts set forth in the application.
e. Applications for partners shall be signed by all partners, with the
foregoing provisions of this subsection answered in detail as to each
said partner, and applications of corporations shall have attached
thereto individual statements in accordance with all of the provisions of
this section relating to every employee, agent or servant who shall
engage in any of the functions authorized by this chapter and signed by
each such agent, servant or employee with full compliance herewith by
each such individual.
f. Where the applicant is to undertake any activity to be licensed by this
section from a fixed or stationary location, the applicant shall state the
tax lot and block of such location on the application filed with the
Township Clerk, and provide a diagram detailing the location of the
activity. No permit shall be issued by the Township Clerk, without the
Township Clerk having determined in his or her sole discretion that the
fixed or stationary location does not impede or inconvenience the public
or traffic.
a. Any person, organization, society or association desiring to solicit or
have solicited in its name, money, donations of money or property or
§ 4-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-3.5
AO:245
§ 4-3.6. Investigation of Application. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
§ 4-3.7. License Fees; Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
financial assistance of any kind or desiring to sell or distribute any
kind of literature or merchandise for which a fee is charged or solicited
from persons other than members of such organization at any place or
places within the Township of Lakewood in the County of Ocean for a
charitable, religious, patriotic or philanthropic purpose shall be exempt
from the provisions of Subsections 4-3.4 and 4-3.7 of this section,
provided that there is filed a sworn application, in writing, with the
Township Clerk which shall give the following information:
1. The name and purpose of the cause for which the permit is sought.
2. The names and addresses of the officers and directors of the
organization.
3. The period during which the solicitation is to be carried on.
4. Whether or not any commissions, fees or emoluments are to be
expended in connection with such solicitation and the amount
thereof.
5. The name and address of each agent or representative employed or
affiliated with such organization, society, association or
corporation.
b. Upon being satisfied that such person, organization, society or
association is a religious, charitable, patriotic or philanthropic
organization and that the agents or representatives who shall conduct
the solicitations are of good moral character and reputation, the
Township Clerk shall issue a Mercantile License without charge to such
organization, association, society or corporation to solicit in the
Township of Lakewood. Such organization, association, society or
corporation shall furnish all of its members, guests or representatives
conducting such solicitation with credentials, in writing, stating the
name of the organization, the name of the agent and the purposes of the
solicitation.
a. Each application shall be reviewed and investigated by the Township
Clerk as to the applicant's business and moral character as the
Township Clerk deems necessary for the protection of the public good,
and the Township Clerk shall endorse the application in the manner
prescribed in this section within a reasonable period of time after it has
been filed by the applicant.
b. If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant's character or
business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory or for any other
good cause, the Township Clerk shall disapprove the license, and no
license will be issued.
§ 4-3.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-3.7
AO:246
§ 4-3.8. Governing Regulations. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
Every person, association or organization to whom a license is issued under
the terms of this section shall be governed by the following rules and
regulations:
a. Every applicant for a license under this section shall pay a license fee as
follows:
1. Nonfood articles or merchandise: $25.
2. A mobile food vendor: $215 per vehicle and $25 per operator. Each
mobile food vendor shall be required to obtain an operator license
for each individual operator.
b. Any veteran who holds a special State license issued under the laws of
the State of New Jersey shall be exempt from securing a license as
provided herein for hawking and peddling but shall be required to
comply with all other applicable sections of this section and shall be
required to procure from the Township Clerk a special veteran's permit,
which shall be issued by the Township Clerk upon proper identification.
a. All circulars, samples or other matter, except newspapers, which shall
be defined as a periodical with a paid circulation of at least 90% of its
total circulation shall be handed to an occupant of the property and not
be left on or about the same.
b. No person subject to the provisions of this section shall canvass, solicit
or distribute circulars or other materials or call from house to house
without the prior consent and approval of the Lakewood Police and the
Township Committee, except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. Monday through Friday. No house to house solicitation shall be
permitted on Saturday or Sunday.
c. No person subject to the terms of this section shall enter or attempt to
enter the land of any resident in the Township of Lakewood in the
County of Ocean without an express invitation from the occupant of the
house.
d. No person subject to the terms of this section shall conduct himself in
such a manner as to become objectionable to or annoy an occupant of
any house.
e. No licensee to whom a license has been issued under this section for
the sale of beverages, food products or foodstuffs of any nature shall
engage in the sale of the same in the Township of Lakewood except
between the hours of sunrise and sunset as determined by the "Air
Almanac" published by the United States Naval Observatory,
Washington, D.C. In addition, any such licensee shall, at the daily close
of business, remove any vehicle, from which such items are sold from
any public street, lot or other location on or from which the latter items
are or have been sold and shall further clear such lot or location of any
§ 4-3.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-3.8
AO:247
§ 4-3.9. Noise Restrictions. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
No licensee nor any person in his behalf shall shout, cry out, blow a horn,
ring a bell or use any sound-making or amplifying device upon any of the
streets, parks or public places of the Township or upon private premises
where sound emitted or produced therefrom is of sufficient volume to
be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, parks or
other public places of the Township or upon private premises therefrom
to be capable of being plainly heard upon the streets, avenues, parks or
other places for the purpose of attracting attention to any goods, wares,
merchandise or services which said licensee proposes to sell.
§ 4-3.10. Location Restrictions. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
trash, paper or other debris resulting from the activities of such
licensee.
f. Any licensee under this chapter shall be required to comply with
Chapter 18 Unified Development Ordinance, of the Revised Code of the
Township of Lakewood 1999 and any other ordinance, rule or
regulation of the Township of Lakewood.
g. No licensee to whom a license has been issued under this section for
the sale of beverages, food products or foodstuffs of any nature shall
engage in the sale of the same on any property owned by the Township
of Lakewood, along Routes 88, 526, 9, 70 and Kennedy Boulevard.
h. No tables, crates or signs will be permitted at any location.
a. No licensee shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public
street, sidewalk or right-of-way, nor shall any be permitted to a
stationary location thereon, nor shall any be permitted to operate in a
congested area where such operation might impede or inconvenience
the public use of such street. For the purpose of this section, the
judgment of the enforcement officer exercised in good faith shall be
deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested or the public
impeded and inconvenienced. No licensee shall be permitted to remain
stationary in an area designated as a driveway, fire lane, bus stop, or
handicapped parking spot. No licensee shall be permitted to remain
stationary or occupy an area designated for more than two parking
spaces in an improved parking area.
b. For purposes of this section, a licensee shall be permitted to operate in
a stationary location, provided the licensee shall be located in an area
zoned for business, commercial, industrial or office-professional zone.
No licensee shall be permitted to operate in a stationary location in an
area zoned residential or on a lot used for residential use.
c. No licensee shall operate from a stationary location on private property
without submitting to the Township Clerk written confirmation that the
licensee has sent, via certified mail, a request for the express written
§ 4-3.8 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-3.10
AO:248
§ 4-3.11. Badges. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
The Township Clerk shall issue to each licensee at the time of delivery
of his license a badge which shall contain the words "Licensed Peddler,"
the period for which the license is issued and the number of the license
in letters and figures easily discernible from a distance of 10 feet. The
badge shall, during the time the licensee is engaged in peddling, be worn
constantly by the licensee on the front of his outer garment in such a way
as to be conspicuous.
§ 4-3.12. Report of Violations; Recording. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
The State Police and the Township of Lakewood Police Department, or
any special police or agents of the Township of Lakewood shall report to
the Township Clerk all convictions for violations of this section, and the
Township Clerk shall maintain a record for each license issued and record
the reports of violations therein.
§ 4-3.13. Revocation of License. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
permission of the property owner to operate on the owner's property. A
licensee may not operate from a stationary location on private property
if the licensee is advised, in writing, that the property owner denies the
licensee permission to operate from that location.
d. No licensee shall operate from a stationary location on any (1) public
property, (2) property owned by the Township, or (3) on any private,
public or Township property along Routes 88, 526, 9, 70 or Kennedy
Boulevard.
a. Licenses issued under the provisions of this section may be revoked by
the Township Council of the Township of Lakewood in the County of
Ocean after notice and hearing for any of the following causes:
1. Fraud, misrepresentation or a material incorrect statement
contained in the application for a license.
2. Fraud, misrepresentation or a material incorrect statement made
in the course of carrying on his business as solicitor, canvasser or
peddler.
3. Any violation of this section.
4. Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor.
5. Conducting the business of peddler, canvasser or solicitor, as the
case may be, in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to
constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
b. Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given by the
Township Clerk, in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of
§ 4-3.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-3.13
AO:249
§ 4-3.14. Bonding Requirements. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
§ 4-3.15. Vehicle Regulations. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
No licensee shall canvass or solicit orders for any articles from pedestrian
or vehicular traffic other than in a permitted locality, and said licensee
shall at no time double-park when operating his business and shall in no
event transact business when stopped in a public street other than from the
passenger side of the vehicle.
§ 4-3.16. Littering. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
No licensee shall at any time permit any waste materials or parts of produce
or any other merchandise to remain in or upon a street, roadway, curbs
or walks and shall at all times remove any such debris that may have
fallen from his vehicle so that the same is immediately placed in the metal
containers as hereinabove provided.
complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be
mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at
least five days prior to the date set for the hearing or shall be delivered
by his agent in the same manner as a summons at least three days prior
to the date set for the hearing.
a. Prior to the issuance of any license or permit to any licensee, said
prospective licensee shall file with the Township Clerk of the Township
of Lakewood in the County of Ocean a bond to said Township of
Lakewood in the County of Ocean in the amount of $1,000, which said
bond shall be executed by the proposed licensee as principal in a surety
company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey, which said
bond shall be in accordance with and for all purposes provided in
N.J.S.A. 45:24-5, and which said bond shall remain in force for the term
of the license to be issued and shall be conditioned as follows: to
indemnify and pay the Township of Lakewood in the County of Ocean
any penalties or costs incurred in the enforcement of any of the
provisions of this chapter and to indemnify or reimburse any purchaser
of personal property from the licensee in a sum equal to at least the
amount of any payments such purchaser may have been induced to
make through the misrepresentation as to the kind, quality or value of
the personal property, whether the misrepresentations were made by
the licensee or said licensee's agents, servants or employees either at
the time of making the sale or through any advertisement printed or
circulated with reference to such personal property or any parts
thereof.
b. The aforesaid bond shall be declared forfeited upon proof of
falsification in the application for a license.
c. Said bond shall be deemed forfeited upon proof of violation of any of the
provisions of this section by the licensee or said licensee's agents,
servants or employees.
§ 4-3.13 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-3.17
AO:250
§ 4-3.17. Packaging of Goods. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
All sales of merchandise by any licensee shall, at the time of said sale, be
placed in bags or other like suitable containers when the same shall be
handed to the customers of said licensee.
§ 4-3.18. Eating Near Vehicles. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
The licensee shall prohibit as reasonably as possible the eating of any
merchandise directly from his vehicle.
§ 4-3.19. Compliance with Regulations Required. [Ord. No.
2011-24]
All licensees and their respective vehicles or modes of transportation in
carrying the permitted businesses shall at all times fully comply with all
terms, covenants and conditions of this section and all other applicable
municipal ordinances and all other applicable State laws, regulations or
provisions pertaining thereto and particularly, but not in limitation thereof,
that may deal with provisions of health, safety and general welfare of the
public.
§ 4-3.20. Expiration of Licenses. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
a. A license issued after the effective date of this section shall expire on
June 30 following the date of issuance of such license. Applications for
licenses to be issued under this section shall be made on forms supplied
by the Township Clerk.
b. Licenses are Not Transferable. Licenses may be relinquished during the
license period by submitting a notarized letter from the license holder
to the Township Clerk declaring the intent to relinquish the license.
c. If a licensed mobile food vendor fails to renew his or her license or
relinquishes such license during the license period, the Township Clerk
shall send, via certified mail, correspondence to the first applicant on
the waiting list as established herein, advising such applicant of the
availability of a license. The notified applicant shall have 10 calendar
business days from receipt of the notification to advise the Township
Clerk, in writing, whether the applicant desires to obtain the available
mobile food vendor license. If the Township Clerk does not receive a
response from the first applicant within 10 calendar days of the
applicant's receipt of the notification of license availability, or if the
certified mail is rejected or undeliverable, the Township Clerk shall
provide notification of availability to the next applicant on the waiting
list in the manner prescribed herein.
d. Once the notified applicant advises the Township Clerk that the
applicant desires to obtain the available mobile food vendor license, the
applicant shall have eight weeks to meet all of the requirements
established by this section. If the applicant fails to meet all such
§ 4-3.17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-3.20
AO:251
§ 4-3.21. Exemption for Certain Business. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
This section shall not affect any person engaging in delivering wares, goods
or merchandise or other articles or things in the regular course of business
in the premises of the person ordering or entitled to receive the same.
§ 4-3.22. Use of Vending Unit; Prohibitions. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
No person regulated hereunder shall set up, maintain or permit the use of
any table, crate, sign, carton, rack or other device to increase the selling or
display capacity of the vending unit. No person regulated hereunder shall
stack or place the items offered to sale upon any sidewalk, street or upon
the ground. All materials, signs and/or other items offered for sale shall be
located solely on or within the vending unit.
Each licensee shall have a plainly visible trash receptacle or container on
each vehicle used by the licensee. Each licensee shall have a sign indicating,
"Please place all trash in this container" at the location of the receptacle or
container.
In addition to the above, failure to comply with the terms and provisions of
this section may subject the licensee to the suspension and revocation of
the license.
§ 4-3.23. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2011-24]
Any person violating the terms of this section, whether as principal, agent
or employee of another, shall, upon conviction in the Municipal Court of the
Township of Lakewood in the County of Ocean, be subject to the penalties as
provided in Chapter 1, § 1-5 General Penalty, in the discretion of the Judge
of the Municipal Court of the Township of Lakewood.
In addition to the above, failure to comply with the terms and provisions of
this section may subject the licensee to the suspension and revocation of
the license.
requirements within the eight weeks allotted, the Township Clerk shall
provide notification of availability to the next applicant on the waiting
list in the manner prescribed in Subsection c above.
e. An applicant may secure a spot on the waiting list for a license by
submitting a completed mobile food vendor application to the Township
Clerk. The applicants on the list will be ranked in the chronological
order in which their initial applications are received by the Township
Clerk. Each applicant must submit a new application by November 30
of each year in order to remain on the waiting list. An applicant will not
lose ranking on the waiting list, provided a new application is received
by November 30 of each year. If the applicant's address changes, it is
the applicant's responsibility to so notify the Township Clerk, in writing.
§ 4-3.20 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-4
AO:252
§ 4-4. COIN-OPERATED DEVICES.27
See § 4-11 for regulations concerning Amusement Game licenses at First
Energy Park.
§ 4-4.1. Machine License. [1971 Code § 6-4.1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate or maintain or permit
to be installed, operated or maintained, in any public or quasi-public place,
or in any building, store, restaurant, hotel, inn, club, boarding house,
amusement place or other place wherein the public are invited or wherein
the public may enter within the Township, any coin-operated music
machine, or any automatic amusement games or games of the type
commonly known as "pin amusement" games, "bumper" games, "claw
machines," "electric traveling crane," "digger," "rotary table," "counter
games" or similar machines or devices and particularly, but not by way
of limitation, any coin-operated automatic game, machine or device of the
type heretofore mentioned operated for profit, without a license for each
machine.
§ 4-4.2. Dealer's Licenses. [1971 Code § 6-4.2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, lease, rent or place in any public
or quasi-public place a coin-operated device referred to in Subsection 4-4.1
without a license to sell, lease, rent, or place such machine.
§ 4-4.3. Issuance of Machine License. [1971 Code § 6-4.3]
Upon filing of written application for a machine license and the paying of
the license fee and compliance with the other regulations, the Township
Clerk shall, within eight days, issue a separate license for each machine
which the applicant desires to place, operate, maintain or use. The license
shall specifically state the serial number or designation or other means of
identification affixed to the machine by the Township Clerk. The license
shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on the machine and shall not be
transferred to another machine unless the licensee immediately notifies the
Township Clerk of the transfer. No machine shall be placed, maintained,
operated or used in any public or quasi-public place unless the Township
Clerk has affixed a means of identification to the machine.
§ 4-4.4. Issuance of Dealer's Licenses. [1971 Code § 6-4.4]
Upon filing of a written application for a dealer's license and the paying of
the license fee, the Township Clerk shall, within eight days issue a license
to the person selling, leasing, renting or placing one or more machines
herein described in any public or quasi-public place. The license shall not
be transferable as to person.
27.Editor's Note: Tobacco vending machines are prohibited. See § 3-18 of this Code.
§ 4-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-4.5
AO:253
§ 4-4.5. Term of License. [1971 Code § 6-4.5]
Licenses required under this section shall be issued for not more than one
year and shall expire on August 31 of each year.
§ 4-4.6. License Fees. [1971 Code § 6-4.6]
The license fees for licenses issued under this section for each year or part
of a year are as follows:
§ 4-4.7. Reports. [1971 Code § 6-4.7]
Any person licensed to sell or lease or rent or place amusement games or
machines or vending machines shall make a written report to the Township
Clerk of the name and address of the proprietor or lessee of the premises
wherein the licensee desires to place, operate, maintain or use any machine
or machines. The licensee shall immediately notify in writing the Township
Clerk each time any machine is transferred to public or quasi-public
premises other than those set forth in the report.
a. For each penny-operated amusement game or machine including
chewing gum machines, each machine, $1.
b. For each nickel-, dime-, or quarter-operated amusement game or
machine or pin game in which three balls or more are employed in the
playing thereof, each machine, $10.
c. For each nickel-, dime-, or quarter-operated amusement game or
machine or pin game in which less than three balls are employed in the
playing thereof, each machine, $20.
d. For each coin-operated counter game, each machine, $10.
e. For each nickel-, dime-, or quarter-operated claw machine, electric
traveling crane, digger, rotary table or similar machine, each machine,
$20.
f. (Reserved)
g. For each coin-operated music machine, each machine, $10. For each
additional coin-operated music machine control box, $2.50.
h. For each unclassified coin-operated amusement game or machine, each
machine, $15.
i. For every person selling or leasing or renting or placing amusement
games or machines or vending machines as described in Subsection
4-4.2 and candy, peanut and gum vending machines, $75.
j. For concessionaires maintaining an amusement parlor having two and
not more than seven coin-operated amusement games of any type, $75.
k. For concessionaires maintaining an amusement parlor having more
than seven coin-operated amusement games of any type, $150.
§ 4-4.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-4.8
AO:254
§ 4-4.8. Gambling. [1971 Code § 6-4.8]
No person shall use or permit any use of the machines or devices, which are
required to be licensed under this section for the purpose of gambling
§ 4-4.9. Use by Minors. [1971 Code § 6-4.9]
§ 4-4.10. Duties of Licensee. [1971 Code § 6-4.10]
The licensee shall at all times maintain order in the licensed premises
in which the machines are situated and shall control the activities of the
patron using the machines, including prevention of congregation of groups
of patrons or persons attracted to such business premises outside of the
business premises in such manner as to interfere with the normal flow
of foot traffic or business to and from any adjoining or nearby business
establishment. The licensee shall, if necessary, employ Special Police
Officers or other duly licensed guards to keep order about the premises and
enforce the ordinances of the Township relative thereto.
§ 4-4.11. Suspension and Revocation of License. [1971 Code
§ 6-4.11]
The license issued by the Township in accordance with this section may
be revoked or suspended by the Township Committee after notice and a
hearing for any of the following violations:
§ 4-4.12. Number of Licenses Permitted. [1971 Code § 6-4.12]
The automatic amusement games, machines, or devices referred to in
Subsection 4-4.1 shall be permitted solely as an ancillary or accessory use
a. No person under the age of 17 years shall be permitted to use, play
with, or take part in any amusements, games or machines required to
be licensed under this section between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m.
b. The licensee shall be responsible for enforcing the limitation as
contained in Subsection a.
a. Fraud or misrepresentation in any application for a license.
b. Fraud or misrepresentation in the conduct of the licensed premises or
use thereof.
c. Conviction of the licensee for any felony or high misdemeanor or a
misdemeanor of a disorderly person's offense involving moral turpitude.
d. Conduct of the licensed premises or use thereof whether by the licensee
himself or his agent or employees in an unlawful manner or in a manner
that constitutes a breach of the peace or a menace to the public health,
safety or general welfare.
e. A violation of any provisions of this section.
§ 4-4.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-4.12
AO:255
to any business premises permitted by the Revised General Ordinances of
the Township of Lakewood and there shall be allowed not more than three
such devices on each of said premises. However, all licenses in effect as
of December 12, 1982 for such games, machines or devices shall not be
subject to the limitations of this subsection.
§ 4-5. FIREWORKS. [1971 Code § 6-7]
For provisions relating to the granting of a permit by the Township
Committee for public display of fireworks by non-profit organizations, see
Chapter 3, § 3-17, Fireworks.
§ 4-6. LICENSED TOWING OPERATORS REQUIREMENTS.28
§ 4-6.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2010-80]
The purpose of this section is to provide for the establishment of a licensed
towing operator list to be utilized when necessary by the Police Department
to provide quick, safe and reasonably priced towing and wrecker services
for abandoned, disabled or wrecked vehicles and the regulation of said
operators, and to keep the flow of traffic as free as possible, as authorized
by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.49. All towing operators while on duty shall operate as
independent contractors and nothing herein shall be deemed to establish
a principal agent relationship between the Township of Lakewood and
licensed towers, this section is to regulate the operation of the wreckers
and fees charged.
§ 4-6.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2010-80]
As used in this section:
ADMINISTRATIVE CHARGE — Shall mean the charges for post-accident
services including but not limited to physical inspection, telephone and/
or fax call, removal of personal items and additional paperwork. The fee
shall be charged after the 4th documented visit to a single vehicle or upon
additional paperwork, including certified letters, has occurred.
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — Shall mean the removal and transportation
of an automobile from a highway, street or other public or private road or
a parking area, or from a storage facility and any other services normally
incident thereto, but does not include recovery service.
CRUISING — Shall mean the operation of an unengaged wrecker along the
public streets in any fashion intended likely or calculated to solicit business.
OWNER — Shall mean any person, firm or corporation who owns and/
or operates a vehicle on the roads and highways within the Township of
Lakewood, whose vehicle by reason of being disabled or being unlawfully
upon said roads, requires towing services.
28.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1971 Code §§ 6-10.1 — 6-10.12
and Ordinance Nos. 99-70, 2001-29, 2006-46 and 2006-61.
§ 4-4.12 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-6.2
AO:256
RECOVERY SERVICE — Shall mean any operation, which requires the
recovery of an automobile from a position beyond the right-of-way or berm,
or from being impaled upon any other object within the right-of-way or
berm by several actions, which may include but not be limited to winching
and rigging. A recovery shall be when a towing operator applies his/her
knowledge in a skillful manner to preserve the condition of the motor
vehicle while moving the damaged vehicle to a towable position. If there
is an extenuating circumstance in which excessive winching is required
(i.e. vehicle off of roadway which requires more than 50 feet of cable) an
additional charge of $20 per 1/2 hour will apply. Must be documented by
the officer at the scene or with photographs showing services.
TOWING OPERATOR — Shall mean a person, firm, or corporation engaged
in the business of providing wrecker services and storage services for
vehicles towed, which services are made available to the general public
upon such rates, charges, and fees as determined by said person, firm or
corporation.
TOWNSHIP PROCESSING FEE — Shall mean the charge paid to the
Township of Lakewood as per the provisions of this section. Such charge
is hereby established to cover costs incurred by the Township of Lakewood
in administration of towing services, automobile releases, reports,
advertisement of auctions and notifications to owners. Towing operators will
collect and submit this fee as per this section.
TRANSMISSION SERVICE — Shall mean the combined operation of
removing and then replacing a transmission locking pin, when such
operation is necessary before a vehicle can be moved.
VEHICLE REMOVAL CHARGE — Shall mean the charge for a motor vehicle
that is not movable and has been towed into the storage facility of the
primary owner and must be towed out of the primary's tower storage facility
to a public street for towing by the secondary tower.
WAITING TIME — Shall mean any additional time a tow operator spends at
the scene other than the time required for the actual tow and/or recovery.
Examples of waiting time may include but are not limited to Emergency
Medical Services which must be performed and/or police investigations.
WINCHING SERVICE — Shall mean any operation in which a vehicle is
moved onto a roadway from a position off the roadway, or any operation in
which substantial work is required to prepare a vehicle for normal towing.
WRECKER — Shall mean a vehicle driven by mechanical power and
employed for the purpose of towing, transporting, conveying, or removing
any and all kinds of vehicles, or part of vehicles, which are unable to
be operated under their own power, for which a service charge or fee is
exacted.
§ 4-6.2.1. Storage Rates. [Ord. No. 2010-80]
As stated in Subsection 4-6.11 Rate Schedule.
§ 4-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-6.3
AO:257
§ 4-6.3. License Required: Limit. [Ord. No. 2010-80]
§ 4-6.4. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2010-80]
Specifically exempted from the license and regulation requirements of this
section are towing operators providing towing, transporting, conveying,
or removal of vehicles from private property within the Township unless
authorized by the police, or operators who are directly and privately
engaged or designated by the owner, without the assistance of the Police
Department, to be towed, transported, conveyed or removed.
§ 4-6.5. Standards for Licensing. [Ord. No. 2010-80; Ord. No
2011-23 § 1]
a. No towing operator shall operate within the Township of Lakewood
without obtaining a towing license in accordance with the provisions of
this section in addition to any other licenses required under Township
of Lakewood ordinances, except as is otherwise provided herein.
b. No person, partnership, entity, corporation or business shall acquire
more than one license. Each licensee shall meet the standard for
licensing as set forth in this section.
c. Application for a towing license shall be made to the Township
Committee as a form proscribed by the Township Clerk. The Township
Committee shall approve or reject a license application.
d. Each application shall be accompanied by a photograph of the vehicle
or vehicles to be used by the applicant, such photograph shall show all
of the applicant's identification and markings. The applicant shall also
include a copy of all vehicle registrations, insurance cards, along with
proof of liability and worker's compensation insurance. Each applicant
shall provide a photograph of the place of business or premises. The
applicant shall also provide a photograph evidencing a secured yard
and/or facility. A copy of a lease or proof of ownership must also be
provided.
e. If the Township Committee rejects a license application for good cause,
the rejected applicant may request a hearing before the Committee.
a. Equipment Requirements. No license shall be issued to a towing
operator who does not possess at his place of business for utilization in
this business, the following equipment, which shall bear a
manufacturers I.D. plate containing the below required ratings
information or otherwise be rated and certified by a national testing
company. Said equipment shall be inspected by the Chief of Police or his
authorized representative prior to a license being issued.
1. At least one four-ton or larger wrecker with boom and drum
capable of being operated from inside or outside the wrecker
having a minimum rating of four tons; drums to have a minimum of
100 foot long cable at least three-eighths (3/8) inch in diameter
§ 4-6.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-6.5
AO:258
with a recommended working limit of a minimum of 7,000 pounds;
recommended gross vehicle weight of truck or chassis of 10,000
pounds or greater; and dual rear wheels maintained and equipped
at least in accordance with manufacturer's specifications.
Equipped with a 360 degree amber emergency warning light with
permit.
2. Safety equipment to be carried on tow trucks on call shall include
the following:
(a) One universal towing sling.
(b) Speedy dry absorbent.
(c) Shovel and broom.
(d) Tow hooks and chains.
(e) One snatch block for three-eighths (3/8) to 1/2 inch cable.
(f) Two high test safety chains.
(g) Auxiliary safety light kit to place on rear of towed vehicle.
(h) Toolbox with assortment of hand tools and emergency pry bars.
(i) At scene work lights.
(j) Blocking chocks for wrecker.
(k) Safety cones and flares.
(l) Fire extinguisher, ABC rated.
(m) Steering wheel lock or tie down.
(n) Protective gloves.
b. Flatbed Requirements.
1. At least one flatbed or car carrier with at least a one-car capacity, a
360 degree amber emergency warning light with permit, wheel
chokes.
2. Safety Equipment.
(a) Tow hooks and chains.
(b) Speedy dry absorbent.
(c) Wheel chocks.
(d) One snatch block for three-eighths (3/8) to 1/2 inch cable.
(e) Two high test safety chains.
§ 4-6.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-6.5
AO:259
(f) Auxiliary safety light kit to place on rear of towed vehicle: if
towed behind a flatbed.
(g) Tool box with assortment of hand tools and emergency pry
bars.
(h) At scene work lights.
(i) Safety cones and flares.
(j) Fire extinguisher, ABC rated.
(k) Shovel and broom.
(l) Protective gloves.
3. All applicants for a towing license shall be subject to background
investigation by the Police Department.
4. All licensed towers are required to have a cellular phone or other
method of communication to the tower's home base to provide
Lakewood Township with 24 hour coverage while on tow duty.
5. Towing operators shall accept cash and credit card payment for all
services rendered. Check payment is up to the discretion of the
towing business.
c. Facilities Required. Each towing operator shall have access to a secure,
adequately lighted, separately fenced or enclosed storage area for the
safe storage of a minimum of 50 towed vehicles, located within the
Township. The storage area must be owned or leased by the licensee,
and used exclusively in connection with the licensee's towing
operations. All towed vehicles must be stored within the storage area.
Subject to the Zoning Regulations of the Township of Lakewood, the
fenced-in enclosure shall be six feet in height and be of chain link
construction or other similar and durable materials. The fence shall be
sufficient to obstruct the interior of the secured premises from public
view. Additionally, each towing operator shall have access to an indoor
storage area for the storing of impounded vehicles involved in criminal
transactions located within the Township.
d. Employee Standards. All towing operators and their employees who
operate towing equipment shall be certified, fully trained and
knowledgeable in the operation of all required equipment.
Certifications are to be approved by the Traffic Safety Office. All towing
businesses when on towing call must have available for service, at least
two qualified and certified employees that will be available on duty 24
hours a day, seven days a week without exception while on police tow
call and/or another Lakewood licensed tower who is on the police duty
towing list may assist to back up the duty wrecker when needed to
arrive at the scene within a reasonable time as defined in Subsection
4-6.8 (15 minutes, weather permitting). It will be the responsibility of
the tower on duty to notify his back up tower to respond, all vehicles
§ 4-6.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-6.5
AO:260
will be towed to the on duty tower's yard. The hours of operation
shall be as follows for releasing vehicles to the public, 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m. Monday through Friday and from 10:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. on
Saturday and Sunday with the exception of Independence Day, Labor
Day, Christmas Day, New Years Day and Memorial Day. All towing
companies will notify the Traffic Safety Office when a new employee is
hired. Notification must be made within 10 days with the employee's
name, address, telephone number, driver's license number and towing
certification/certificates.
e. Insurance Required. All towing operators shall maintain and produce
proof of the following insurance coverage to the Township Clerk:
1. Workmen's compensation insurance for all employees.
2. Minimum liability coverage on light/medium-duty vehicles with a
gross weight of less than 32,000 pounds is $750,000. Minimum
liability coverage on heavy-duty vehicles with a gross weight of
more than 32,000 pounds is one million ($1,000,000) dollars.
3. Property damage insurance, $100,000.
4. Theft insurance on stored vehicles.
5. The certificate of insurance shall be issued by a company certified
to do business in New Jersey and each policy so required must
contain an endorsement providing for 10 days notice to Lakewood
Township in the event of any material changes in the policy of
cancellation thereof and must name the Township of Lakewood as
an insured party.
6. In addition thereto, the towing operator shall provide an
indemnification and hold harmless agreement in accordance with
the Township of Lakewood terms and conditions.
7. A valid Certificate of Occupancy for the business office of the
Facility.
8. A current business license to operate within the Township.
f. Business Location. All towing businesses shall be located within the
Township of Lakewood so as to ensure a quick, safe response to calls as
needed, to provide reasonably priced services, to remedy unsafe traffic
conditions caused by disabled vehicles as expeditiously as possible and
to eliminate traffic congestion as rapidly as possible. Also, each towing
company must retain a physical mailing address in the Township of
Lakewood.
g. Application Process. Prior to issuance of license, each wrecker and
storage facility will be inspected by the Police Department to ensure
that all equipment and safety standards and all rules and regulations
have been complied with. Any applicant not in full compliance at the
time of the first inspection during the application process will not be
§ 4-6.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-6.5
AO:261
§ 4-6.6. Rates. [Ord. No. 2010-80; Ord. No. 2016-5]
The following schedule of fees is hereby adopted for obtaining a towing
operator's license and a renewal of towing operator's license pursuant to
this section.
§ 4-6.7. Term of License. [Ord. No. 2010-80]
License issued pursuant to this section shall be for a term of one year.
§ 4-6.8. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. No. 2010-80]
permitted to tow until a second or subsequent inspection as conducted
by the Police Department indicates said applicant is in full compliance
with all rules and regulations.
a. Application Fee: $150 (Initial).
b. License Fee: $325.
c. Renewal Fee: $200. This fee shall be payable every year on September
30th. License and renewal fees paid pursuant to this section shall not be
refundable for any reason.
d. Administrative Fee. A fee of $25 shall be charged by the towing
operator after 4th documented visit to the vehicle or after additional
paper work (i.e. certified letters). Towing operator shall document why
this charge has been added and reference this section.
e. Township Processing Fee. A fee of $50 shall be charged on behalf of the
Township by the towing operator on all released vehicles, whether
towed for impound or MVA. This fee is to be paid to the Township for
each released vehicle by the towing operator within 30 days of the
finish of each tow cycle. However, if the towing operator or operators
receive no fee for towing services, the fifty ($50) dollar fee to the
Township may be waived by the Township Manager.
a. No flashing lights or sirens shall be used by a towing operator except by
permission granted by the Chief of Police under the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 39:3-50.
b. Each wrecker and flatbed must meet all of the requirements and
regulations of Title 39 Motor Vehicle Rules and Regulations including
but not limited to proper registration and inspection. Dealer
registration will not be permitted and each vehicle must have displayed
thereon the name and phone number of the owner/business in a
minimum of three inch letters, which must be permanently affixed. The
physical appearance of both the wrecker and flatbed will be of
professional quality, as far as equipment and exterior finish. Further,
each wrecker must have a boom lifting capacity of at least four tons.
§ 4-6.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-6.8
AO:262
c. Each wrecker, while on duty, will be responsible for changing tires on
police vehicles at any time when required to do so and can pick up the
tires at Police Headquarters. This service will be performed free of
charge.
d. The governing body hereby designates the Police Department generally,
and the Chief of Police particularly, as the supervising authority to
enforce the provisions of this section. The Chief of Police is hereby
given the authority to promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and
regulations necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of this section
provided copies thereof are submitted to the governing body for
approval at least 14 days prior to effective date thereof and written
approval is given.
e. Prior to license renewal during the calendar year, each towing operator
licensed under this section shall be inspected by a representative of the
Police Department for compliance with the provisions of this section
without prior notice on and any rules and regulations promulgated
hereunder and a written inspection report thereof shall be prepared by
the Police Department, signed by the operator who shall receive a copy
thereof and filed with the Township Clerk. Failure to maintain the
required equipment or to maintain same in good condition shall be
grounds for removal from the towing list unless said failure is remedied
within 30 days of receipt of the written inspection.
f. Each towing operator, prior to departure from the scene of towing
services, shall clean the streets of any debris resulting from any
accident at such scene and shall at all times carry the necessary
equipment to perform such cleaning services.
g. No towing operator, licensed under this section, shall respond to the
scene of an accident except upon the request of the driver or owner of
the vehicles involved or except upon the request of the Police
Department. If the owner or driver requests a private towing service to
respond to the accident scene, it will be the responsibility of that
responding company to clean up the accident scene or they will not be
allowed to tow the vehicle.
h. Any refusal by a licensed towing operator to tow or remove a vehicle
when requested by the police shall be reported by the Police Officer
assigned to the incident to his superior. The report of refusal shall
include the reasons for refusal and a description of the disabled vehicle
and shall be furnished to the Chief of Police. The operator shall be
subject to removal from the duty list for said refusal if deemed
unreasonable by the Chief of Police provided he is first given a hearing
pursuant to Subsection 4-6.9 hereof.
i. Towing operators shall arrive at the scene to which they are dispatched
within a reasonable time after being dispatched. Under normal
circumstances, such reasonable time limit is defined as within 15
minutes of receipt of the call, weather permitting. Next operator on list
§ 4-6.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-6.8
AO:263
shall be on standby in case additional help is needed, unless the tower
has made prior arrangements with another licensed tower to use as his
backup tower.
j. When any unusual situation occurs due to an investigation or special
operations detail which is conducted through the Police Department,
office of the Chief of Police or an accident which may be dangerous to
the safety of the public, such as disabled vehicles containing dangerous
cargo, solvents, fluids, natural gas, or the spilling thereof or danger
related thereto. It will be in the discretion of the Police Department to
select a towing company qualified to perform the duties of the
operation needed. This company if selected does not have to be within
the Township of Lakewood.
k. When no designation or destination has been made to where the vehicle
is to be towed, the licensed towing operators are authorized to remove
the vehicles to the towing operator's place of business. It may be
requested by the owner or driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
or a disabled vehicle, to have the vehicle towed to another place of
business or residence within the Township of Lakewood, by the on-duty
towing service.
l. When vehicles are towed to premises controlled by the Police
Department for the purpose of utilizing the vehicles or its contents as
evidence, or for other purposes, such vehicle shall not be released from
police custody unless the owner of the vehicle furnishes the Police
Department with a receipt that towing service fees have been paid.
m. In all cases where cars are to be towed for illegal parking, summonses
for such offenses shall be issued prior to towing.
n. No towing operator operating under the license issued hereunder shall
employ directly or indirectly any personnel or employees of the
Township of Lakewood that maintain a position which is consistent of
full time of 40 hours or more per week (i.e. Police, Public Works).
o. The Lakewood Township Police Department shall maintain a log record
of calls to licensed towing operators under this section. Said record
shall be available for inspection by any licensed operator or member of
the public upon reasonable notice.
p. Such additional rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the
Chief of Police shall take effect 30 days after notification by the
Township Clerk of such rules and regulations upon all holder of licenses
for towing operators provided further that they are approved by the
governing body pursuant to Subsection 4-6.8 hereof. Service shall be
made by forwarding these rules and regulations by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the licensee at the address listed in his
most recent application.
q. Abandoned automobile summonses shall be issued prior to towing
abandoned automobiles and the licensed towing operator on call shall
§ 4-6.8 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-6.8
AO:264
be responsible to tow said vehicles to the licensee's premises at no
cost to the Police Department or the Township of Lakewood. Police
will assist operators to obtain junk title for said vehicles after proper
waiting period, pursuant to law.
r. Towing operators shall keep a complete log of all vehicles towed while
on duty which shall contain at least the following information:
1. Date, time, and location of towing.
2. Nature of call.
3. Destination.
4. If vehicle stored, the date storage commenced and terminated.
5. Itemized bill of all charges.
6. The log shall be made available to the Chief of Police at his request
upon reasonable notification by the Chief or his designated
representative.
s. Car owners shall be supplied with bill listings charges, which shall be
itemized.
t. Towing operators shall have vehicle owners or authorized
representative sign release forms when releasing vehicles.
u. Towing operators shall be capable of providing adequate transmission
service if required in order to tow a vehicle, in order that the
transmission will not be damaged by towing.
v. The Chief of Police shall see that a record is maintained containing the
names, addresses and 24 hour telephone numbers of all licensed
wreckers and a record of the types of wreckers available to meet the
specific need of the emergency. The Chief of Police shall also see that a
record is maintained of the regular response of wreckers to police calls
and any and all complaints from vehicle owners as to improper charges
or service. Any complaints as to the towing and/or storage charges shall
be referred to the Chief of Police, who shall attempt to resolve same,
and shall report same to the Division of Consumer Affairs.
w. The Chief of Police shall maintain a weekly revolving list of licensed
wreckers to provide service where needed and shall instruct all duty
and investigating officers to utilize said list. The Chief of Police shall
supply a police radio to the tower, so that they may remain in contact
with the Police Department. The radio, its case and microphone will be
supplied by the Chief of Police and will be the responsibility of the tower
in the event it is broken or is stolen. In the event the radio is broken or
stolen, it will be replaced by the on-duty tower. The Police radio while in
the possession of the tower must be kept away from people not directly
involved with the towing service.
§ 4-6.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-6.8
AO:265
§ 4-6.9. License Suspension or Revocation. [Ord. No. 2010-80]
The Township Committee shall have the right to suspend or revoke any
license issued under this section for good cause upon written complaint
of the Chief of Police of the Township following his determination that
there is justification for revocation or suspension. Written notice of such
complaint and the basis of the complaint shall be given to the licensee and
said licensee shall be entitled to a hearing before the Township Committee
with the right to present evidence on his behalf and to be represented by an
attorney and to show why the suspension should not be implemented. The
Rules of Evidence of the State of New Jersey shall not apply at such hearing
and the decision of the Township Committee shall be in the form of a
resolution containing findings of fact derived from the evidence presented.
§ 4-6.10. License Transfer. [Ord. No. 2010-80]
No license issued pursuant to this section shall be transferable and upon
cessation of activity under the license through revocation or otherwise,
the license shall be determined null and void. The exception to the license
transfer would be to a family member taking over the business through a
sale of the business/partnership or through death.
§ 4-6.11. Rates Schedule. [Ord. No. 2010-80]
Every operator of a towing service shall give the owner a written itemized
bill for the towing cost and a written receipt when paid. A schedule of the
towing regulations and fees shall be posted for viewing by the public at each
towing business on the Police Duty List and in the Traffic Safety Office in
the Police Department. Towing fees and charges shall be as follows:
x. The Police Chief shall have the power to temporarily suspend a
wrecker's license for violations of safety standards or violations of the
rules and regulations of operation. The following shall serve as a guide
in imposing penalties for violations.
1. First Offense -suspension of license for one tour of duty (one week).
2. Second Offense -suspension of license for two tours of duty.
3. Third Offense -revocation of the towing license, pending a hearing
by the Township Committee.
y. Any additional charges and/or fees not mentioned within this section
must be approved by the Traffic Safety Office.
z. Each tow truck in use pursuant to this section shall display weight
classification cab decals pursuant to State requirements.
a. Towing.
§ 4-6.8 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-6.11
AO:266
1. Automobile and trucks with a gross vehicle weight
requirement (GVWR) of 8,600 pounds or under,
motorcycles and motor scooters and snow removal
included. Includes the use of special equipment (i.e.
flatbed and wheel lift).
Flat Rate $100
2. Automobiles and trucks over 8,601-15,000 GVWR
Flat Rate $150
3. Trucks, buses, tractor-trailers and other heavy
equipment over 15,001 pounds
Minimum Fee $250
b. Additional.
1. Mileage for vehicles towed from outside of the
Township perimeters only
$3/mile
2. Unlock transmission $10
3. Speedy dry, per bag $12.50
4. Waiting time (per man an hour, maximum two men) $25
5. Extra clean up over half an hour for extra debris,
glass, vehicle parts. Debris (clean up is mandatory Ref:
N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.8)
$25
6. Administrative fee as per Subsection 4-6.6d $25
7. Township processing fee as per Subsection 4-6.6e $50
8. Removal and yard fee within the towing operators
business to street. (Use of mechanical device to two
vehicle to front of business for pick up)
$25
9. Recovery and service fees and charges relating to
automobiles and trucks with a GVWR of 8,600 pounds, or
less and motorcycles
$50/half
hour
10. Recovery and service fees and charges relating to
heavy duty vehicles including automobiles and trucks
with a GVWR of 8,601 and over, all buses, tractor trailers
and other heavy equipment.
$125/half
hour
c. Storage—Outside:
1. Automobiles, cycles, trucks under 15,000 pounds $1
per hour for first calendar day, thereafter.
(a) Vehicles impounded for Title 39 Violations will
receive 1 day free storage based on a 24-hour period.
$25/day
2. Trucks, buses, tractor-trailers, etc. over 15,000
pounds
$50/day
§ 4-6.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-6.11
AO:267
§ 4-6.12. Duty List. [Ord. No. 2010-80]
The Police Department shall promulgate a duty list on a semi-annual basis.
Said list shall be served by regular mail on all licensed towing operators
of record, one month in advance of the effective date of the new list. All
licensees of record at that time shall have their names placed on said duty
towing list for use by the Police Department when necessary. All towing
operators licensed after the date of mailing above referenced shall be added
to the bottom of the newest list promulgated. The licensee on duty shall be
on duty for a seven-day period commencing each Wednesday at 9:00 a.m.
Licensees will be used in rotation in order to assure fairness. The duty list
will be comprised of 12 operators. No towing operator will cover, operate,
drive equipment or switch on the police duty list without being authorized
by the Chief of Police or his designee. This must be requested in writing
two weeks prior to the duty week. Should one of the 12 licenses become
available, the first completed application will be added to the roster with
approval of the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall reserve the right to
add additional duty wreckers to roster at his discretion.
§ 4-6.13. Choice of Towing Operator. [Ord. No. 2010-80]
Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to prevent any owner
of a motor vehicle from calling any tower or wrecker of his own choice.
However, if the tower or wrecker designated by the owner or operator of
the motor vehicle is not immediately available or cannot respond in a timely
manner, the tower or wrecker designated on the revolving list established
herein shall be utilized.
§ 4-6.14. Tower/Wrecker Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 2010-80]
By making application to be utilized as a tower or wrecker by the Police
Department and by accepting such position, the person or firm agrees to
the following:
d. Storage—Inside.
1. Automobiles, cycles, trucks under 15,000 pounds
(when required by Police Department for investigation
purposes only)
$25/day
Payment for impounded vehicles may be in cash or credit card. Towing
operators shall accept cash and credit card payment for all other
services rendered. Check payment is up to the discretion of the towing
business.
a. Provide a prompt response to each call (fifteen (15 minutes of
notification), weather permitting.
b. Clean all debris at the accident site emanating from the accident.
§ 4-6.11 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-6.14
AO:268
§ 4-7. MASSAGE PARLORS.
§ 4-7.1. Definitions. [1971 Code § 6-11.1]
As used in this section:
EMPLOYEE - — Shall mean any and all persons, other than the masseurs
or masseuses, who render any service to the permittee; who receive
compensation directly from the permittee, and who have no physical
contact with the customers and clients.
MASSAGE — Shall mean any method of pressure on or friction against,
or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating
of the external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of
any mechanical electrical apparatus or appliances with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder,
creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in
this practice.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean any establishment having a
fixed place of business where any person, firm, association or corporation
engages in or carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of
the activities mentioned in this subsection. Any establishment engaged in
or carrying on, or permitting any combination of massage and bath house
shall be deemed a massage establishment.
MASSEUR OR MASSEUSE — Shall mean any person including a trainee,
who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in the practice of massage
as herein defined.
PATRON — Shall mean any person over 18 years of age who receives a
massage under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he
will pay money or give any other consideration therefor.
c. If at the end of 30 days the registered owner of the motor vehicle has
not claimed his vehicle then the operator shall be permitted to request
that the Chief of Police submit appropriate application for a salvage
permit for said vehicle. This provision applies only to motor vehicles
directed to be towed by the Police Department.
d. Maintain a record in a bound volume of all towing and wrecking jobs
handled, the name of the owner or operator involved, the charge made
for the service, the date and an amount of payment.
e. Comply with all other terms and conditions of this section.
f. The licensee shall be responsible for the release of each vehicle. No
vehicle is to be released without police authorization if there is a
condition of release noted on the towed vehicle report.
g. No vehicle shall be stored inside unless authorized by the investigating
officer or the owner/driver of the vehicle.
§ 4-6.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-7.1
AO:269
PERMITTEE — Shall mean the operator of a massage establishment and out
call massage service.
RECOGNIZED SCHOOL — Shall mean any school or institution of learning
which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession, or
work of massage, which school requires a resident course of study not less
than 70 hours to be given in not more than three calendar months before
the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation
from the school or institution of learning following the successful
completion of the course of study of learning.
§ 4-7.2. Permit Required. [1971 Code § 6-11.2]
§ 4-7.3. Filing and Fee Provision. [1971 Code § 6-11.3]
Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage
establishment or out call massage service shall file an application with the
Township Clerk upon a form provided by the Township Clerk and pay a filing
fee of $100, which shall not be refundable.
§ 4-7.4. Application for Massage Business Permit. [1971 Code
§ 6-11.4]
Any person desiring a massage business permit shall file a written
application with the Township Clerk on a form to be furnished by the
Township Clerk. The applicant shall accompany the application with a
tender of the correct fee as hereinafter provided and shall, in addition,
furnish the following:
a. Business Permit Required. No person shall engage in or carry on the
business of massage unless he has a valid massage business permit
issued by the Township pursuant to the provisions of this section for
each and every separate office or place of business conducted by the
person.
b. Masseur's Permit Required. No person shall practice massage as a
masseur, employee or otherwise, unless he has a valid and subsisting
masseur's permit issued to him by the Township pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
a. The type of ownership of the business (i.e., whether individual,
partnership, corporation, or otherwise);
b. The name, style, and designation under which the business or practice
is to be conducted;
c. The business address and all telephone numbers where the business is
to be conducted;
d. A complete list of the names and residence addresses of all masseurs
and employees in the business and the name and residence addresses
§ 4-7.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-7.4
AO:270
of the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of
the business;
e. The following personal information concerning the applicant, if an
individual; and concerning each stockholder holding more than 10% of
the stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if the
applicant is a corporation; and concerning the partners, including
limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and concerning the
manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the
business:
1. Name, complete residence address and residence telephone
numbers.
2. The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant.
3. Written proof of age.
4. Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex.
5. Two front face-portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the
date of the application and at least two inches by two inches (2"x2")
in size.
6. The massage or similar business history and experience, including
but not limited to whether or not such person in previously
operating in this Township or another town or state under license
or permit has had such license or permit denied, revoked, or
suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activities or
occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or
revocation.
7. All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted, and the offense
for which convicted and circumstances thereof.
8. Diploma, certificate, or other written proof of graduation from a
recognized school by the person who shall be directly responsible
for the operation and management of the massage business.
f. Such other information, identification, and physical examination of the
person as shall be deemed necessary by the Township Clerk to discover
the truth of the matters hereinbefore required to be set forth in the
application.
g. Authorization for the Township, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the
statements set forth in the application.
h. The names and addresses of three adult residents of the County who
will serve as character references. These references must be persons
other than relatives and business associates.
§ 4-7.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-7.4
AO:271
§ 4-7.5. Facilities Necessary. [1971 Code § 6-11.5]
No massage establishment shall be issued a permit, nor be operated,
established, or maintained in the Township unless an inspection by the
Health Officer, Building Inspector and Fire Inspector reveals that the
establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements:
i. Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury, that the
foregoing information contained in the application is true and correct,
said declaration being duly dated and signed in the Township.
a. Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths, and showers
shall be made waterproof with approved waterproof materials and shall
be installed in accordance with the building code of the Township;
b. All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas and
floors shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected;
c. Adequate bathing, dressing and locker facilities shall be provided for
the patrons to be served at any given time. In the event male and female
patrons are to be served simultaneously, separate bathing, dressing,
locker and massage room facilities shall be provided;
d. The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in
administering massages. Such nondisposable instruments and
materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron;
e. Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean
linen, towels, and other materials used in connection with
administering massages. All soiled linens, towels, and other materials
shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which
containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean storage
areas;
f. Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When
employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the
same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex. A
single water closet per sex shall be provided for each 20 or more
employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time.
Urinals may be substituted for half of the water closets for the male
patrons after one water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be
designated as to the sex accommodated therein;
g. Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running
water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule
immediately adjacent thereto. Lavatories or washbasins shall be
provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary towels;
h. The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial
services;
§ 4-7.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-7.5
AO:272
§ 4-7.6. Application for Masseur's Permit. [1971 Code § 6-11.6]
Any person desiring a masseur's permit shall file a written application
with the Township Clerk on a form to be furnished by the Township Clerk.
The applicant shall tender with the application the correct permit fee as
hereinafter provided and shall, in addition, furnish the following:
i. The premises shall meet the Building Code and Fire Code of the
Township;
The Health Officer, the Building Inspector, and the Fire Inspector shall certify
that the proposed massage establishment complies with all the requirements of
this section and of this chapter and shall send such certification to the License
Inspector.
a. The business address and all telephone numbers where the massage is
to be practiced.
b. The following personal information concerning the applicant:
1. Name, complete residence address and residence telephone
numbers.
2. The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant.
3. Written proof of age.
4. Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, and sex.
5. Two front face-portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the
date of application and at least two inches by two inches (2"x2") in
size.
6. The massage or similar business history and experience, including
but not limited to whether or not such person in previously
operating in this Township or another city or state under license or
permit has had such license or permit denied, revoked, or
suspended and the reason therefor, and the business activities or
occupations subsequent to such action of denial, suspension or
revocation.
7. All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted, and the offense
for which convicted and the circumstances thereof.
8. Diploma, certificate, or other written proof of graduation from a
recognized school where the theory, method, profession or work of
massage is taught.
9. A statement in writing from a licensed physician in the state that he
has examined the applicant and believes the applicant to be free of
all communicable diseases.
§ 4-7.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-7.6
AO:273
§ 4-7.7. Permit Fee. [1971 Code § 6-11.7]
The applicant for a masseur's or masseuse's license shall pay an annual
license fee of $50 which license fee shall become due on the first day of
March in each year.
§ 4-7.8. Notice of Hearing. [1971 Code § 6-11.8]
When an application is filed for a license under this section, the Township
Clerk shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon. Not less than
10 days before the date of such hearing, the Township Clerk shall cause to
be posted a notice of such hearing in a conspicuous place on the property in
which or on which the proposed massage establishment is to be operated.
Such posting of notice shall be carried out by the Township Clerk, and the
applicant shall maintain said notice as posted for the required number of
days.
§ 4-7.9. Referral of Application to Other Departments. [1971 Code
§ 6-11.9; Ord. No. 2003-24 § 1]
The Township Clerk, upon receiving an application for a massage
establishment permit, shall refer the application to the Department of Code
Enforcement and Zoning, the Fire Department, and the Health Department,
which departments shall inspect the premises proposed to be operated as
a massage establishment and shall make written recommendations to the
Township Clerk concerning compliance with the codes that they administer.
§ 4-7.10. Issuance of Permit for a Massage Establishment. [1971
Code § 6-11.10]
The Township Clerk may issue a permit within 14 days following a hearing
if all requirements for a massage establishment described in the section are
met and may issue a permit to all persons who apply to perform massage
services unless he finds:
c. Such other information, identification, and physical examination of the
person deemed necessary by the Township Clerk in order to discover
the truth of the matters hereinbefore required to be set forth in the
application.
d. Authorization for the Township, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the veracity of the
statements set forth in the application and the qualifications of the
applicant for the permit.
a. The correct permit fee has not been tendered to the Township, and, in
the case of a check or bank draft, honored with payment upon
presentation;
§ 4-7.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-7.10
AO:274
§ 4-7.11. Issuance of Masseur or Masseuse Permit. [1971 Code
§ 6-11.11]
The Township Clerk may issue a masseur or masseuse permit within 21
days following a hearing unless he finds that the applicant for masseur
or masseuse permit has been convicted within the last five years of: (i) a
felony, (ii) an offense involving sexual misconduct with a minor, (iii) keeping
or residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation of lewd or unlawful act,
prostitution, or pandering; or (iv) any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, or
b. The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not
comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the
building, zoning, and health regulations;
c. The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent
statement of fact in the permit application or in any document required
by the Township in conjunction therewith;
d. The applicant has had a massage business, masseur, or other similar
permit or license denied, revoked, or suspended for any of the above
causes by the Township or any other state or local agency within five
years prior to the date of the application;
e. The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors, if the
applicant is a corporation; or any of the partners, including limited
partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the manager, or other
person principally in charge of the operation of the business, is not over
the age of 18 years;
f. The manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of
the business has not successfully completed a resident course of study
or learning of not less than 70 hours from a recognized school where
the theory, method, profession, or work of massage is taught;
g. The applicant, if an individual; or any of the stockholders holding more
than 10% of the stock of the corporation; any of the officers and
directors, if the applicant is a corporation or any of the partners,
including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and the
manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the
business, have been convicted of: (i) a felony, (ii) an offense involving
sexual misconduct with a minor, (iii) prostitution, soliciting for purposes
of prostitution, pandering, keeping a place of prostitution, (iv) any
crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or other offenses opposed to
decency and morality, within the last five years;
h. The Township Clerk may issue a permit to any person convicted of any
of the crimes described in Subsection g of this subsection if he finds
that such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of the
application and the applicant has had no subsequent felony convictions
of any nature and no subsequent misdemeanor convictions for crimes
mentioned in this subsection.
§ 4-7.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-7.11
AO:275
deceit; provided however that the Township Clerk may issue a permit to any
person convicted of any crimes described in this subsection if he finds that
such conviction occurred at least five years prior to the date of application
and the applicant has had no subsequent felony convictions of any nature
and no subsequent misdemeanor convictions for crimes mentioned in this
subsection.
§ 4-7.12. Operating Requirements. [1971 Code § 6-11.12]
a. Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and
apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.
b. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception
area in a location available to all prospective customers.
c. All employees, including masseurs and masseuses, shall be clean and
wear clean, nontransparent outer garments. A separate dressing room
for each sex must be available on the premises and each dressing room
shall contain a tub or shower in good working order and individual
lockers for each employee and customer. Doors to such dressing rooms
shall open inward and shall be self-closing.
d. All massage establishments shall be provided with clean, laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after
each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner.
e. The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels, cloths,
or undergarments when in the presence of an employee, masseur, or
masseuse.
f. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly, in a massage
establishment, to place his or her hand upon, or touch with any part of
his or her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage a sexual or
genital area of any other person.
g. No masseur or masseuse, employee, or operator shall perform, offer or
agree to perform, any act which would require the touching of the
patron's sexual or genital area.
h. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and
all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor
rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in
operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each
use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry.
i. Oils, creams, lotions, and other preparations used in administering
massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
§ 4-7.11 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-7.12
AO:276
§ 4-7.13. Sanitation and Safety Requirements. [1971 Code
§ 6-11.13]
All premises used by permittees hereunder shall be periodically inspected
by the Chief of Police or his authorized representatives for safety of the
structure and adequacy of plumbing, ventilation, heating and illumination.
The walls shall be clean and painted with washable, mold-resistant paint
in all rooms where water or steam baths are given. Floors shall be free
from any accumulation of dust, dirt or refuse. All equipment used in the
massage operation shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
Towels, linen and items for personal use of operators and patients shall be
clean and freshly laundered. Towels, cloths, and sheets shall not be used
for more than one patron. Heavy, white paper may be substituted for sheets
provided that such paper is changed for every patron. No massage service
or practice shall be carried on within any cubicle, room, booth, or any
area within a massage establishment which is fitted with a door capable
of being locked. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate
other requirements of statute or ordinance concerning the maintenance of
premises, not to preclude authorized inspection hereof.
§ 4-7.14. Revocation or Suspension of Permit. [1971 Code § 6-11.14]
Any permit issued for a massage establishment or out call massage service
may be revoked or suspended by the Township Clerk, after a hearing, for
good cause, or in any case where any of the provisions of this section are
violated or where any employee of the permittee, including a masseur and
masseuse, is engaged in any conduct which violates any of the state or
local laws or ordinances at permittee's place of business and the permittee
has actual or constructive knowledge of such violations or the permittee
should have actual or constructive knowledge by due diligence, or in any
case, where the permittee or licensee refuses to permit any duly authorized
Police Officer or Health Inspector of the Township of Lakewood to inspect
the premises or the operations therein. Such permit may also be revoked or
suspended by the Township Clerk, after hearing, upon the recommendation
of the Director of Public Health that such business is being managed,
conducted or maintained without regard for the public health or health
of patrons or customers or without due regard to proper sanitation and
hygiene.
j. Eating in the massage work areas shall not be permitted. Animals
except for seeing-eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the massage work
areas.
k. Each masseur and masseuse shall wash his or her hands in hot running
water, using a proper soap or disinfectant before administering a
massage to each patron.
§ 4-7.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-7.15
AO:277
§ 4-7.15. Revocation of Masseur or Masseuse Permit. [1971 Code
§ 6-11.15]
A masseur or masseuse permit issued by the Township Clerk to any
employee may be revoked or suspended after a public hearing on any of the
following grounds:
§ 4-7.16. Masseur or Masseuse General Regulations. [1971 Code
§ 6-11.16]
No person engaged or employed in the business of masseur or masseuse
shall treat a person at a location other than his licensed business premises
or other approved medical facility. An applicant must list said facilities on
his application for a permit.
§ 4-7.17. Register of Employees. [1971 Code § 6-11.17]
The operator of a massage establishment or an out call massage service
must maintain a register of all persons employed as masseurs or masseuses
and their permit numbers. Such register shall be available for inspection at
all times during regular business hours.
§ 4-7.18. Employment of Masseurs and Masseuses. [1971 Code
§ 6-11.18]
It shall be the responsibility of the permittee and the employer of any person
purporting to act as masseurs and masseuses to insure that each person
employed as a masseur or masseuse shall first have obtained a valid permit
pursuant to this section.
§ 4-7.19. Operator of Massage Establishment: Exception. [1971
Code § 6-11.19]
A diploma from a recognized school as defined herein will not be required
by the operator of a massage establishment or for any employee where such
operator or employee does not give a massage as defined herein.
§ 4-7.20. Display of Permits. [1971 Code § 6-11.20]
The massage business permittee shall display his permit, and that of each
and every masseur employed in the establishment, in an open and
conspicuous place on the premises of the massage business.
a. Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
b. Conviction of: (1) a felony; (2) an offense involving sexual misconduct
with children; (3) keeping or residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation
or lewd or unlawful acts, prostitution, or pandering; or (4) any crime
involving dishonesty.
§ 4-7.15 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-7.21
AO:278
§ 4-7.21. Keeping of Records. [1971 Code § 6-11.21]
Every person who operates a massage business or practices or provides a
massage shall at all times keep an appointment book in which the name of
each and every patron shall be entered, together with the time, date and
place of service, and the service provided. Such appointment book shall be
available at all times for inspection by the Township Clerk or his authorized
representatives.
§ 4-7.22. Inspections. [1971 Code § 6-11.22]
The Township Clerk and the Department of Public Health shall, from time
to time, at least twice a year, make an inspection of each massage
establishment granted a permit under the provisions of this section for
the purpose of determining whether the provisions of this section are
complied with. Such inspections shall be made at reasonable times and in
a reasonable manner. It shall be unlawful for any permittee to fail to allow
such inspection officer access to the premises or to hinder such officer in
any manner.
§ 4-7.23. Persons Under Age Eighteen Prohibited on the Premises.
[1971 Code § 6-11.23]
No person shall permit any person under the age of 18 years to come or
remain on the premises of any massage business establishment, as masseur,
employee, or patron, unless such person is on the premises on lawful
business.
§ 4-7.24. Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited. [1971 Code § 6-11.24]
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep or permit the sale or
consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises.
§ 4-7.25. Unlawful Activities. [1971 Code § 6-11.25]
It shall be unlawful for any person to massage any other person or give or
administer any of the other things mentioned in this section which violate
the provisions of this section or which violate any municipal or state law
or ordinance. Any violation of this provision shall be deemed grounds for
revocation of the permit granted hereunder.
§ 4-7.26. Name and Place of Business: Change of Location. [1971
Code § 6-22.26]
No person granted a permit pursuant to this section shall operate under any
name or conduct his business under any designation for any location not
specified in his permit.
§ 4-7.21 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-7.27
AO:279
§ 4-7.27. Transfers Prohibited. [1971 Code § 6-11.27]
No massage business and masseur permits are transferable, separate or
divisible, and such authority as a permit confers shall be conferred only on
the permittee named therein.
§ 4-7.28. Exclusions. [1971 Code § 6-11.28]
This section shall not include hospitals, nursing homes, sanitaria, or persons
holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the
laws of the State of New Jersey, or persons working under the direction
of any such persons or in any such establishments, nor shall this section
apply to barbers or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their particular
profession or business and holding a valid, unrevoked license or certificate
of registration issued by the State of New Jersey.
§ 4-7.29. Rules and Regulations. [1971 Code § 6-11.29]
The Township Clerk or the Director of Public Health may, after a public
hearing, make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations not in conflict
with, but to carry out, the intent of this section.
§ 4-7.30. Time Limit for Filing Application for Permit. [1971 Code
§ 6-11.30]
All persons who presently operate a massage establishment or who are
employed as a masseuse or masseur must apply for a permit within one
week of the effective date of this section. Applications for renewal of
permits must be filed not more than two months nor less than (1) month
prior to termination of an existing permit.
§ 4-7.31. Massage Parlors; Penalties. [1971 Code § 6-11.32; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be subject to the penalty in Chapter 1, § 1-5.
§ 4-8. JUNK YARDS.
§ 4-8.1. License Required. [1971 Code § 6-6.1]
No person shall maintain, operate or conduct the business of a junk yard or
keep a place for the storage or sale of junk as defined in this section without
first having obtained a license for same in the manner hereinafter set forth
and subject to each and all of the conditions, rules and regulations as set
forth.
§ 4-8.2. Definitions. [1971 Code § 6-6.2]
As used in this section:
JUNK — Shall mean any one or more or accumulation of one or more of the
following items:
§ 4-7.27 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-8.2
AO:280
Old iron, glass, paper or cordage, in such state of disrepair, uselessness,
age and condition as to be not readily usable for the purpose for which
it was originally intended, or not usable after further treatment or
processing so as to change its form or structure or in such condition
as to be considered worthless trash or not reasonably restorable to its
original use because the cost of restoration would greatly exceed the
market value of the item when restored. If the condition of the item
is such that it is inoperable or dismantled, broken or not reasonably
restorable to its original use, the burden of proof of market value shall
be on the owner.
a.
An automobile or automobiles which because of age, lack of
maintenance, general condition or partial or complete demolition are
in such condition as to be inoperable, unfit to be reasonably restored
for transportation because of the degree of damage or the fact that the
cost of restoration would greatly exceed the market value therefore,
or motor vehicles which are unfit for reconditioning for registration
and use for transportation. If the condition of the item is such that it
is inoperable or dismantled, broken or not reasonably restorable in its
original use the burden of proof of market value shall be on the owner.
b.
Used, damaged or broken parts of motor vehicles, or materials from
motor vehicles, the sum of which parts or materials shall be equal in
bulk to one or more motor vehicles.
c.
Household appliances, motors, furniture or furnishings or pieces of
industrial or manufacturing equipment, which are broken or in such
state of disrepair as to be unusable without additional work being
performed thereon or additional parts being provided or added thereto,
except as located within a store or shop specifically engaged in the
repair of such items.
d.
One or more used automobile tires that are in such condition as to be
unsafe for use on a motor vehicle or for resale as used automobile tires
capable of being placed upon and used on motor vehicles for highway
transportation.
e.
One or more items of machinery, equipment or parts thereof that are
unusable for the purpose for which they were originally intended
without repairing, reconditioning or remanufacturing to such extent as
to be in excess of the reasonable market value of the equipment or
machinery or parts thereof.
f.
Used building materials, parts of buildings, piping, electrical wiring
or other materials of any nature whatsoever that are not reasonably
marketable for use or reuse for the purpose for which they were
originally processed or manufactured or not readily adaptable for any
other use due to their condition, state of disrepair, or due to the fact
that reconditioning or reuse of the items would exceed the reasonable
value of the item or items.
g.
§ 4-8.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-8.2
AO:281
JUNK YARD — Shall mean and include the business of buying or selling
junk; or the keeping of a place for the storage or deposit of junk; or
the possession of junk for sale or resale, or parts therefrom, and shall
include yards or portions of yards used for the storing of motor vehicles or
machinery or parts of either for the purpose of obtaining parts therefrom or
repair of or replacement of other motor vehicles or machinery.
The term junk yard shall also apply to the entire area of the premises on
which junk is kept or any warehouse, garage or storage building on the
premises except that portion specifically designated on the application for
license as for use other than for storage of junk.
Junk yard shall also be inclusive of any place where automobile demolition
is carried on as a business; or where dismantling of automobiles or removal
of parts therefrom other than for the purpose of replacement or repair of
the part removed is carried on. If an automobile is dismantled or a part
removed therefrom for replacement or repair the automobile shall, if not
repaired and restored to an operative condition within 15 days, be classified
for the purpose of this section as a junk automobile and must be removed to
and stored upon the premises of a licensed junk yard or within an enclosed
garage until proper parts are available for complete restoration and repair
thereof.
§ 4-8.3. Additional Application Information; Fees. [1971 Code
§ 6-6.3]
In addition to the requirements of Subsection 4-1.2, the application for a
license shall contain each and all of the following:
In all instances wherein the worth, usability or operable condition of
an item alleged to be junk is set up by the defendant as a defense,
the burden shall be on the defendant or owner of the item in question
to prove its worth, usefulness or to establish the value of the item or
items.
a. Name and address of owner of the property and if a corporation, name
and address of the registered agent and the address of the principal
office of the corporation; also the application shall state the date on
which the business was commenced or is to be commenced.
b. The name and address of the person in whose name the license is to be
issued and if a corporation, the name and address of the registered
agent and also the address of the principal office and a certificate
stating the names and addresses of the officers of the corporation must
be filed with the licensing official.
c. A map of the property, prepared by a licensed land surveyor or engineer
showing the boundary lines of the property, driveways, location of all
buildings, with the portion proposed to be used as a junk yard clearly
delineated thereon. The location of, type of and height of all proposed
fences and gates, the location, size and type of construction of any
proposed buildings, names of all adjoining property owners. The map
§ 4-8.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-8.3
AO:282
§ 4-8.4. Fence Required. [1971 Code § 6-6.4]
All premises or land areas used or operated as a junk yard shall be
surrounded by a fence of a type to prevent entrance or accessibility to
the premises or areas of children or animals, and such as to deter the
entry of rodents. The fence shall include a fence along any portion of the
premises or land area facing a public road, which shall be a solid fence
or wall constructed of wood or masonry, not less than eight feet nor more
than 15 feet in height, which fence shall at all times be maintained in an
upright solid condition and kept stuccoed or painted in such manner as
to not tend to depreciate the property value of properties situated in the
area. The fence shall be provided with solid doors or gates at the entrance
ways for either pedestrian or vehicles entrance, which gates must be kept
closed and locked during such time as the junk yard is not open for business
and latched at all times when not being actually used for the purpose of
entrance or egress to or from the junk yard.
§ 4-8.5. Off-Street Parking. [1971 Code § 6-6.5]
Each junk yard must provide sufficient off-street parking for use of
customers of the junk yard as may be necessary to eliminate any dangerous
shall also indicate all residences within 200 feet of the boundary lines
of the property. The map may be a plotting rather than an actual survey.
d. The application shall contain a statement that the applicant if issued a
license, understands and agrees to be bound by all the provisions of this
section. The application shall state whether or not there is to be located
a residence on the premises to be licensed, and if so, the number of
persons to occupy the residence, and the distance between the
residence and any portion of the lands to be used as a junk yard.
e. The application shall state the methods the licensee will use to prevent
the accumulation or attraction of rats, rodents, and vermin insects, and
shall state the working hours during which work shall be permitted on
the premises, and the hours during which sales and deliveries to and
from the premises take place.
f. The application shall state the maximum height junk is to be kept on the
premises and the location of proposed roadways or walkways for access
to the piled junk.
g. The license application shall be accompanied by an application fee of
$25 to defray the cost of inspection of premises and review and
processing of application. Upon approval for licensing an additional fee
of $100 shall be paid for the license.
h. All licenses issued pursuant to this section shall expire on June 30th
following the date when so licensed, without regard to the time of year
when issued and the license fee fixed herein shall be the license fee for
all or any part of the calendar year during which license is issued.
§ 4-8.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-8.5
AO:283
traffic hazard or serious parking problems that may be apparent on
inspection of the plans submitted with the application and inspection of the
area where the yard is to be located. All driveways shall be situated in such
manner as to create the least possible interference with the flow of traffic
on the highways. One off-street parking space shall be provided for each
employee, plus a minimum of five customer off-street parking spaces.
§ 4-8.6. Storage. [1971 Code § 6-6.6]
The storage of junk in any junk yard shall be accomplished in such manner
as to prevent the accumulation of standing stagnant water which may tend
to be a harboring or breeding place for mosquitoes or other disease bearing
insects.
§ 4-8.7. Pollution Prohibited. [1971 Code § 6-6.7]
No junk yard shall be permitted to operate in such manner as to cause or
tend to cause pollution of any water source or navigable body of water or
stream; or in such manner as to interfere with the rights of the general
public in the use of any water course or navigable body of water or stream.
§ 4-8.8. Area Limitation. [1971 Code § 6-6.8]
No junk shall be permitted to be stored in any area of the premises licensed
as a junk yard, excepting in the area specifically specified and licensed as
such shown on the plan of the junk yard submitted and approved and shall
be clearly indicated upon the plan submitted with the application. No junk
shall be permitted to be stored on the junk yard premises in such manner
as to create unhealthful, unsanitary, unsafe, fire hazard or other condition
dangerous to the general public or to the users and invitees of the general
public using or having access to the premises in question.
§ 4-8.9. Storage Above Fence Prohibited. [1971 Code § 6-6.9]
No junk shall be piled to such height as to endanger the safety of persons
walking about in the junk yard or climbing about on the piles of junk and
in no event shall the junk be so stored as to create so unsightly a condition
as would tend to cause the depreciation of property values of those owning
adjacent or nearby property. In any event no junk shall be piled at a height
in excess of the height of the lowest portion of fence surrounding the
premises.
§ 4-8.10. Lavatory Facilities Required. [1971 Code § 6-6.10]
Each junk yard shall provide toilet and lavatory facilities open and available
to its employees and its customers at all times when the junk yard is open
for business. The lavatory facilities shall have both hot and cold water
available for washing at all times.
§ 4-8.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-8.11
AO:284
§ 4-8.11. Board of Health Approval Required. [1971 Code § 6-6.11;
Ord. No. 2003-24 § 3]
A condition of any junk yard license is that the operation of the junk yard
shall be in compliance with the Township Code or ordinances and the codes
or ordinances of the local Board of Health of the Township. Continuous
or multiple violations of the codes as well as violations of the provisions
of this licensing ordinance shall be grounds for revocation of any license
issued hereunder after notice and public hearing as otherwise set forth
herein. When the application for license is received and filed with the
Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning, he
shall cause the inspection of the premises subject of application by the
Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning,
Tax Assessor, Building Inspector, Fire Inspector, Housing Inspector and
Plumbing Inspector of the Township, each of whom shall report in writing
to the Township Committee as to the conditions apparent from inspection
of the premises affecting the health, building or housing conditions or
property values of the residents of the community and surrounding
properties. The report shall be filed within 15 days of the date of the
application. A copy of the report shall be made available to the applicant
upon his request prior to hearing on the application, which hearing shall be
held not less than 20 days nor more than 45 days after filing the application
and exhibits in proper form and payment of fees.
§ 4-8.12. Hearing Required. [1971 Code § 6-6.12]
All applications for junk yard license shall be filed at least 20 days prior
to the date fixed for hearing thereon and hearing thereon shall be held
within 45 days of the date of filing of the application and notice of the date
of hearing shall be given to the applicant at the address set forth in the
application. Notice of the hearing shall be served upon all property owners
within 200 feet by the same manner as is provided for service of notice for
application for a variance, as set forth under Section 40:55-44 of Revised
Statutes of New Jersey providing the manner of service of notices for
variance application, except that five days' notice shall be given rather than
10 days' notice set forth therein. The Township shall notify the applicant by
certified mail of the date of hearing not less than 10 days before the date
fixed for the date of hearing.
§ 4-8.13. Grant of License. [1971 Code § 6-6.13]
No junk yard license shall be issued unless it appears that the license may
be issued without substantial detriment to the health, morals, safety or
welfare of the community and unless it be shown that the issuance of the
license will not cause undue depreciation of the value of the surrounding
properties and in no event shall a license for a junk yard be issued unless
it shall appear to be in the best interest of the community to permit the
operation of a junk yard at the location in question.
§ 4-8.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-8.14
AO:285
§ 4-8.14. Fire Precautions. [1971 Code § 6-6.14]
No license for operation of a junk yard shall be granted unless the applicant
shows on his application that any highly flammable material such as oils,
gasoline or bottled gases are to be stored, used or conducted in such place
and in such manner as to not constitute a fire, safety or health hazard.
§ 4-8.15. License Renewals. [1971 Code § 6-6.15]
Any renewal application may simply state that no changes in the terms,
plans or conditions of the prior license are to be made. In such case no
notice or public hearing shall be required for renewal. If changes as to the
plans, conditions or terms set forth in the original license or application are
to be made, the applicant shall furnish all required exhibits and information
the same as for a new application and arrange for notice of hearing thereon
as though for a new license.
§ 4-8.16. Hearing Procedures. [1971 Code § 4-8.17; Ord. No.
2003-24 § 4]
a. The Township Manager shall set a date for hearing pursuant to this
section and notify the applicant of the date not less than 10 days before
date of the hearing and the applicant shall serve the required notices as
otherwise set forth in this section.
b. A public hearing shall be held, at which time the applicant, objectors
and any other persons wishing to be heard upon the application shall be
given an opportunity to be heard before the Township Committee. The
hearing shall not be bound by the strict rules of evidence, but all
testimony shall be taken under oath and with the right of crossexamination
of all witnesses by the applicant and by the Township
Counsel on behalf of the Township Committee.
c. The Township Committee shall within 15 days thereafter deliver its
findings in writing to the applicant together with the reasons therefor in
the form of a resolution of the Township Committee passed at a regular
or special meeting by a majority vote of a quorum of the Township
Committee present at the regular or special meeting.
d. If the finding of the Township Committee is that a license shall issue to
the applicant, the resolution shall state all terms and conditions upon
which the license shall issue and all ordered or stipulated boundary
lines, driveways, walkways, limitations of areas in which junk may be
stored, and additions or changes to be made in the terms shown on the
plans submitted with the application shall be clearly marked on at least
three copies of the plan. One copy shall be delivered to the applicant
and two copies shall be retained by the Township. All copies shall bear
the signature of the Township Clerk and Department Head of the
Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning. One copy shall be
retained by the Township Clerk and one by the Department of Code
Enforcement and Zoning.
§ 4-8.14 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-8.16
AO:286
§ 4-9. DEALERS OF PRECIOUS METALS AND OTHER
SECONDHAND GOODS.29
§ 4-9.1. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. No. 2015-17]
The purpose and intent of this section is to assist law enforcement officials
and victims of crime in recovering stolen precious metals and other
secondhand goods by requiring minimum identification, reporting,
maintenance and distribution criteria for licensed dealers in these goods.
No person shall use, exercise, or carry on the business, trade, or occupation
of the buying, selling, or pawning of precious metals or other secondhand
goods without complying with the requirements of this section in the exact
manner described herein.
§ 4-9.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2015-17]
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — Means a current valid New Jersey
Driver's License or Identification Card, a current valid photo driver's license
issued by another US state, a valid United States Passport, or other
verifiable US Government issued identification, which will be recorded on
the receipt retained by the dealer and subsequently forwarded to the local
Police Department on request.
DEALER — Means any person, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation, or other entity who, either wholly or in part, engages in or
operates any of the following trades or businesses: the buying for purposes
of resale of precious metals, jewelry, or other secondhand goods as defined
herein; pawnbrokers as defined herein; "Dealer" shall not mean itinerant
businesses or transient buyers as defined herein.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — Means a dealer who conducts business
intermittently within the municipality or at varying locations.
MUNICIPAL CLERK — Means the statutory officer whose duties are defined
in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 and may refer to the duly appointed clerk of the "city,"
"town," "township," "village," or "borough."
PAWNBROKER — Means any person, partnership, association or
corporation: lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other
than choses in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness;
purchasing personal property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated
price; or doing business as furniture storage warehousemen and lending
money on goods, wares or merchandise pledged or deposited as collateral
security.
e. The applicant by the acceptance of a license shall agree to be bound by
the conditions set forth in the resolution and as shown on the plans as
conditions for the location, maintenance and operation of the junk yard.
29.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 2015-17 repealed and replaced § 4-9 in entirety.
§ 4-8.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-9.2
AO:287
PRECIOUS METALS — Means gold, silver, platinum, palladium, and their
alloys as defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.
PUBLIC — Means individuals and retail sellers, not to include wholesale
transactions or transactions between other merchants.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Means every transaction conducted
between a dealer and a member of the public in which precious metals,
jewelry, or any other secondhand goods as defined herein are purchased or
pawned.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Means used goods such as antiques, gold, silver,
platinum, or other precious metals, jewelry, coins, gemstones, gift cards,
any tools, telephones, typewriters, word processors, GPS devices,
computers, computer hardware and software, television sets, radios, record
or stereo sets, electronic devices, musical instruments, sporting goods,
automotive equipment, collectibles, game cartridges, DVDs, CDs, and other
electronically recorded material, firearms, cameras and camera equipment,
video equipment, furniture, clothing, and other valuable articles. For the
purposes of this section, secondhand goods shall not include goods
transacted in the following manner: i) judicial sales or sales by executors or
administrators; ii) occasional or auction sales of household goods sold from
private homes; iii) auctions of real estate; iv) the occasional sale, purchase,
or exchange of coins or stamps by a person at his permanent residence or
in any municipally owned building who is engaged in the hobby of collecting
coins or stamps and who does not solicit the sale, purchase, or exchange
of such coins or stamps to or from the general public by billboard, sign,
handbill, newspaper, magazine, radio, television, or other form of printed or
electronic advertising.
SELLER — Means a member of the public who sells or pawns used goods
such as precious metal, jewelry, or other secondhand goods to a dealer.
TRANSIENT BUYER — Means any person, partnership, association or
corporation, who has not been in a registered retail business continuously
for at least six months at any location in the Township of Lakewood.
§ 4-9.3. License Requirement for Dealers. [Ord. No. 2015-17]
No person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity shall engage in the business of buying, selling, or pawning of precious
metals or other secondhand goods, as defined above, within the jurisdiction
of the Township of Lakewood, without having first obtained a license
therefor from the Municipal Clerk, which license shall bear a number issued
by the Municipal Clerk. The application for a license to the Municipal Clerk
shall set forth the name, date of birth, and address of the dealer, whether or
not he or she is a citizen of the United States, and whether or not he or she
has ever been convicted of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or
municipal ordinance violation(s), and the date(s) thereof. Advertising in any
print or electronic media or by sign that any of those articles or secondhand
goods referred to in Subsection 4-9.2 above are being bought in any location
within the municipality shall constitute engaging in business as a dealer
§ 4-9.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-9.3
AO:288
of secondhand goods for purposes of this section. No person, partnership,
limited liability company, corporation or other entity shall place or cause to
be placed any advertisement for purchase of such articles or goods without
stating in the advertising the license number issued to a person or entity
by the municipality. In any print advertisement, the license number shall
appear in type no smaller than eight point in the lower-right-hand corner
of the advertisement. In any advertisement in electronic media, the license
number shall be visually or audibly stated. Failure to state or indicate the
license number shall be a violation of this section and shall be subject to the
penalties established in Subsection 4-9.9.
§ 4-9.4. Application Process for Dealers; Approval or Denial. [Ord.
No. 2015-17]
a. Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this section, the
Municipal Clerk shall refer such application to the Chief of Police, who
shall make an investigation of the prospective licensee, pursuant to this
section for the purpose of determining the suitability of the applicant
for licensing. The investigation shall include, but shall not be limited to
the following:
1. The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of those articles or goods referred to in Subsection 4-9.2
above, although nothing in this section shall be construed to
warrant denial of a license solely on the basis of lack of experience;
2. The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which shall be made among credible sources, which sources shall
be disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license;
3. Any criminal record of the applicant including any past convictions
for any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or municipal
ordinance violation(s) within this or any other jurisdiction. The
Chief of Police may, as part of the application process, require a
fingerprint criminal background check through the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, Criminal Justice Information Services Division,
which may require an additional fee from the applicant.
4. The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of precious metal or
other secondhand goods, and other factors bearing on whether the
licensed business will be of a fixed and permanent nature. This
section shall be construed to require the denial of any license solely
on the grounds that the business is not from a fixed location or that
the applicant is a transient buyer or itinerant business.
b. The Chief of Police shall complete any investigation pursuant to this
section within 30 days of the submission of the application to the
Municipal Clerk, fully completed by the applicant. If a criminal record
§ 4-9.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-9.4
AO:289
§ 4-9.5. Identification of Seller; Record-keeping Requirements for
Dealers. [Ord. No. 2015-17]
For every reportable transaction between a dealer and the public, the
dealer shall be required to do as follows:
check has been requested within the thirty-day period and has not
been received by the Chief of Police within that period, the Chief of
Police may, if all other factors are satisfactory, recommend a conditional
issuance of the license subject to the finding regarding criminal record.
c. The Chief of Police shall, upon completion of the investigation,
recommend "grant" or "denial" of the license to the Municipal Clerk,
who shall grant or deny the license. Any recommendation of the Chief of
Police shall be in writing and, in the case of a recommendation of
denial, shall state fully and specifically the reasons for said
recommendation. If the Municipal Clerk accepts the recommendation
of the Chief of Police to deny any license, the applicant shall be notified
in writing within 10 days of such denial and the Clerk shall forward to
the applicant a statement of the reason or reasons for such denial.
d. Grounds for recommending denial of license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to a dealer in secondhand goods. A license may be denied if the
investigation reveals a conviction of the applicant or any of its principal
officers or employees of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s) in
which deceit or misrepresentation is an element; or any conviction of
any crime(s), disorderly persons offense involving theft or the receiving
of stolen goods, regardless of whether the applicant was a principal,
accessory before the fact, after the fact, or a co-conspirator; or any
prior municipal ordinance violation(s) by the applicant or any of its
principal officers or employees in this or any other jurisdiction. A
license may be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate an ability to
satisfactorily comply with the electronic reporting requirements
specified in Subsection 4-9.5, the retention and inspection
requirements of Subsection 4-9.6, or any other portion of this section.
Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Chief of Police, the
Municipal Clerk shall issue or deny the license accordingly, contingent
upon the receipt of a bond as required by Subsection 4-9.7 of this
section.
e. Whenever any application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be
entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel appointed by the Chief
of Police, at which time the applicant shall be permitted to introduce
such evidence as may be deemed relevant to such denial. Any applicant
exercising the right to appeal must file a written notice of appeal within
10 days of receiving written notice of denial of a license to act as a
dealer of secondhand goods.
f. No license shall be assignable by the dealer.
§ 4-9.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-9.5
AO:290
a. Require of each person selling or pawning precious metals or other
secondhand goods acceptable identification as defined above in
Subsection 4-9.2.
b. Require each seller to execute a "Declaration of Ownership," which
shall contain the following certification: "My signature confirms that I
am the sole legal owner of and am legally authorized to sell the goods
being sold. By signing below I certify that I did not obtain and do not
possess the identified goods through unlawful means. I am the full age
of eighteen years and the identification presented is valid and correct."
c. Record and issue to each person selling or pawning such goods on a
sequentially numbered receipt:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the purchaser,
including the clerk or employee of the licensee making the
purchase;
2. The name, address, date of birth, and telephone number of the
seller or sellers;
3. A photographed recording of the seller in a format acceptable to
the Chief of Police, along with a physical description of the seller,
including height and weight (approximate), hair color, eye color,
facial hair, if any, etc.;
4. A photographed recording of the seller's presented acceptable
identification, as set forth in Subsection 4-9.2, in a format
acceptable by the Chief of Police;
5. A photographed recording of all items sold in a format acceptable
by the Chief of Police. When photographing, all items must be
positioned in a manner that makes them readily and easily
identifiable. Items should not be grouped together when
photographing or imaging. Each item should have its own
photograph;
6. The receipt number;
7. A detailed, legible description of the item(s) and the manufacturer
and model of the item(s) if known; in the case of jewelry, the
descriptions must include style, length, color, design, and stones, if
any; any identifying marks, including numbers, dates, sizes,
shapes, initials, names, monograms, social security numbers
engraved thereon, serial numbers, series numbers, or any other
information, which sets apart the particular object from others of
like kind;
8. The price paid for the purchase or pawn of the item(s);
(a) If precious metals, the net weight in terms of pounds Troy,
pennyweight (Troy) or kilograms/grams; fineness in terms of
§ 4-9.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-9.5
AO:291
§ 4-9.6. Retention; Revocation; Other Restrictions. [Ord. No.
2015-17]
karats for gold, and sterling or coin for silver, in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 51:5-1, N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.;
9. The time and date of the transaction.
d. The information outlined in Subsection c above, must additionally be
electronically documented through the use of an electronic database
system authorized by the Chief of Police. Installation and training in this
software will be made mandatory as of the effective date of this section
and licensing will be conditional upon compliance with proper use of
the system as described herein. These records shall be subject to the
inspection of any authorized Police Officer or any sworn law
enforcement officer acting in the performance of their duty as set forth
in Subsection f below. Through the use of applicably required computer
equipment, and using the electronic format approved by the Chief of
Police, every dealer shall enter all reportable transactions into the
electronic database by the end of the close of business on the same date
as the purchase or receipt of property for pawn or consignment. The
information entered must contain all pertinent information outlined in
Subsection c above.
e. In the event of a database failure, or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police within 24 hours from the
date of purchase. In the event that paper forms are used, the dealer is
responsible to enter all transaction information set forth in Subsection c
above into the database as soon as possible upon the dealer's
equipment being repaired or replaced, or the database coming back
into service. Failure by the dealer to properly maintain computer
equipment in a reasonable fashion, or failure by the dealer to replace
faulty computer equipment, may result in the dealer being cited for a
violation of this section and subsequently being subject to the penalties
for doing so including revocation of the dealer's license as described in
Subsection 4-9.6.
f. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the Police Department to examine any database, book,
ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to the reportable
transactions of precious metals or other secondhand goods, as well as
the articles purchased or received and, where necessary, relinquish
custody of those articles as provided in Subsection 4-9.6.
a. All precious metals and other secondhand goods purchased, received
for pawn, or received for consignment as described above, are to be
made available for inspection by the Chief of Police or designee thereof
at the designated business address for a period of at least 10 business
days from the date the transaction information is actually reported to
§ 4-9.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-9.6
AO:292
the Chief of Police in the approved manner described above in
Subsection 4-9.5 including jewelry, which must be maintained for at
least 10 business days or for the statutory period provided in N.J.S.A.
2C:21-36(d). All precious metal or other secondhand goods subject
to inspection must remain in the same condition as when purchased
or received for pawn and shall not be sold, disposed of, changed,
modified, or melted by the dealer until the seven-day retention period
has expired. [Amended 10-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-43]
b. Upon probable cause that goods held by a dealer are stolen, and
providing that the seller signed the mandatory statement required by
Subsection 4-9.5b upon the sale of those goods, a law enforcement
officer with jurisdiction should charge the seller with theft by deception
under N.J.S.A. 2C:20-4 on behalf of the dealer, who shall be considered
the "victim" of the offense for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3. The
officer shall seize the goods, provide the dealer with a receipt, and issue
a criminal complaint against the seller for theft by deception and any
other criminal charges for which the officer has probable cause that the
seller has committed. If convicted of theft by deception and if so found
by an order of a court of valid jurisdiction, the seller will be responsible
for providing restitution to the dealer under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-2 for the
amount paid by the dealer to the seller for the stolen goods.
c. If market conditions would create a hardship on the dealer by holding
precious metals or other secondhand goods for such period, the dealer
may present the property to the Chief of Police in order that it may be
photographed and, if deemed necessary by the Chief of Police, an
investigation may be implemented. The Chief of Police shall have the
authority to grant the dealer a waiver of the requirement under this
section.
d. In addition to all other reporting requirements, every dealer shall
maintain for at least five years, a written record of all purchases of
precious metals and other secondhand goods in the form prescribed in
Subsection 4-9.5c.
e. No dealer shall purchase any item covered by this section from any
person under the age of 18 or in the absence of providing prior
notification of such purchase to the Chief of Police or business designee
identifying the individual from whom such purchase is to be made and
the item to be purchased.
f. Suspension. The Chief of Police or a designee thereof is hereby
empowered to temporarily suspend for cause any dealer's license and
rights to operate there under. This penalty shall be in addition to any
fines and penalties the dealer may incur pursuant to Subsection 4-9.9 of
this section.
1. Grounds for Suspension. The following shall constitute grounds for
suspension: violation of any provisions of this section, including
failure to comply with any training or fees associated with the
§ 4-9.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-9.6
AO:293
electronic database software system in use by the municipality;
violation of any other statute, regulation, or local ordinance; or any
other illegal, improper, or fraudulent activity.
2. Procedure for Suspension. Upon determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a suspension is warranted, the Chief of
Police or a designee thereof shall issue a written notice of
suspension of license to the offending dealer and to the Municipal
Clerk, which shall set forth the grounds for the suspension and
notify the dealer of his or her right to appeal pursuant to
Subsection h. A temporary suspension shall issue immediately,
pending the outcome of any appeal taken. Suspended dealers must
immediately cease engaging in the business of purchasing for
resale, receiving for pawn, and/or selling of precious metals and/or
other secondhand goods in the municipality until reinstatement.
3. Reinstatement. Suspended dealers may be reinstated only when
the grounds leading to the suspension have, in the determination of
the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee, been cured, corrected,
or appropriately rectified; or if reinstatement is deemed
appropriate by the three-person panel appointed by the Chief of
Police, upon the timely filing of an appeal as provided in Subsection
h.
g. Revocation. A license issued under this section may be revoked by the
Municipal Clerk at the direction of the Municipal Manager upon written
recommendation from the Chief of Police or the Chief’s designee that
the dealer is no longer qualified, capable or competent to comply with
the requirements of this section. This penalty shall be in addition to any
fines and penalties the dealer may incur under Subsection 4-9.9.
[Amended 10-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-43]
1. Grounds for Revocation. The following shall constitute grounds for
revocation: a third violation under this section; a second violation
under this section less than one year after an earlier violation
under this section; conviction for a criminal offense within this or
any jurisdiction; or multiple violations of any other regulations or
local ordinances within this or any jurisdiction.
2. Procedure for Revocation. Upon a determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a revocation is warranted, the Chief of
Police of the Chief's designee shall so report to the Municipal Clerk
in writing. A temporary suspension will immediately and
automatically issue, if one is not already in effect, pending the
outcome of the charge. A three-person panel, appointed by the
Chief of Police, shall review the stated grounds for revocation and
the panel shall issue an appropriate disposition of either
suspension, revocation, or reinstatement. If the panel determines
that revocation is the appropriate disposition, it shall set forth the
grounds for the same in writing in the form of a notice of
revocation, which shall be provided to the dealer. The notice shall
§ 4-9.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-9.6
AO:294
§ 4-9.7. Bond. [Ord. No. 2015-17]
Each dealer covered under this section shall deliver a bond to the Municipal
Clerk executed by the applicant as principal and executed by a surety
company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of New
Jersey as surety. The bond shall be subject to review and approval by the
Municipal Attorney, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A: 9-139, and shall be in the
penal sum of $10,000, conditioned for the due and proper observance of
and compliance with the provisions and requirements of all ordinances of
the municipality in force or which may be adopted respecting the conduct of
this business and conditioned also that the bond shall be and remain for the
benefit of any person or persons who shall have received judgment against
the dealer licensed under this chapter, which damage shall be established
by a judgment of a court of proper jurisdiction. Said bond shall contain
the following language: "The obligation of this bond shall, in addition to
the [party municipality], be and remain for the benefit of any person who
shall obtain a judgment against obligor as a result of damage sustained in
operation pursuant to any license granted under this chapter." Said bond
shall be kept for a minimum of one year from the date of issuance of license
and must be renewed annually along with the license.
§ 4-9.8. Fees; Period of License Validity. [Ord. No. 2015-17]
A nonrefundable fee for initial application and license for a pawnbroker or a
dealer in precious metals or other secondhand goods, as covered under this
section, is $300. The annual renewal fee for a license is $250. These fees are
separate from and in addition to any fees the dealer must pay in relation to
the mandatory electronic database system designated by the Chief of Police,
as provided by Subsection 4-9.5d of this section. Payments are to be made
advise the dealer of the right to appeal. If the panel determines
that suspension is the appropriate disposition, it shall provide the
dealer with a notice of suspension that shall advise the dealer of the
right to appeal. Following revocation, the dealer must relinquish
his or her license and must immediately and indefinitely cease
operating as a dealer of precious metals or other secondhand goods
within the municipality.
h. Appeal. Any applicant wishing to appeal an issuance of a suspension or
revocation shall be entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel,
appointed by the Chief of Police, at which time the applicant shall be
permitted to introduce such evidence as may be deemed relevant to
such suspension or revocation. Any applicant exercising the right to
appeal must file a written notice of appeal within 10 days of receiving
written notice of revocation or suspension of license.
i. A dealer shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business, provided that he or she notifies the Municipal Clerk, in
writing, of the street address of said new location.
§ 4-9.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-9.8
AO:295
in the manner directed by the Municipal Clerk. A license is valid for a oneyear
period from the date of its issuance.
§ 4-9.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2015-17]
Violation of any provision of this section by any dealer shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not in excess of the limitations of N.J.S.A.
40:49-5 or by a term of imprisonment or a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days in addition to a suspension or revocation of operating
license as provided in Subsection 4-9.6f and g above. Each and every
violation shall be considered a separate violation. Each violation shall result
in an additional suspension period. Any person who is found guilty of
violating the provisions of this section within one year of the date of a
previous violation and who was fined for the previous violation may be
sentenced by the court to an additional fine as a repeat offender and,
in addition, may be subject to revocation proceedings as provided in
Subsection 4-9.6g. The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender shall
not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided herein,
and same shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the
violation of this section.
§ 4-9.10. Time Limit for Conformance; Repealer; Severability. [Ord.
No. 2015-17]
§ 4-10. DEALERS IN SCRAP METAL.
§ 4-10.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2015-5]
The purpose of this section is as follows:
a. Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity engaging in the business of a pawnbroker, or a dealer in precious
metals or other secondhand goods shall conform to the provisions of
this section within 90 days following the effective date of this section.
b. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
c. Nothing contained in this section is intended to replace any pre-existing
statutory requirements governing pawnbrokers, as in N.J.S.A. 45:22-1
et seq., the sale of precious metals as in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq., the sale
of secondhand jewelry as in N.J.S.A. 2C:21-36 et seq., or any other
statutory provision regarding any subject matter discussed herein.
d. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ 4-9.8 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-10.1
AO:296
§ 4-10.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2015-5]
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — Means a current valid New Jersey
Driver's License or Identification Card, a current valid photo driver's license
issued by another US state, a valid United States Passport, or other
verifiable US Government issued identification, which will be recorded on
the receipt retained by the dealer and subsequently forwarded to the local
police department on request.
DEALER — Means any person, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation, or other entity who, either wholly or in part, engages in or
operates a scrap metal business involving the buying and/or selling of
scrap metal as defined herein, including itinerant businesses, and transient
buyers as defined herein.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — Means any scrap metal dealer who conducts
business intermittently within the municipality or at varying locations.
MUNICIPAL CLERK — Means the statutory officer whose duties are defined
in N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 and may refer to the duly appointed clerk of the "city,"
"town," "township," "village," or "borough."
PUBLIC — Means individuals and retail sellers, not to include wholesale
transactions or transactions between other merchants.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Means every transaction conducted
between a dealer and a member of the public in which scrap metal is
purchased or pawned.
SCRAP METAL — Means used, discarded, or previously owned items that
consist predominantly of ferrous metals, aluminum, brass, copper, lead,
chromium, tin, nickel, or alloys.
SCRAP METAL BUSINESS — Means a commercial establishment, which, as
one of its principal business purposes, purchases scrap metal for purposes
of resale or processing including transient buyers of scrap metal and
itinerant businesses, as defined herein.
SELLER — Means a member of the public who sells scrap metal to a dealer.
TRANSIENT BUYER — Means an operator of a scrap metal business, as
defined herein, who has not been in the scrap metal business continuously
for at least six months at any address in the municipality where the dealer
is required to register or who intends to close out or discontinue the scrap
metal business within six months.
a. The purpose of this section is to establish a unified electronic reporting
system for dealers in scrap metal.
b. To aid law enforcement in recovering scrap metal and to establish
distribution criteria for licensed dealers.
§ 4-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-10.3
AO:297
§ 4-10.3. License Requirement for Dealers. [Ord. No. 2015-5]
No person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity shall engage in a scrap metal business, as defined above, within
the jurisdiction of the municipality, without having first obtained a license
therefor from the Municipal Clerk, which license shall bear a number issued
by the Municipal Clerk. The application for a license to the Municipal Clerk
shall set forth the name, date of birth, and address of the dealer, whether or
not he or she is a citizen of the United States, and whether or not he or she
has ever been convicted of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or
municipal ordinance violation(s), and the date(s) thereof. Advertising in any
print or electronic media or by sign regarding the purchase of scrap metal
at any location within the municipality shall constitute engaging in business
as a dealer of scrap metal within the jurisdiction of the municipality for
purposes of this section. No person, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation or other entity shall place or cause to be placed any
advertisement for purchase of such item(s) without stating in the
advertising the license number issued to a person or entity by the
municipality. In any print advertisement, the license number shall appear
in type no smaller than eight point in the lower-right-hand corner of the
advertisement. In any advertisement in electronic media, the license
number shall be visually or audibly stated. Failure to state or indicate the
license number shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to
the penalties established in Subsection 4-10.9.
§ 4-10.4. Application Process for Dealers; Approval or Denial. [Ord.
No. 2015-5]
a. Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this section, the
Municipal Clerk shall refer such application to the Chief of Police, who
shall make an investigation of the prospective licensee, pursuant to this
section for the purpose of determining the suitability of the applicant
for licensing. The investigation shall include, but shall not be limited to
the following:
1. The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of scrap metal, although nothing in this section shall be
construed to warrant denial of a license solely on the basis of lack
of experience;
2. The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which shall be made among credible sources, which sources shall
be disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license;
3. Any criminal record of the applicant including any past convictions
for any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or municipal
ordinance violation(s) within this or any other jurisdiction. The
Chief of Police may, as part of the application process, require a
fingerprint criminal background check through the Federal Bureau
of Investigation, Criminal Justice Information Services Division,
which may require an additional fee from the applicant.
§ 4-10.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-10.4
AO:298
4. The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of scrap metal, and
other factors bearing on whether the licensed business will be of a
fixed and permanent nature. This section shall not be construed to
require denial of any license solely on the grounds that the
business is not from a fixed location or that the applicant is a
transient buyer or itinerant business, however applicants who fall
under the category of a transient buyer or itinerant business must
state with specificity on the license application the business
address where transaction records required by Subsection 4-10.6d
of this section will be stored as well as the location where scrap
metal goods purchased will be retained during the mandatory
inspection period required under Subsection 4-10.6a.
b. The Chief of Police shall complete any investigation pursuant to this
section within 30 days of the submission of the application to the
Municipal Clerk, fully completed by the applicant. If a criminal record
check has been requested within the thirty-day period and has not been
received by the Chief of Police within that period, the Chief of Police
may, if all other factors are satisfactory, recommend a conditional
issuance of the license subject to the finding regarding criminal record.
c. The Chief of Police shall, upon completion of the investigation,
recommend "grant" or "denial" of the license to the Municipal Clerk,
who shall grant or deny the license. Any recommendation of the Chief of
Police shall be in writing and, in the case of a recommendation of
denial, shall state fully and specifically the reasons for said
recommendation. If the Municipal Clerk accepts the recommendation
of the Chief of Police to deny any license, the applicant shall be notified
in writing within 10 days of such denial and the Clerk shall forward to
the applicant a statement of the reason or reasons for such denial.
d. Grounds for recommending denial of license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to a scrap metal business. A license may be denied if the
investigation reveals a conviction of the applicant or any of its principal
officers or employees of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s) in
which deceit or misrepresentation is an element; or any conviction of
any crime(s), disorderly persons offense involving theft or the receiving
of stolen goods, regardless of whether the applicant was a principal,
accessory before the fact, after the fact, or a co-conspirator; or any
prior municipal ordinance violation(s) by the applicant or any of its
principal officers or employees in this or any other jurisdiction. A
license may be denied if the applicant fails to demonstrate an ability to
satisfactorily comply with the electronic reporting requirements
specified in Subsection 4-10.5, the retention and inspection
requirements of Subsection 4-10.6, or any other portion of this section.
§ 4-10.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-10.4
AO:299
§ 4-10.5. Identification of Seller; Record-keeping Requirements for
Dealers. [Ord. No. 2015-5]
For every reportable transaction between a dealer and the public, the
dealer shall be required to do as follows:
Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Chief of Police, the
Municipal Clerk shall issue or deny the license accordingly, contingent
upon the receipt of a bond as required by 4-10.7 of this section.
e. Whenever any application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be
entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel appointed by the Chief
of Police, at which time the applicant shall be permitted to introduce
such evidence as may be deemed relevant to such denial. Any applicant
exercising the right to appeal must file a written notice of appeal within
10 days of receiving written notice of denial of a license to act as a
scrap metal business.
f. No license shall be assignable by the dealer.
a. Require of each member of the public selling scrap metal acceptable
identification as defined above in Subsection 4-10.2.
b. Require each seller to execute a "Declaration of Ownership," which
shall contain the following certification: "My signature confirms that I
am the sole legal owner of and am legally authorized to sell the goods
being sold. By signing below I certify that I did not obtain and do not
possess the identified goods through unlawful means. I am the full age
of eighteen years and the identification presented is valid and correct."
c. Record and issue to each person selling scrap metal on a sequentially
numbered receipt:
1. The name, address, and telephone number of the purchaser,
including the clerk or employee of the licensee making the
purchase;
2. The name, address, date of birth, and telephone number of the
seller or sellers;
3. A photographed recording of the seller in a format acceptable to
the Chief of Police, along with a physical description of the seller,
including height and weight (approximate), hair color, eye color,
facial hair, if any, etc.;
4. A photographed recording of the seller's presented acceptable
identification, as set forth in Subsection 9-10.2, in a format
acceptable to the Chief of Police;
5. A photographed recording of all items sold in a format acceptable
to the Chief of Police;
6. The receipt number;
§ 4-10.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-10.5
AO:300
7. A full description of the item(s) purchased, including but not
limited to the manufacturer, type, amount, form, model, any
identifying marks, numbers, dates, sizes, shapes, initials,
monograms, and serial numbers;
8. The price paid for the item(s);
9. The make, model and license plate of the motor vehicle delivering
the scrap metal;
10. The time and date of the transaction.
d. The information outlined in Subsection c above must additionally be
documented through the use of an electronic database software system
authorized by the Chief of Police. Installation and training in this
software will be made mandatory as of the effective date of this section
and licensing will be conditional upon compliance with proper use of
the system as described herein. These records shall be subject to the
inspection of any authorized Police Officer or any sworn law
enforcement officer acting in the performance of their duty as set forth
in Subsection f below. Through the use of applicably required computer
equipment, and using the electronic format approved by the Chief of
Police, every dealer shall enter all reportable transactions into the
electronic database by the end of the close of business on the same date
as the purchase. The information entered must contain all pertinent
information outlined in Subsection c above.
e. In the event of a database failure, or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police within twenty-four hours
from the date of purchase. In the event that paper forms are used, the
dealer is responsible to enter all transaction information set forth in
Subsection c above into the database as soon as possible upon the
dealer's equipment being repaired or replaced, or the database coming
back into service. Failure by the dealer to properly maintain computer
equipment in a reasonable fashion, or failure by the dealer to replace
faulty computer equipment, may result in the dealer being cited for a
violation of this chapter and subsequently being subject to the penalties
for doing so including revocation of the dealer's license as described in
Subsection 4-10.6.
f. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the Police Department to examine any database, book,
ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to the reportable
transactions of scrap metal as well as the articles purchased and, where
necessary, relinquish custody of those articles as provided in
Subsection 4-10.6. Itinerant businesses and transient buyers will be
responsible for notifying the Chief of Police of the address where
records and articles will be stored.
§ 4-10.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-10.5
AO:301
§ 4-10.6. Retention; Suspension and Revocation; Other Restrictions.
[Ord. No. 2015-5]
g. For all reportable transactions between a dealer and a member of the
public, the dealer may only accept delivery of scrap metal for purchase
by motor vehicle and the license plate of the motor vehicle must be
recorded as provided in Subsection c above.
h. No scrap metal business shall, except as provided in Subsection i below,
purchase:
1. Any metal marked with identification of a telephone, cable, electric,
water, other public utility, or other government entity;
2. Any utility access or water meter cover;
3. Any street light pole or fixture;
4. Any road or bridge guard rail;
5. An highway or street sign, traffic directional or control sign, or
light signal;
6. Any metal beer keg that is clearly marked as being the property of
the beer manufacturer;
7. Any historical marker, grave marker, or burial vase;
8. Any central air conditioner evaporator coils or condensers or
catalytic converters that are not attached to a vehicle; or
9. Any metal bleachers or benches.
i. The provisions of Subsection h shall not apply to purchases of scrap
metal from entities who manage such metal in the ordinary course of
business. These entities include manufacturing, industrial, government,
contractor, individual, or other commercial vendors or scrap metal
businesses that generate or purchase or process scrap metal in the
ordinary course of business.
a. All scrap metal purchased by a dealer in a reportable transaction are to
be made available for inspection by the Chief of Police or designee
thereof at the designated business address for a period of at least seven
calendar days from the date the transaction information is actually
reported to the Chief of Police in the approved manner described above
in Subsection 4-10.5. All scrap metal subject to inspection must remain
in the same condition as when purchased and shall not be sold,
disposed of, changed, modified, or melted by the dealer until the sevenday
retention period has expired. Itinerant businesses and transient
buyers will be responsible for notifying the Chief of Police of the
location where the purchased scrap metal is being held.
§ 4-10.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-10.6
AO:302
b. Upon probable cause that goods held by a dealer are stolen, and
providing that the seller signed the mandatory statement required by
Subsection 4-10.5b upon the sale of those goods, a law enforcement
officer with jurisdiction should charge the seller with theft by deception
under N.J.S.A. 2C:20-4 on behalf of the dealer, who shall be considered
the "victim" of the offense for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3. The
officer shall seize the goods, provide the dealer with a receipt, and issue
a criminal complaint against the seller for theft by deception and any
other criminal charges for which the officer has probable cause that the
seller has committed. If convicted of theft by deception and if so found
by an order of a court of valid jurisdiction, the seller will be responsible
for providing restitution to the dealer under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-2 for the
amount paid by the dealer to the seller for the stolen goods.
c. If market conditions would create a hardship on the dealer by holding
scrap metal for such period, the dealer may present the property to the
Chief of Police in order that it may be photographed and, if deemed
necessary by the Chief of Police, an investigation may be implemented.
The Chief of Police shall have the authority to grant the dealer a waiver
of the requirement under this section.
d. In addition to all other reporting requirements, every dealer shall
maintain for at least five years, a written record of all purchases of
scrap metal in the manner prescribed in Subsection 4-10.5c.
e. No dealer shall purchase any item covered by this section from any
person under the age of 18 or in the absence of providing prior
notification of such purchase to the Chief of Police or business designee
identifying the individual from whom such purchase is to be made and
the item to be purchased.
f. Suspension. The Chief of Police or a designee thereof is hereby
empowered to temporarily suspend for cause any dealer's license and
rights to operate thereunder. This penalty shall be in addition to any
fines and penalties the dealer may incur pursuant to Subsection 4-10.9
of this section.
1. Grounds for Suspension. The following shall constitute grounds for
suspension: violation of any provisions of this section, including
failure to comply with any training or fees associated with the
electronic database software system in use by the municipality;
violation of any other statute, regulation, or local ordinance; or any
other illegal, improper, or fraudulent activity.
2. Procedure for Suspension. Upon determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a suspension is warranted, the Chief of
Police or a designee thereof shall issue a written notice of
suspension of license to the offending dealer and to the Municipal
Clerk, which shall set forth the grounds for the suspension and
notify the dealer of his or her right to appeal, pursuant to
Subsection h. A temporary suspension shall issue immediately,
§ 4-10.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-10.6
AO:303
pending the outcome of any appeal taken. Suspended dealers must
immediately cease all purchasing and/or selling of scrap metal in
the municipality until reinstatement.
3. Reinstatement. Suspended dealers may be reinstated only when
the grounds leading to the suspension have, in the determination of
the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee, been cured, corrected,
or appropriately rectified; or if reinstatement is deemed
appropriate by the three-person panel appointed by the Chief of
Police, upon the timely filing of an appeal as provided in Subsection
h.
g. Revocation. A license issued under this section may be revoked by the
Municipal Clerk upon written recommendation from the Chief of Police
or the Chief's designee that the dealer is no longer qualified, capable or
competent to comply with the requirements of this section. This penalty
shall be in addition to any fines and penalties the dealer may incur
under Subsection 4-10.9.
1. Grounds for Revocation. The following shall constitute grounds for
revocation: a third violation under this section; a second violation
under this section less than one year after an earlier violation
under this section; conviction for a criminal offense within this or
any jurisdiction; or multiple violations of any regulations or local
ordinances within this or any jurisdiction.
2. Procedure for Revocation. Upon a determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a revocation is warranted, the Chief of
Police or the Chief's designee shall so report to the Municipal Clerk
in writing. A temporary suspension will immediately and
automatically issue, if one is not already in effect, pending the
outcome of the charge. A three-person panel, appointed by the
Chief of Police, shall review the stated grounds for revocation and
the panel shall issue an appropriate disposition of either
suspension, revocation, or reinstatement. If the panel determines
that revocation is the appropriate disposition, it shall set forth the
grounds for the same in writing in the form of a notice of
revocation, which shall be provided to the dealer. The notice shall
advise the dealer of the right to appeal. If the panel determines that
suspension is the appropriate disposition, it shall provide the
dealer with a notice of suspension that shall advise the dealer of the
right to appeal. Following revocation, the dealer must relinquish
his or her license and must immediately and indefinitely cease
operating a scrap metal business within the municipality.
h. Appeal. Any applicant wishing to appeal an issuance of a suspension or
revocation shall be entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel,
appointed by the Chief of Police, at which time the applicant shall be
permitted to introduce such evidence as may be deemed relevant to
such suspension or revocation. Any applicant exercising the right to
§ 4-10.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-10.6
AO:304
§ 4-10.7. Bond. [Ord. No. 2015-5]
Each dealer covered under this section shall deliver a bond to the Municipal
Clerk executed by the applicant as principal and executed by a surety
company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of New
Jersey as surety. The bond shall be subject to review and approval by the
Municipal Attorney, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A: 9-139, and shall be in the
penal sum of $10,000, conditioned for the due and proper observance of
and compliance with the provisions and requirements of all ordinances of
the municipality in force or which may be adopted respecting the conduct of
this business and conditioned also that the bond shall be and remain for the
benefit of any person or persons who shall have received judgment against
the dealer licensed under this chapter, which damage shall be established
by a judgment of a court of proper jurisdiction. Said bond shall contain
the following language: "The obligation of this bond shall, in addition to
the [party municipality], be and remain for the benefit of any person who
shall obtain a judgment against obligor as a result of damage sustained in
operation pursuant to any license granted under this section." Said bond
shall be kept for a minimum of one year from the date of issuance of license
and must be renewed annually along with the license.
§ 4-10.8. Fees; Period of License Validity. [Ord. No. 2015-5]
A nonrefundable fee for initial application and license for an operator of a
scrap metal business, as covered under this chapter, is $300. The annual
renewal fee for a license is $250. These fees are separate from and in
addition to any fees the dealer will be required to pay in relation to the
mandatory electronic database system designated by the Chief of Police, as
provided by Subsection 4-10.5d of this section. Payments are to be made in
the manner directed by the Municipal Clerk. A license is valid for a one-year
period from the date of its issuance.
§ 4-10.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2015-5]
Violation of any provision of this section by any dealer shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not in excess of the limitations of N.J.S.A.
40:49-5 or by a term of imprisonment or a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days in addition to a suspension or revocation of operating
license as provided in Subsection 4-10.6 f and g above. Each and every
violation shall be considered a separate violation. Each violation shall result
in an additional suspension period. Any person who is found guilty of
violating the provisions of this section within one year of the date of a
previous violation and who was fined for the previous violation may be
appeal must file a written notice of appeal within 10 days of receiving
written notice of revocation or suspension of license.
i. A dealer shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business, provided that he or she notifies the Municipal Clerk, in
writing, of the street address of said new location.
§ 4-10.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 4-10.9
AO:305
sentenced by the court to an additional fine as a repeat offender and,
in addition, may be subject to revocation proceedings as provided in
Subsection 4-10.6g. The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender shall
not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided herein,
and same shall be calculated separately from the fine imposed for the
violation of this section.
§ 4-10.10. Time Limit for Conformance; Repealer; Severability.
[Ord. No. 2015-5]
§ 4-11. AMUSEMENT PARKS.
§ 4-11.1. First Energy Park; Amusement Game Licenses; Fees. [Ord.
No. 2018-19]
a. Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity engaging in the scrap metal business shall conform to the
provisions of this section within 90 days following the effective date of
this section.
b. All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed.
c. Nothing contained in this section is intended to replace any pre-existing
statutory requirements governing scrap metal businesses, as in N.J.S.A.
45:28-1 et seq., or any other statutory provision regarding any subject
matter discussed herein.
d. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
section is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct, and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
a. Lakewood Township hereby establishes First Energy Park as an
amusement park.
b. Any amusement games established at the amusement park shall
conform to all federal, state and local licensing laws including, but not
limited to the New Jersey Amusement Games Licensing Law.
c. Each amusement license shall be filed with the Township Clerk and be
subject to approval by the Township Committee.
d. Upon proof of compliance with all applicable requirements, the
Township shall authorize the issuance of a license by Resolution.
e. The following amusements and/or games will be available at First
Energy Park and will be licensed pursuant to Chapter 4 of The Revised
General Ordinances of The Township of Lakewood:
§ 4-10.9 LAKEWOOD CODE § 4-11.1
AO:306
Chapter 5
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 5-1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 5-1.1. Definitions. [1971 Code § 7-1; Ord. No. 2005-93 § 1]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
DOG — Shall mean any member of the species generally referred to as canis
familiaris.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Shall mean any dog which has attained the age
of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean each portion of a multiple dwelling
occupied for living or dwelling purposes by a family, individual, individuals
or group living together as a single housekeeping unit.
IMMEDIATE — Shall mean that the pet solid waste is removed at once,
without delay.
KENNEL OR PET SHOP — Shall mean any establishment or place wherein
or whereon the raising, training, boarding, breeding, for hire or sale, of
dogs, cats, birds, rodents, reptiles, or other small animals, fish or fowl,
occurs, or the sale thereof, or where more than five dogs over the age of
seven months or which have their permanent teeth, are kept.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Shall mean any building containing dwelling
units for two or more families, individuals or groups living together as
a single housekeeping unit and shall include horizontally or vertically
attached dwelling units notwithstanding that they may be under different
ownership.
Type of Amusement/Game Annual License Fee
Basketball $150
Dart Game $150
Ring Toss Game $150
Knock Down the Cats Game $150
Goblet Toss Game $150
§ 4-11.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-1.1
AO:307
OWNER/KEEPER — Shall mean any person who shall possess, maintain,
house or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or
not the owner of such pet.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — Shall mean a domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance
animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SHOP. — See Kennel.
PET SOLID WASTE — Shall mean waste matter expelled from the bowels of
the pet; excrement.
POUND — Shall mean an establishment for the confinement of dogs seized
either under the provisions of this chapter or otherwise.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Shall mean placement in a designated waste
receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container
which is regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse
collector; or disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for
proper treatment and disposal.
SHELTER — Shall mean any establishment where dogs are received,
housed and distributed without charge.
VICIOUS DOG — Shall mean any dog which has been declared to be
dangerous to the public by a Judge of the Municipal Court pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter because the dog has attacked, attempted to attack
or has bitten a human being, or because he habitually attacks other dogs
or domestic animals. A dog shall not be declared vicious if the Judge of the
Municipal Court determines that there was justifiable cause for the attack,
attempted attack or bite or that the dog constitutes no danger to the public.
§ 5-2. DOG LICENSING.30
§ 5-2.1. License Required. [1971 Code § 7-2.1]
Licenses shall be required for the following dogs of licensing age:
a. Any dog owned or kept within the Township by a resident of the
Township on the first day of January of any calendar year.
b. Any dog acquired by any person during the course of the calendar year
and kept within the Township for more than 10 days after acquisition.
c. Any dog attaining licensing age during the course of the calendar year.
d. Any unlicensed dog brought into the Township by any person and kept
within the Township for more than 10 days.
30.Editor's Note: See also Section 5-6, Dangerous Dogs.
§ 5-1.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 5-2.1
AO:308
§ 5-2.2. Application for License. [1971 Code § 7-2.2]
Each applicant for a license under this chapter shall give the following
information:
§ 5-2.3. Application for License; Time Limits. [1971 Code § 7-2.3]
Applications for licenses for dogs which are required to be licensed by
the provisions of subsection 5-2.1a, shall be made before the first day of
February of each calendar year. In all other cases, the application for a
license shall be made within 10 days of the day upon which the dog in
question becomes subject to the provisions of this section.
§ 5-2.4. License Record. [1971 Code § 7-2.4]
The information on all applications under this chapter and the registration
number issued to each licensed dog shall be preserved for a period of
three years by the Township Clerk. In addition, he shall forward similar
information to the State Department of Health each month on forms
furnished by the Department.
§ 5-2.5. Dog License Fees. [1971 Code § 7-2.5; Ord. No. 2009-35 § 1]
The fee for a dog license and registration tag shall be as follows:
Spayed/ Neutered
Non-Spayed/Non-
Neutered
License fee $11.80 $11.80
N.J. Registration $1.00 $1.00
N.J. Pilot Clinic Fund $0.20 $0.20
e. Any dog licensed by another state brought into the Township by any
person and kept within the Township for more than 90 days.
a. A general description of the dog sought to be licensed, including breed,
sex, age, color and markings, and whether such dog is of a long- or
short-haired variety.
b. Name, street and post office address of the owner of, and the person
who shall keep or harbor, such dog.
c. Number of other dogs owned or kept on premises and registration
number of licensing age.
d. Evidence of inoculation of dog with rabies vaccine pursuant to
provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1a.
Registration numbers shall be issued in the order in which applications are
received.
§ 5-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-2.5
AO:309
Spayed/ Neutered
Non-Spayed/Non-
Neutered
N.J. Pet Population
Control
N/A $3.00
Total: $13.00 $16.00
All applications filed after March 1 shall be subject to a late fee of $5 in
addition to the fees set forth above.
§ 5-2.6. Expiration Date. [1971 Code § 7-2.6]
Each dog license and registration tag shall expire on the last day of January
of the calendar year following the calendar year in which it was issued.
§ 5-2.7. Exceptions. [1971 Code § 7-2.7]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to any dog licensed under
Section 5-3 of this chapter. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and
commonly known as "seeing eye dogs" shall be licensed in the same manner
as other dogs, except that the owner or keeper shall not be required to pay
any fee.
§ 5-3. PET SHOPS, KENNELS, SHELTERS, AND POUNDS.
§ 5-3.1. License Required. [1971 Code § 7-3.1]
Any person who keeps or operates, or proposes to establish a kennel, pet
shop, shelter or pound, shall apply to the Township Clerk for a license
entitling him to keep or operate such establishments; such licenses shall not
be transferable to another owner or different premises. Prior to issuance
of the license, the applicant shall obtain a written confirmation from the
Zoning Officer that the use is permitted in the particular zone where the
establishment is located.
§ 5-3.2. Application Information. [1971 Code § 7-3.2]
The application shall contain the following information:
a. The name and permanent and local address of the applicant.
b. The street address where the establishment is located, or proposed to
be located, together with a general description of the premises.
c. The purposes for which it is to be maintained.
d. The maximum number of dogs to be accommodated by such
establishment at any one time.
e. The number of employees or volunteers who work on the premises on a
daily basis.
§ 5-2.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 5-3.3
AO:310
§ 5-3.3. Approval of Health Officer. [1971 Code § 7-3.3]
No license shall be issued until the proposed licensee submits a written
statement from the Health Officer of the Board of Health that the
establishment or proposed establishment complies with local and state
rules governing the location of the sanitation at such establishment.
§ 5-3.4. License Term. [1971 Code § 7-3.4]
All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall state the
purpose for which the establishment is maintained and all such licenses
shall expire on the last day of January of each year.
§ 5-3.5. License Fee. [1971 Code § 7-3.5]
The annual license fees for kennels, pet shops, shelters or pounds shall be
as follows:
§ 5-3.6. Compliance with Health Regulations. [1971 Code § 7-3.6]
All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be subject
to revocation by the Township Committee on recommendation of the State
Department of Health or the Board of Health for failure to comply with the
rules and regulations of the State Department of Health or the Board of
Health, after the owner has been afforded a hearing by either the State
Department of Health or the Board of Health.
Any person holding a license to establish, keep or operate a kennel, pet
shop, shelter or pound shall comply with all Township ordinances and
the rules and regulations promulgated by the State Department of Health
governing the sanitary conduct and operation of kennels, pet shops, shelters
and pounds, the preservation of sanitation therein, and the prevention of
the spread of rabies and other diseases of dogs within and from such
establishments.
§ 5-3.7. Reports to State Health Department. [1971 Code § 7-3.7]
The Township Clerk shall forward to the State Department of Health a list
of kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds licensed within 30 days after the
licenses therefor are issued, which list shall include the name and address
of the licensee and the type of license issued.
a. Kennel accommodating 10 or less dogs, $10.00.
b. Kennel accommodating more than 10 dogs, $25.00
c. Pet shop, $10.00
d. Shelter or pound, no fee.
§ 5-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-3.8
AO:311
§ 5-3.8. Control of Dogs Off Premises. [1971 Code § 7-3.8]
No dog kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter or pound shall be permitted off
such premises, except on a leash or in a crate or other safe control.
§ 5-4. DISPOSITION OF FEES. [1971 Code § 7-4]
License fees and other monies collected or received under the provisions
of this chapter, except the registration tag fees, shall be forwarded to
the Township Treasurer (30) days after collection or receipt, and shall be
placed in a special account separate from any of the other accounts of
the Township this account shall be used for the following purposes only:
housing and disposing of dogs seized under this chapter; local prevention
and control of rabies; providing anti-rabies treatment under the direction of
the local Board of Health for any person known or suspected to have been
exposed to rabies; all other purposes prescribed by the Statutes of New
Jersey governing the subject and for administering the provisions of this
chapter. Any balance remaining in such special account shall be retained
therein until the end of the third fiscal year following and may be used for
any of the purposes set forth in this section. At the end of the third fiscal
year following, and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter, there shall be
transferred from such special account to the general funds of the Township
any amount then in such account which is in excess of the total amount paid
into the special account during the last two fiscal years next preceding.
The registration tag fee of $1.00 for each dog shall be forwarded within
30 days after collection by the Township Clerk to the State Department of
Health.
§ 5-5. DOG CANVASS. [1971 Code § 7-5]
Any person appointed by the Township Committee shall annually cause
a canvass to be made of all dogs owned, kept or harbored within the
Township and shall report to the Township Clerk, the Board of Health
and to the State Department of Health the results thereof, setting forth in
separate columns the names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or
harboring dogs, the number of licensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by
each person, together with the registration number of each dog; the number
of unlicensed dogs owned, kept or harbored by each person, together with
a complete description of each unlicensed dog.
§ 5-6. DANGEROUS DOGS.
§ 5-6.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 97-55]
As used in this section:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — Shall mean a Certified Municipal Animal
Control Officer as defined in N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.1.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Department of Health.
§ 5-3.8 LAKEWOOD CODE § 5-6.1
AO:312
DOG — Shall mean any dog or dog hybrid.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Shall mean any cat, dog or livestock other than
poultry.
POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG — Shall mean any dog or dog hybrid
declared potentially dangerous by a Municipal Court pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-23.
§ 5-6.2. Seizure and Impoundment of Dog by Animal Control
Officer; Grounds. [Ord. No. 97-55]
§ 5-6.3. Notice of Seizure and Impoundment; Determination of
Identity of Owners; Notice of Hearing; Return of Statement by
Owner; Destruction of Dog. [Ord. No. 97-55]
a. The Animal Control Officer shall seize and impound a dog when the
Officer has reasonable cause to believe that the dog:
1. Attacked a person and caused death or serious bodily injury as
defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) to that person;
2. Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a person
during an unprovoked attack and poses a serious threat of harm to
persons or domestic animals;
3. Engaged in dog fighting activities as described in N.J.S.A. 4:22-24
and N.J.S.A. 4:22-26; or
4. Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals,
or the likeness of persons or domestic animals.
b. The dog shall be impounded until the final disposition as to whether the
dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. Subject to the approval of the
Municipal Health Officer, the dog may be impounded in a facility or
other structure agreeable to the owner.
a. The Animal Control Officer shall notify the Municipal Court and the
Municipal Health Officer immediately that he has seized and
impounded a dog pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-19, or that he has reasonable
cause to believe that a dog has killed another domestic animal and that
a hearing is required. The Animal Control Officer shall, through a
reasonable effort, attempt to determine the identity of the owner of any
dog seized and impounded pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-19. If its owner
cannot be identified within seven days, the dog may be humanely
destroyed.
b. The Animal Control Officer shall, within three working days of the
determination of the identity of the owner of a dog seized and
impounded pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-19, notify by certified mail, return
receipt requested, the owner concerning the seizure and impoundment,
and that, if the owner so requests, a hearing will be held to determine
§ 5-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-6.3
AO:313
§ 5-6.4. Agreement Between Township and Dog Owner; Settlement
and Disposition; Liability of Township; Legal Expenses. [Ord. No.
97-55]
Notwithstanding any provision in N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. to the contrary, the
Township and the owner of the dog may settle and dispose of the matter at
any time in such manner and according to such terms and conditions as may
be mutually agreed upon. Notwithstanding any provision of N.J.S.A. 4:19-19
to the contrary, neither the Township nor any of its employees shall be
liable by virtue of having entered into any settlement agreement pursuant
to this action, or for any action or inaction related to the entry into such
agreement, for any injuries or damages caused thereafter by the dog. The
Township may, as a condition of the settlement agreement, also require that
the owner of the dog hold the Township harmless for any legal expenses
or fees the Township may incur in defending against any cause of action
brought against the Township notwithstanding the prohibition against such
causes of action set forth in this section.
§ 5-6.5. Findings to Declare Dog Vicious; Grounds. [Ord. No. 97-55]
§ 5-6.6. Findings to Declare a Potentially Dangerous Dog. [Ord. No.
97-55]
whether the impounded dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. This
notice shall also require that within seven days the owner return, by
certified mail or hand delivery, a signed statement indicating whether
the owner requests the hearing to be conducted or, if not, to relinquish
ownership of the dog, in which case the dog may be humanely
destroyed. If the owner cannot be notified by certified mail, return
receipt requested, or refuses to sign for the certified letter, or does not
reply to the certified letter with a signed statement within seven days
of receipt, the dog may be humanely destroyed.
a. The Municipal Court shall declare the dog vicious if it finds by clear and
convincing evidence that the dog:
1. Killed a person or caused serious bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A.
2C:11-1(b) to a person; or
2. Has engaged in dog fighting activities as described in N.J.S.A.
4:22-24 and N.J.S.A. 4:22-26.
b. A dog shall not be declared vicious for inflicting death or serious bodily
injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(b) upon a person if the dog was
provoked. The Township shall bear the burden of proof to demonstrate
that the dog was not provoked.
c. If the Municipal Court declares a dog to be vicious, and no appeal is
made of this ruling pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-25, the dog shall be
destroyed in a humane and expeditious manner, except that no dog may
be destroyed during the pendency of an appeal.
§ 5-6.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 5-6.6
AO:314
§ 5-6.7. Order and Schedule for Compliance for Potentially
Dangerous Dog; Conditions. [Ord. No. 97-55]
If the Municipal Court declares the dog to be potentially dangerous, it shall
issue an order and a schedule for compliance which, in part:
a. The Municipal Court shall declare a dog to be potentially dangerous if it
finds by clear and convincing evidence that the dog:
1. Caused bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a person
during an unprovoked attack, and poses a serious threat of bodily
injury or death to a person; or
2. Killed another domestic animal, and:
(a) Poses a threat of serious bodily injury or death to a person; or
(b) Poses a threat of death to another domestic animal; or
3. Has been trained, tormented, badgered, baited or encouraged to
engage in unprovoked attacks upon persons or domestic animals,
or the likeness of persons or domestic animals.
b. A dog shall not be declared potentially dangerous for:
1. Causing bodily injury as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1(a) to a person if
the dog was provoked, or
2. Killing a domestic animal if the domestic animal was the aggressor.
For the purposes of paragraph b1 above, the Township shall bear
the burden of proof to demonstrate that the dog was not provoked.
a. Shall require the owner to comply with the following conditions:
1. To apply, at his own expense, to the Township Clerk or other official
designated to license dogs pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.2, for a
special municipal potentially dangerous dog license, municipal
registration number and red identification tag issued pursuant to
subsection 5-6.13 of this section. The owner shall, at his own
expense, have the registration number tattooed upon the dog in a
prominent location. A potentially dangerous dog shall be
impounded until the owner obtains a municipal potentially
dangerous dog license, municipal registration number and red
identification tag.
2. To display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on his premises warning
that a potentially dangerous dog is on the premises. The sign shall
be visible and legible from 50 feet of the enclosure required
pursuant to paragraph a3 herein.
3. To immediately erect and maintain an enclosure for the potentially
dangerous dog on the property where the potentially dangerous
dog will be kept and maintained, which has sides, top and bottom to
§ 5-6.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-6.7
AO:315
§ 5-6.8. Procedures for Appeal. [Ord. No. 97-55]
The owner of the dog or the Animal Control Officer, may appeal any final
decision, order or judgment, including any conditions attached thereto,
of the Municipal Court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq., by filing an
appeal with the Superior Court, Law Division, in accordance with the Rules
Governing the Courts of the State of New Jersey pertaining to appeals from
courts of limited jurisdiction. The Superior Court shall hear the appeal by
conducting a hearing de novo in the manner established by those rules for
appeals from courts of limited jurisdiction.
§ 5-6.9. Liability of Owner for Costs of Impoundment and
Destruction. [Ord. No. 97-55]
prevent the potentially dangerous dog from escaping by climbing,
jumping or digging and within a fence of at least six feet in height
separated by at least three feet from the confined area. The owner
of a potentially dangerous dog shall securely lock the enclosure to
prevent the entry of the general public and to preclude any release
or escape of a potentially dangerous dog by any unsuspecting
person. All potentially dangerous dogs shall be confined in the
enclosure, or, if taken out of the enclosure, securely muzzled and
restrained with a tether approved by the Animal Control Officer
having a minimum tensile strength sufficiently in excess of that
required to restrict the potentially dangerous dog's movements to
a radius of no more than three feet from the owner and under the
direct supervision of the owner.
b. May require the owner to maintain liability insurance in an amount
determined by the Municipal Court to cover any damage or injury
caused by the potentially dangerous dog. The liability insurance, which
may be separate from any other homeowner policy, shall contain a
provision requiring the Township of Lakewood to be named as an
additional insured for the sole purpose of being notified by the
insurance company of any cancellation, termination or expiration of the
liability insurance policy.
a. If a dog is declared vicious or potentially dangerous and all appeals
pertaining thereto have been exhausted, the owner of the dog shall be
liable to the Township for the costs and expenses of impounding and
destroying the dog. The owner shall incur the expense of impounding
the dog in a facility other than the municipal depository, regardless of
whether the dog is ultimately found to be vicious or potentially
dangerous.
b. If the dog has bitten or exposed a person within 10 days previous to the
time of euthanasia, its head shall be transported to the New Jersey
State Department of Health laboratory for rabies testing.
§ 5-6.7 LAKEWOOD CODE § 5-6.10
AO:316
§ 5-6.10. Right to Convene Hearing for Subsequent Actions of Dog.
[Ord. No. 97-55]
If the Municipal Court finds that the dog is not vicious or potentially
dangerous, the Municipal Court shall retain jurisdiction to convene a
hearing to determine whether the dog is vicious or potentially dangerous
for any subsequent actions of the dog.
§ 5-6.11. Duties of Owner of Potentially Dangerous Dog. [Ord. No.
97-55]
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog shall:
§ 5-6.12. Violations by Owner; Penalties; Enforcement; Seizure and
Impoundment of Dog; Destruction by Order of Court. [Ord. No.
97-55]
The owner of a potentially dangerous dog, who is found to have violated
this section or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or to have
failed to comply with a Court's order shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $1,000 per day of the violation, and each day's continuance of the
violation shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. The Municipal
Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce this section. The Animal Control
Officer is authorized to seize and impound any potentially dangerous dog
whose owner fails to comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:19-17, et seq.,
or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, or a Court's order.
The Municipal Court may order that the dog so seized and impounded be
destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner.
a. Comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A 4:19-17, et seq. in accordance
with a schedule established by the Municipal Court, but in no case more
than 60 days subsequent to the date of determination.
b. Notify the Licensing Authority, the Police Department and the Animal
Control Officer if a potentially dangerous dog is at large or has attacked
a human being or killed a domestic animal.
c. Notify the Licensing Authority, the Police Department and the Animal
Control Officer within 24 hours of the death, sale or donation of a
potentially dangerous dog.
d. Prior to selling or donating the dog, inform the prospective owner that
the dog has been declared potentially dangerous.
e. Upon the sale or donation of the dog to a person residing in a different
municipality, notify the Licensing Authority, Police Department and
Animal Control Officer of that municipality of the transfer of ownership
and the name, address and telephone of new owner.
f. In addition to any license fee required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.3,
pay a potentially dangerous dog license fee to the Township as provided
by N.J.S.A. 4:19-31.
§ 5-6.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-6.13
AO:317
§ 5-6.13. Potentially Dangerous Dog Registration Number, Red
Identification Tag and License; Issuance; Telephone Number to
Report Violations; Publicity. [Ord. No. 97-55]
The Township shall:
§ 5-6.14. Fee for Potentially Dangerous Dog License. [Ord. No.
97-55]
Each person who shall own, possess, keep or harbor any potentially
dangerous dog or dogs shall obtain an annual license for each dog and shall
have the same registered and numbered with the Township Clerk, and for
such license shall pay the sum of $700, as provided in N.J.S.A. 4:19-31, as
a license fee for each and every potentially dangerous dog. Said license fee
shall be in lieu of any other license fee required pursuant to the Revised
General Ordinances of the Township of Lakewood.
§ 5-6.15. Inspection to Determine Continuing Compliance. [Ord.
No. 97-55]
The Animal Control Officer shall inspect the enclosure and the owner's
property at least monthly to determine continuing compliance with this
section.
§ 5-6.16. Deposit and Use of Fines and Fees. [Ord. No. 97-55]
All fines and fees collected or received by the Township pursuant to this
section shall be deposited in a special account and used by the Township to
administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
§ 5-6.17. Inapplicability of this Section to Dogs Used for Law
Enforcement Activities. [Ord. No. 97-55]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs used, or being trained
to be used, for legitimate public sector law enforcement activities.
a. Issue a potentially dangerous dog registration number and red
identification tag along with a municipal potentially dangerous dog
license upon a demonstration of sufficient evidence by the owner to the
Animal Control Officer that he has complied with the Court's orders.
The last three digits of each potentially dangerous dog registration
number issued by the Township will be a three number code assigned to
the Township in the regulations promulgated pursuant to N.J.S.A.
4:19-33. The Animal Control Officer shall verify, in writing, compliance
to the Township Clerk.
b. Publicize a telephone number for reporting violations of this section.
This telephone number shall be forwarded to the Township Clerk and
any changes in this number shall be reported immediately to the
Township Clerk.
§ 5-6.13 LAKEWOOD CODE § 5-7
AO:318
§ 5-7. IMPOUNDING AND DESTRUCTION OF CERTAIN DOGS.
§ 5-7.1. Causes for Impounding. [1971 Code § 7-7.1]
The Animal Control Officer shall take into custody and impound, or cause to
be taken into custody and impounded, any of the following dogs:
§ 5-7.2. Access to Premises. [1971 Code § 7-7.2]
Any officer or agent authorized or empowered to perform any duty under
this chapter is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any dog which he may lawfully seize and impound when such
officer is in immediate pursuit of such dog, except upon the premises of the
owner of the dog if the owner is present and forbids same.
§ 5-7.3. Notice of Seizure. [1971 Code § 7-7.3]
If any dog so impounded or seized wears a registration tag, collar or
harness having inscribed thereon or attached thereto the name and address
of any person or the owner of, or the person keeping or harboring the dog
is known, the Animal Control Officer shall immediately serve on the person
whose address is given on the collar, or on the person owning, keeping or
harboring the dog, a notice in writing stating that the dog has been seized
and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven
days after service of the notice.
A notice under this subsection may be served either by delivering it to the
person on whom it is to be served, or by leaving it at a person's usual
or last known place of abode, or at the address given on the collar, or by
forwarding it by certified and regular mail in a prepaid letter addressed to
that person at his usual or last known place of abode, or to the address
given on the collar.
a. Any dog running at large in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
b. Any dog off the premises of the owner of or the person keeping or
harboring such dog which the Animal Control Officer or his agent has
reason to believe is a stray dog.
c. Any dog off the premises of the owner of or the person keeping or
harboring such dog without a current registration tag on its collar.
d. Any female dog in season off the premises of the owner thereof or the
person keeping or harboring such dog.
e. Any dog which has been determined to be a vicious dog as provided in
Section 5-6, provided that such dogs may also be seized by any Police
Officer, and provided further that if such dogs cannot be seized with
safety they may be killed.
§ 5-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-7.4
AO:319
§ 5-7.4. Disposition of Unclaimed Dogs. [1971 Code § 7-7.4]
The Animal Control Officer is authorized and empowered to cause the
destruction of any unclaimed dog, in as humane a manner as possible, under
any of the following circumstances:
§ 5-8. DOG REGULATIONS.
§ 5-8.1. Compliance with Chapter Regulations Required. [1971
Code § 7-8]
No person shall own, keep or harbor a dog in the Township except in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the following
regulations.
§ 5-8.2. Wearing of Registration Tag. [1971 Code § 7-8.1]
All dogs which are required by the provisions of this chapter to be licensed
shall wear a collar or harness with the registration tag for such dog securely
fastened thereto.
§ 5-8.3. Use of Registration Tags. [1971 Code § 7-8.2]
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove a
registration tag from the collar of any dog without the consent of the owner,
nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog for which it was not
issued.
§ 5-8.4. Interference with Official Duties. [1971 Code § 7-8.3]
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 5-8.5. Noise; Disturbing the Peace. [1971 Code § 7-8.4]
No person shall own, keep, harbor or maintain any dog which habitually
barks or cries between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
§ 5-8.6. Running at Large. [1971 Code § 7-8.5]
a. When any dog so seized has not been claimed by the person owning,
keeping or harboring such dog within seven days after notice or within
seven days of the dog's detention when notice has not been or cannot be
given, as set forth in the previous subsection.
b. If the person owning, keeping or harboring any dog so seized has not
claimed the dog and has not paid all expenses incurred by reason of its
detention, including maintenance, computed pursuant to Title 4 of the
New Jersey Statutes, after receiving written notice of charges by the
Animal Control Officer. The notice shall be set forth in subsection 5-7.3
above.
§ 5-7.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 5-8.6
AO:320
§ 5-8.7. Leashing of Dogs Required. [1971 Code § 7-8.6]
No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall suffer or permit it
to be upon the public streets or in any of the public places of the Township
unless such dog is accompanied by a person over the age nine years and
is securely confined and controlled by an adequate leash not more than six
feet long.
§ 5-8.8. Property Damage; Annoyance of Other Persons. [1971 Code
§ 7-8.7; Ord. No. 2005-93 § 2]
a. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall permit the dog
to run at large upon the public streets or any public park or any public
building or any other public place within the Township.
b. No person owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall permit it to run
at large upon any private property of third persons without the consent
of said third persons.
c. Any dog found running at large pursuant to the terms of paragraphs a
and b hereinabove shall be deemed to be doing so with the permission
of the owner, keeper or harborer and such person shall be deemed to be
in violation of this subsection, for which either a summons or warrant
may be issued.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this subsection is to establish requirements for
the proper disposal of pet solid waste in the Township of Lakewood so
as to protect the health, safety and welfare of all those residing within
the Township. It is further the purpose of this section to prescribe
penalties for failure to comply.
b. No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall
cause or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on, or commit any
nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, by-path,
play area, park, or any place where people congregate or walk, or upon
any private property, without the permission of the owner of the
property.
c. Any person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog which
soils, defiles, defecates on, or commits any nuisance on any common
thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, by-path, play area, park, or any
place where people congregate or walk, or upon any public property
whatsoever, or upon any private property not owned or possessed by
that person, shall immediately remove all feces deposited by the dog in
a sanitary manner.
d. The feces removed from the aforementioned designated areas shall be
disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of
the dog by the use of a leak-proof container, sealed, nonabsorbent
disposal bag, or in any other sanitary manner approved by the
Department of Health.
§ 5-8.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-8.8
AO:321
§ 5-9. DOG BITES. [1971 Code § 7-9]
Where it has been determined by a physician that a person has been bitten
by a dog, such individual, or his parent or guardian if he is a minor, shall
immediately notify the Board of Health. When the owner or keeper of a dog
shall be notified by the police that the dog has bitten any individual, the
owner or keeper of the dog must comply with the following procedures:
§ 5-10. QUARANTINE OF DOGS AND CATS. [1971 Code § 7-10]
The Township Committee may, by proclamation, require all dogs and cats to
be quarantined during such period in each year as may seem advisable to
the Township Committee.
§ 5-11. NUMBER OF DOGS IN MULTIPLE DWELLING UNITS. [1971
Code § 7-11]
No more than three dogs shall be allowed in any dwelling unit of a multiple
dwelling.
e. Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance
animal shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such
animal is being used for that purpose.
f. No dog owner shall suffer or permit his dog to annoy neighbors and
other persons living within the immediate vicinity in the Township by
interfering with the enjoyment of their property, interfering with their
sleep or rest or otherwise annoying them in the enjoyment of their
property in a substantial manner, by barking and howling.
g. No dog owner shall suffer or permit his dog to trespass upon the
property of other persons in the Township nor suffer or permit his dog
to damage shrubbery, flowers, gardens or to soil or defile any other
property of any kind or character belonging to the Township, any
neighbor or other person in the Township of Lakewood.
h. Enforcement. The provisions of this subsection shall be enforced by the
Animal Control Officer, Animal Warden, Police Officer or other person
whose duty it shall be to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
i. Violations and Penalty. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of
the provisions of this subsection shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$500 for each and every violation.
a. Have the dog examined by a licensed veterinarian within 12 hours.
b. Have the dog kept in quarantine in the owner's home or at a kennel for
a period of 10 days.
c. At the end of 10 days have the dog reexamined by a veterinarian and a
written report of the dog's state of health sent to the Board of Health.
§ 5-8.8 LAKEWOOD CODE § 5-12
AO:322
§ 5-12. VIOLATIONS; PENALTY. [1971 Code § 7-12; New; Ord. No.
2008-38 § 1]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, unless otherwise
provided for, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to a fine as follows:
§ 5-13. ENFORCEMENT.
§ 5-13.1. Appointment of Dog Warden; Process for Violations. [1971
Code § 7-13]
The Township Committee shall have the power to appoint a Dog Warden
or other person or Police Officer whose duty it shall be to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. The official appointed to enforce this chapter
shall, in all instances of violations of any section of this chapter except a
violation of the rules and regulations of the State Department of Health
covering kennels, pet shops, shelters and pounds, file a complaint in the
Municipal Court for such violations and may issue either a summons or
warrant. The warrant may be issued without any order of the Court first
being obtained against the person so charged. The process, if in the nature
of a warrant, shall be returnable in not less than five nor more than 15
days. The process shall particularly set forth the section of this chapter or
rule or rules alleged to have been violated by the defendant. The Judge of
the Municipal Court may at any time amend all defects and errors in the
complaint process.
§ 5-13.2. Complaints. [1971 Code § 7-13.1]
In any proceeding before the Judge of the Municipal Court then find that
the dog in question has committed the prohibited act as set forth herein,
then there shall be a presumption that the defendant owner, possessor or
harborer has suffered or permitted the dog to commit the prohibited acts
alleged in the complaint and it shall not be necessary that the complainant
prove the defendant's knowledge, or intention or scienter; provided,
however, that in such case, it shall appear in such proceeding that if
complainant had on at least one other previous occasion lodged a complaint
with the Police Department charging the same defendant with the same
offense and that the defendant had notice of such previous complaints.
§ 5-14. ANIMALS AT LARGE.
a. 1st Offense. A fine of not more than $200;
b. 2nd Offense. A fine of not less than $200 and not to exceed $300;
c. 3rd Offense. A mandatory fine of $500, and community service of not
more than 40 hours and/or up to 10 days, or both, in the Ocean County
Jail.
§ 5-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 5-14.1
AO:323
§ 5-14.1. Prohibited. [1971 Code § 4-9.1]
No person shall permit any horse, cattle, swine, sheep, goat or other animal
to run at large within the Township.
§ 5-14.2. Impounding of Animal. [1971 Code § 4-9.2]
Any horse, mule, cattle, swine, sheep, goat or other animal found running at
large may be taken by any person to a public pound. It shall be the duty of
the Poundkeeper to receive and confine the animal until it is either lawfully
redeemed or sold.
§ 5-14.3. Disposition of Animal. [1971 Code § 4-9.3; New]
If the owner of any animal impounded applies to the Poundkeeper for its
redemption and pays the required fees pursuant to Title 4 of the New Jersey
Statutes for each animal impounded, the animal shall be delivered to its
owner. Any impounded animal not redeemed by its owner within seven days
after impounding shall be sold by the Poundkeeper in the same manner and
subject to the provisions as to notice and disposition of the proceeds of the
sale, as provided by law.
§ 5-14.4. Exception. [1971 Code § 4-9.4]
This section shall not apply to dogs.
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
Laws concerning alcoholic beverage control are contained in Title 33 of
the New Jersey Statutes. All ordinances must be in conformity with these
provisions and approved by the Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control,
N.J.S.A. 33:1-40. State law prescribes the types of licenses that may be
issued, their number, permissible license fees and the regulation of licensed
premises, N.J.S.A. 33:1-40.
§ 6-1. PURPOSE. [1971 Code § 8-1]
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Township of Lakewood in accordance with the provisions
of an Act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled "An Act
Concerning Alcoholic Beverages," comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of
1933, its supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1
et seq. and in accordance with the Rules and Regulations of the Director of
the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS. [1971 Code § 8-2]
For the purposes of this chapter, words and phrases shall have the meanings
given in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. and the Rules and Regulations of the Director
of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 5-14.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 6-3
AO:324
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
§ 6-3.1. Laws Applicable. [1971 Code § 8-3.1]
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings under
this chapter shall be in accordance with the Act, Rules and Regulations
referred to in the previous section and all other applicable laws of the State
of New Jersey or of the United States.
§ 6-3.2. Issuing Authority. [1971 Code § 8-3.2]
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the Township
Committee, which shall also administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.3. License Required. [1971 Code § 8-3.3]
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the Township,
without having obtained a license in accordance with the Act referred to in
Section 6-1 and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.4. License Fees; Maximum Number. [1971 Code § 8-3.4; Ord.
10/24/85; Ord. No. 92-10; Ord. No. 95-8; Ord. No. 96-13; Ord. No.
2000-13; Ord. No. 2003-15 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-64 § 1; Ord. No.
2011-15 § 1]
The annual license fees and maximum number of licenses for the sale or
distribution of alcoholic beverages in the Township shall be as follows:
Class of License Annual License Fee Number of Licenses
Plenary Retail
Consumption
$2,500.00 30
Plenary Retail
Distribution
$2,500.00 12
Club License $ 150.00
The annual license fees for Plenary Retail Consumption Licenses and
Plenary Retail Distribution Licenses shall be increased 20% per year until
the annual fee is $2,500.
§ 6-3.5. Required Distances Between Licensed Premises. [1971
Code § 8-3.5; Ord. 5/8/75; Ord. 10/24/85; Ord. 7/9/87; Ord. 10/12/89]
a. Findings. The Township Committee, the issuing authority, hereby states
that it has by observation of local conditions surrounding the sale and
consumption of alcoholic beverages within this Township, determined
that it is not desirable to have licensed beverage establishments for the
plenary retail consumption for alcoholic beverages, other than hotels or
motels of required size and bowling alleys of not less than 40 lanes, that
are too closely situated one to the other so as to encourage pedestrian
traffic back and forth, which appears to tend to cause numerous types
§ 6-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-3.5
AO:325
of violations including drinking on the public streets, carrying of open
containers of alcoholic beverages on the public streets and
congregation of persons inclined to be disorderly, argumentative or
such as may interfere with or molest other persons peacefully enjoying
the streets and sidewalks in the very congested areas.
b. Regulations.
1. No plenary retail consumption license shall be issued for any
premises situated closer than 1,500 feet to the nearest other
licensed plenary retail consumption establishment, other than
hotels or motels of not less than 100 rooms, and bowling alleys of
not less than 40 lanes, within the B-1 Neighborhood Business Zone,
B-2 Central Business Zone and B-3 Shopping Center Zones.
2. In any other zone where licensed beverage retail consumption
establishments are permitted, no license shall be issued to any
premises nearer than 2,000 feet to any other licensed plenary retail
consumption establishment.
3. Wherever any two licensed establishments in question may have
one establishment in one zone where 1,500 feet is allowed and the
other establishment in a zone where 2,000 feet is required, the
requirement of a total of 2,000 feet between such establishments
shall prevail.
4. The regulations regarding the required distances between licensed
premises shall not apply to the establishment issued a special
plenary retail consumption license.
5. The following regulations shall apply to licensed bowling alleys of
not less than 40 lanes:
(a) Regardless of its license classification, no package goods shall
be sold at any bowling establishment licensed herein.
(b) No bowling alley shall be exempt from the distance
requirements set forth above unless they consist of at least 40
lanes.
(c) Alcoholic beverages can only be served while bowling activities
are taking place, i.e., in conjunction with the operation of a
bowling establishment.
(d) Absolutely no alcoholic beverages will be permitted outside the
bowling alley building.
c. Methods of Measurement. For the purposes of this subsection, the
method of measurement shall be by measuring from the outside
boundaries of the perimeter of the lot, tract, or parcel of land on which
the licensed premises are situated, a distance of 1,500 feet or 2,000
feet, as the case may be, perpendicularly at all points around such
perimeter and, if the measurement as shown on the official tax map of
§ 6-3.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 6-3.5
AO:326
§ 6-3.6. Prohibited Locations. [Ord. No. 2011-56]
§ 6-4. REGULATION OF LICENSES.
§ 6-4.1. Hours of Sale. [1971 Code § 8-4.1; Ord. 4/23/81; Ord. 10/24/
85; Ord. No. 2006-33 § I; Ord. No. 2010-34 § 1]
No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, consumed or delivered to
any consumer in or from any licensed premises on any day between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. and no sale of alcoholic beverages, in
original containers, for off-premises consumption (package sales), shall be
permitted on any day before 9:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. It is the intent
herein to permit the sale, for off-premises consumption of malt alcoholic
beverages and wine, in original bottle or can containers, during the same
hours and on the same days as the sale of alcoholic beverages for onpremises
consumption is permitted.
The sale of alcoholic beverages pursuant to the special plenary retail
consumption license shall be as follows: Commencing one hour before the
the Township at any point crosses over the boundary or perimeter
of another tract or lot on which another plenary retail consumption
establishment is situated, then in such event it shall be indication of a
violation of this subsection.
d. Exemption; Pre-existing Licensed Premises. No existing licensed
premises in operation and licensed to do business at the time of final
adoption of this subsection, May 8, 1975, shall be required to change
location as the result of the adoption hereof, but the provisions of this
subsection shall be applicable to any new location or relocation of any
existing plenary retail consumption licensed establishment.
a. Downtown Redevelopment District Defined. The boundaries of the
Downtown Redevelopment District are defined as follows:
Fifth Street in the north, Hurley Avenue in the south; Madison Avenue
in the west; and Jersey Central Railroad Tracks in the east.
b. Consumption Licenses Prohibited. No plenary retail consumption liquor
license issued after January 1, 1989 shall be located in any facility
within the Downtown Redevelopment District as defined in paragraph a
above.
c. Distribution Licenses Prohibited. No plenary retail distribution liquor
license issued after January 1, 1989 shall be located in any facility
within the Downtown Redevelopment District as defined in paragraph a
above.
d. Grandfather Clause. Any plenary retail consumption and distribution
licenses that are currently located within the Downtown
Redevelopment District shall not be governed by the provisions of this
subsection 6-3.6.
§ 6-3.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-4.1
AO:327
beginning of any performance and continuing through the hour immediately
following the conclusion of the performance.
§ 6-4.2. through § 6-4.4 (Reserved)31
§ 6-4.5. Closing Provisions. [1971 Code § 8-4.4; Ord. 4/23/81; Ord.
No. 94-66; Ord. No. 2006-73 § 1; Ord. No. 2010-34 § 1]
On any day, all alcoholic beverages sold on premises prior to 2:00 a.m.
may be consumed between 2:00 a.m. and 2:30 a.m. During the hours when
sales on licensed premises are hereinabove prohibited, and during the 1/2
hour provided for consumption alone, the entire licensed premises shall be
closed, outside lights extinguished and no person other than the licensee
and his bona fide employees permitted to enter. During the 1/2 hour time
period provided for consumption alone, no licensee shall sell, serve, deliver
or allow, permit or suffer the sale, service or delivery of any beverage
whatsoever, and all persons other than the licensee and his bona fide
employees shall vacate the licensed premises at or prior to the expiration of
the time period, it being the expressed intent of this subsection to provide a
1/2 hour time period for patrons to consume those beverages that may have
been purchased during those times when sales are permitted.
§ 6-5. VIOLATIONS; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES.
[1971 Code § 8-7]
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable Statute or any of the Rules and Regulations of the State's
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five day notice of charge
against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for hearing
before the Township Committee.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 6-6. REGULATIONS GOVERNING PERSONS UNDER THE LEGAL
AGE.
§ 6-6.1. Entering Premises to Purchase Alcoholic Beverages. [1971
Code § 8-5]
No person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages shall
enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for
31.Editor's Note: Former subsection 6-4.2, 6-4.3 and 6-4.4 pertaining to sale of alcoholic
beverages on Sundays, New Year's Day, Christmas Day and New Year's Eve, previously
codified herein and containing portions of 1971 Code §§ 8-4.2 and 8-4.3 and Ordinances 4/
23/81, 94-66 and 2006-73, were repealed in their entirety by Ordinance No. 2010-34.
§ 6-4.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 6-6.1
AO:328
the purpose of purchasing or having served or delivered to him or her, any
alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-6.2. Consumption Prohibited by Persons Under the Legal Age.
[1971 Code § 8-5; New]
No person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages shall
consume any alcoholic beverages on premises licensed for the retail sale of
alcoholic beverages, or to purchase, attempt to purchase or have another
purchase for him any alcoholic beverage.
§ 6-6.3. Purchasing Alcoholic Beverages for Persons Under the
Legal Age. [1971 Code § 8-5; New]
No person shall enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages for the purpose of purchasing, or to purchase alcoholic
beverages, for another person who does not because of his age have the
right to purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
§ 6-6.4. Violations by Persons Under the Legal Age; Penalties. [New]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall
be deemed and adjudged to be a disorderly person, and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500. In addition, the
Court shall suspend the person's license to operate a motor vehicle for
six months or prohibit the person from obtaining a license to operate a
motor vehicle in this State for six months beginning on the date he becomes
eligible to obtain a license or on the date of conviction, whichever is later.
In addition to the general penalty prescribed for an offense, the Court may
require any person under the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages
who violates this Act to participate in an alcohol education or treatment
program authorized by the Department of Health for a period not to exceed
the maximum period of confinement prescribed by law for the offense for
which the individual has been convicted. (N.J.S.A. 33:1-81)
§ 6-6.5. Consumption of Alcoholic Beverages by Underage Person
on Private Property Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2011-19 § 1; Ord. No.
2015-15]
It is hereby unlawful for any person under the legal age to, without legal
authority, knowingly possess or knowingly consume an alcoholic beverage
on private property.
a. Violation and Penalties.
1. Any person found guilty of violating the terms of this section shall
be subject to a fine of $250 for a first offense and a fine of $350 for
any subsequent offense. In addition, the court may, upon a finding
of guilty, in addition to the fine authorized for this offense, suspend
or postpone for six months the driving privileges of the defendant.
Upon the conviction of any person and the suspension or
§ 6-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-6.5
AO:329
postponement of that person's driver's license, the court shall
forward a report to the Motor Vehicle Commission stating the first
and last day of the suspension or postponement period imposed by
the court pursuant to this section. If a person at the time of the
imposition of a sentence is less than 17 years of age, the period
of license postponement, including a suspension or postponement
of the privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence
on the day the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of
six months after the person reaches the age of 17 years. If the
defendant at the time of the imposition of the sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this state, the court shall immediately
collect the license and forward it to the Motor Vehicle Commission
along with the report. If for any reason the license cannot be
collected, the court shall include in the report the complete name,
address, date of birth, eye color, and sex of the person, as well as
the first and last date of the license suspension period imposed by
the court.
2. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the
person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period
of license suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject
to the penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. The defendant shall be
required to acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing.
Failure to receive a written notice or failure to acknowledge in
writing the receipt of the written notice shall not be a defense to a
subsequent charge of a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
3. If the person convicted under this section is not a New Jersey
resident, the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the
nonresident driving privilege of the person based on the age of the
person and submit to the Commission the required report. The
court shall not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under
this section. Upon receipt of a report by the court, the Commission
shall notify the appropriate officials in the licensing jurisdiction of
the suspension or postponement.
b. Exceptions.
1. This section shall not prohibit an underage person from consuming
or possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony, or rite or consuming or possessing an
alcoholic beverage in the presence of and with the permission of a
parent, guardian or relative who has attained the legal age to
purchase and consume alcoholic beverages.
2. This section shall not prohibit the possession of alcoholic beverages
by any underaged person while actually engaged in the
performance of employment by a person who was licensed under
Title 33 of the Revised Statutes, or while actively engaged in the
preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel
management program at a county vocational school or post-
§ 6-6.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 6-6.5
AO:330
§ 6-7. IDENTIFICATION CARDS. [Ord. No. 2009-46 § 2]
This section shall provide an application fee and licensing requirements for
the issuance of identification cards for licensees and covered employees.
secondary educational institution; however, this section shall not
be construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty under this
section, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other section of law against a
person who is convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on
or at premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
c. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
GUARDIAN — Shall mean a person who has qualified as a guardian of
the underage person pursuant to a testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — Shall mean the underage person's grandparent, aunt or
uncle, sibling, or any other person related by blood or affinity.
d. Training: TIPS (Training for Intervention Procedures) and TAMS
(Techniques of Alcohol Management).
Each and every liquor licensee is required to ensure all front of the
house employees (managers, servers, hosts, bartenders and bussers)
are certified and keep current a certification in Alcohol Management.
TIPS (Training for Intervention Procedures) and TAMS (Techniques
of Alcohol Management) certification will be accepted. Additional
programs may be acceptable to be determined on an individual basis.
The licensee will keep on record a copy of employee certification #'s
and expiration dates as part of employee files and upon request shall
attach all TIPS or TAMS program current cards to their E141A forms
for inspection.
a. Definition. A "Covered Employee" is an employee or agent who either:
1. Serves alcoholic beverages as part of his/her job duties;
2. Is a waitperson who serves alcoholic beverages;
3. Is any employee that has supervisory authority; or
4. Is any employee whose duties include the performance of security
functions in determining admittance or removal from the licensed
premises.
b. After approval of an application and before the license is issued, every
plenary retail consumption licensee or Covered Employee shall provide
full and complete answers, in writing, on a form identified as an alcohol
beverage control employee application, furnished by the Lakewood
Police Department, to all questions presented thereon as to identity,
character, antecedents and general experience of any such licensee or
Covered Employee.
§ 6-6.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 6-7
AO:331
c. The licensee or Covered Employee shall, along with filing the
application, attach to the application one color passport photograph,
two by two (2 x 2) inches. Said photograph is not to have been taken
more than 30 days prior to the date of the filing of the application.
d. The licensee or Covered Employee shall submit to having his/her
fingerprints taken as a requirement of the application process.
e. Two separate and distinct forms of identification shall be submitted by
the licensee or Covered Employee while executing the alcoholic
beverage employee application for review by an appropriate official.
f. The applicant or licensee on behalf of the applicant shall provide a
money order or check, payable to the Township of Lakewood, for the
sum of $50 to defray the expense of processing the application. Also,
the applicant or licensee on behalf of the applicant shall provide a
money order or check to be payable to the New Jersey State Police,
Identification Division, in an amount which shall be the current charge
posted by the New Jersey State Police, Identification Division, for the
fingerprint processing fee for each applicant. The fingerprint
processing fee may be subject to change as the New Jersey State Police,
Identification Division, changes or regulates their fee schedule.
g. If a plenary retail consumption license is granted or transferred, the
Lakewood Police Department shall, upon application of the licensee or
Covered Employee, issue an identification card showing compliance
with the provisions of this section. The identification card, issued
pursuant thereto, shall be physically located on the licensed premises
so that it can be submitted upon demand at any time during business
hours. The identification card shall remain valid for the remainder of
the calendar year in which it was issued; as well as the next complete
calendar year. It shall expire on the 30th of June of the third calendar
year. The individual holder shall undergo a renewal procedure resulting
in the issuance of a new identification card by the Department of Public
Safety.
h. The licensee or Covered Employee, whose primary function is the
serving of alcoholic beverages or the performance of security duties
that involve determining admittance or removal from the licensed
premises, while in the exercise of his/her duties on the licensed
premises, shall at all times conspicuously wear the presentation side of
the identification card bearing the individual's first name and
identification number. For purpose of this subsection, a waitperson or
other type of employee whose primary function is the serving of food or
performing of services that does not require the delivery of service of
alcoholic beverages or only incidentally involves the service of alcoholic
beverages while serving a meal shall not be covered by this subsection.
i. Renewal requirements shall compel the licensee or Covered Employee
in making a formal application to renew his/her permit prior to its
expiration on June 30. Renewal, as defined under this section, shall
§ 6-7 LAKEWOOD CODE § 6-7
AO:332
Chapter 7
(RESERVED)
The original submission for Traffic as Chapter 7 was current through
September 23, 1999. The Traffic Chapter has been amended
beginning with Ordinance No. 2000-10 and is now codified as
Chapter 11.
Chapter 8
PARKS, PLAYGROUNDS AND RECREATIONAL AREAS
occur prior to the expiration of the applicant's identification card as
outlined in paragraph g. The fee of $50 shall be submitted each time a
renewal application is introduced.
j. No licensee shall engage any Covered Employee connected with the
business of the licensee, unless the Covered Employee has conformed
to the rules and regulations set forth in this section. If new Covered
Employees are hired by the licensee, such new Covered Employees
shall comply with the regulations set forth in this section before being
permitted to work in the licensed premises.
k. If the applicant for a plenary retail consumption license is a
corporation, all the officers thereof shall comply with the regulations of
this section pertaining to the license involved; and should there be a
replacement or election of new officers during the licensed term, such
replaced or newly elected officers must comply with the requirements
of this section.
l. Any identification card issued to a Covered Employee or licensee under
this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the Township of
Lakewood if the Covered Employee or licensee engages in any conduct
that is deemed to be a violation, or causes a licensed premises to be in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any statute of the
State of New Jersey or the United States regarding alcoholic beverages,
or any of the regulations or rules of the Township of Lakewood or other
competent municipal authority or board having been designated by the
Township of Lakewood, the State Director of the Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control, or any Township of Lakewood ordinance relating to a
licensed premises.
m. Any Covered Employee or licensee whose identification card is subject
to suspension or revocation shall be entitled to a hearing before the
Township of Lakewood or any other competent municipal authority or
board having been designated by the Township of Lakewood.
In the event that an applicant shall lose his/her bar identification card,
a replacement card may be obtained for a fee of $5, check or money
order.
§ 6-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-1
AO:333
§ 8-1. TITLE. [1971 Code § 16-1]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Public Park and
Playground Regulations of the Township of Lakewood.
§ 8-2. PURPOSE. [1971 Code § 16-2]
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for making and enforcing rules and
regulations for the government, use and policing of all public parks, open
spaces, playgrounds, beaches, waterfronts and places for public resort and
recreation and to provide penalties for violations thereof.
§ 8-3. DEFINITIONS. [1971 Code § 16-3]
As used in this chapter:
PUBLIC PARKS AND PLAYGROUNDS — Shall mean all public parks,
squares, open spaces, playgrounds, beaches, waterfronts and places for
public resort and recreation, and also streets, avenues, boulevards and
parkways leading to and connecting same, or any of them; and shall include
pavilions, stands, shelters or other suitable buildings or structures with the
apparatus and furniture used in connection therewith; and shall include
lakes, ponds, streams and other waters and lands covered thereby, rights of
flowage and other rights therein, and the shores and banks thereof; wherein
such are used for public parks, resort or recreation; and shall further
include all places, structures and equipment leased, rented, operated or
otherwise subject to management, regulation or control by the Township
pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:61-1, et seq.
WATERS — Shall mean lakes, ponds, streams and parts thereof and whether
such waters are in a liquid or solid state.
§ 8-4. RECREATIONAL FACILITIES DESIGNATED. [1971 Code
§ 16-4; Ord. No. 2006-28 § 1]
The following are recreation facilities of the Township of Lakewood
governed by this chapter:
Lakewood Pine Park, Crystal Lake, Larry D'Zio Park, Sunset Playground,
John Street Playground, Clarke School, Clifton Avenue School, Spruce
Street, Lake Carasaljo, Lake Manetta, Brook Road Sports Complex, Middle
School, Lakewood High School and Princeton Avenue School, as well as
all additional parks and playground areas dedicated hereinafter and all
areas, lands and premises under the direction and control of the Parks and
Recreation Advisory Board or Community School when used as recreational
facilities.32
a. Crystal Lake Preserve Area.
32.Editor's Note: The Southeast Preservation Area was designated as a recreational facility
by an ordinance adopted 7-26-90. A legal description of this area may be found on file in
the Office of the Township Clerk attached to that ordinance.
§ 8-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 8-4
AO:334
Beginning at a point formed by the intersection of the (right-of-way)
centerlines of Carlton Avenue and Cedar Drive; thence:
1. Leaving said centerline of Cedar Drive in a northwesterly direction
in a straight line of approximately 360 feet in length to the
intersection of the centerlines of Cedar Drive and Thorndike
Avenue; thence
2. Along the centerline of Cedar Drive in a northwesterly direction to
the intersection of the centerlines of Cedar Drive with First
Avenue; thence
3. Along the centerline of First Avenue in a northerly direction to the
intersection of the centerlines of First Avenue and Lafayette
Boulevard; thence
4. Along the centerline of Lafayette Boulevard in a westerly direction
in a straight line an approximate distance of 1,115 feet to a point
still on the centerline of Lafayette Boulevard; thence
5. Leaving said centerline in a northwesterly direction in a straight
line within the right-of-way of Lafayette Boulevard and Whitesville
Road to a point on the southern right-of-way line of Whitesville
Road, said point being an approximate distance of 570 feet; thence
6. Leaving said point in a southerly direction through Lot 85 and
along the common boundary line of 5.01 and 6.01 with Lots 84 and
93 Block 251.01, an approximate distance of 455 feet, to the
centerline of Cedar Drive; thence
7. Along the centerline of Cedar Drive in a westerly direction to the
intersection of the centerline of Cedar Drive with the easterly
property line of Lot 46 Block 251.01; thence
8. Along the property line of Lot 46 Block 251.01 in a counterclockwise
direction to the intersection of the easterly most right-ofway
line of Drake Road with the common property corner of Lots 46
and 88 Block 251.01; thence
9. Leaving said right-of-way intersection in a southeasterly direction
along the common property boundary between Lot 88 Block 251.01
with Lot 46 Block 251.01, an approximate distance of 801 feet to
the angular property corner of Lot 46; thence
10. Along a straight line approximately 320 feet in a southeasterly
direction, to the common property corner of Lots 44, 88 and 35
Block 251.01; thence
11. Along the common property lines between Lots 44 and 35 Block
251.01 and Lot 88 Block 251.01 in a southerly direction to the
intersection of the centerline of Vernon Street; thence
§ 8-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-4
AO:335
12. Along the centerline of Vernon Street in an easterly direction to the
intersection of the centerlines of Clarkson Avenue with Vernon
Street; thence
13. Along the centerline of Clarkson Avenue in a southerly direction to
the intersection of the centerlines of Drake Road with Clarkson
Avenue; thence
14. Along the centerline of Drake Road, which becomes Ridgeway
Place, in an easterly direction to the intersection of the centerline
of Rutledge Avenue; thence
15. Along the centerline of Rutledge Avenue in a northerly direction
145 feet, more or less; thence
16. Easterly, 125 feet, more or less, to a point in Block 334 Lot 1;
thence
17. Southerly and running through Block 334 Lot 1, 145 feet more or
less to the intersection with the centerline of Ridgeway Place;
thence
18. Easterly, along the centerline of Ridgeway Place, which becomes
James Street in an easterly direction to the intersection of the
centerline of Edmonds Avenue; thence
19. Along the centerline of Edmonds Avenue in a northerly direction to
the intersection of the centerlines of Vernon Street with Edmonds
Avenue; thence
20. Along the centerline of Vernon Street in an easterly direction to the
intersection of the centerlines of Grantwood Avenue with Vernon
Street; thence
21. Along the centerline of Grantwood Avenue in a northerly direction
to the intersection of the centerlines of Oxford Street with
Grantwood Avenue; thence
22. Along the centerline of Oxford Street in an easterly direction to the
intersection of the centerlines of Eden Avenue with Oxford Street;
thence
23. Along the centerline of Eden Avenue in a southerly direction to the
intersection of the centerlines of Vernon Street with Eden Avenue;
thence
24. Along the centerline of Vernon Street in an easterly direction to the
intersection of the centerlines of Firestone Avenue with Vernon
Street; thence
25. Along the centerline of Firestone Avenue in a northerly direction to
the intersection of the centerlines of Oxford Street with Firestone
Avenue; thence
§ 8-4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 8-4
AO:336
26. Along the centerline of Oxford Street in an easterly direction to the
intersection of the centerlines of Hatfield Avenue with Oxford
Street; thence
27. Along the common property lines between Lot 1 Block 318 and Lot
1 Bock 343 a distance of 450 feet in a southerly direction to the
south-westerly property corner of Lot 1 Block 318; thence
28. Along the common property lines between Lot 1 Block 318 and Lot
1 Block 343 in an easterly direction and continuing along the
centerline of Vernon Street in an easterly direction to the
intersection of the centerline of Vernon Street with the rear
property line of Lot 5 Block 284.04; thence
29. Along the rear property lines of Lots 5, 6 and 7 Block 284.04 in a
northerly direction to the intersection of the centerline of Ferndale
Avenue; thence
30. Along the centerline of Ferndale Avenue in a northerly direction
until said projection intersects with the common lot line between
Lots 79 and 64 Block 284; thence
31. Along the property line of Lot 79 Block 284 in a counter-clockwise
direction until said lot line intersects with the easterly right-of-way
line of Hatfield Avenue at the common property corner of Lot 29
Block 284; thence
32. Leaving said right-of-way intersection in a northwesterly direction
in a straight line approximately 190 feet to the common
intersection of the western-most right-of-way line of Firestone
Avenue with Lot 1 Block 282 and Lot 3 Block 281; thence
33. Along the common property lines of Lots 1 and 3 Block 281 with Lot
1 Block 282 a distance of approximately 285 feet to a point within
the right-of-way of Columbus Avenue South; thence
34. Southwest along the common property lines of Lot 1 Block 273 with
Lots 2 and 8 Block 273 and the northernmost right-of-way terminus
of Northfield Avenue a distance of approximately 530 feet to a point
on the western right-of-way line of Glen Avenue (formerly
Lakewood Park Avenue) South, also being the intersecting corners
of Lots 73 and 46 Block 251.01 with said right-of-way line; thence
35. Northwest in a straight line along the common property lines of
Lots 14 and 46 Block 251.01, Lot 79 Block 251.04, Lot 77 Block
251.04 and the terminus of the rights-of-way of Astor Avenue and
Myrtle Avenue, with Lot 73 Block 251.01, Lots 75 and 76.01 Block
251.04 and the terminus of the right-of-way of Herbert Street, a
distance of approximately 875 feet, to a point in the centerline of
Hammond Avenue; thence
§ 8-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-4
AO:337
§ 8-5. OPENING AND CLOSING HOURS OF PARKS.
§ 8-5.1. Designated Hours Posted. [1971 Code § 16-7.1]
§ 8-6. PUBLIC PLAYGROUNDS.
§ 8-6.1. Applicable Areas. [1971 Code § 4-15.1]
All public playgrounds, including basketball courts, tennis courts and other
playgrounds owned or operated by the Township, shall be subject to the
regulations set forth in this section.
§ 8-6.2. Use Regulations. [1971 Code § 4-15.2]
36. Northeast within the right-of-way of Hammond Avenue in a straight
line a distance of approximately 140 feet to the intersection of the
centerlines of Carlton Avenue with Cedar Drive, said point being
the point of beginning.
a. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be open to
the public every day of the year during the designated hours. The
opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted
within the park for public information and shall be determined by
resolution of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board and/or
Environmental Commission, or Township Committee.
b. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by
the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board and/or Environmental
Commission at any time and for any interval of time, either temporary
or at regular and stated intervals (daily or otherwise) and either
entirely or merely to certain uses, as the Parks and Recreation Advisory
Board may deem necessary.
a. No person other than municipal employees or officers shall enter upon
any public playground for any purpose between the hours of 9:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m.
b. No person shall engage in fighting, use vile or abusive language, be in
possession of or consume intoxicating liquors, make any fires, destroy
public property, or in any other manner conduct himself in a disorderly
or obscene manner on any public playground.
c. All persons using a public playground shall obey all rules and
regulations posted at the entrance of the playground for the special use
or conduct required on that particular playground. Rules and
regulations for each particular playground shall be posted by order of
the Township Committee after recommendation from the Parks and
Recreation Advisory Board.
d. No person shall litter, throw, leave or place trash, debris, garbage,
bottles, paper or other refuse on any public playground.
§ 8-4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 8-6.3
AO:338
§ 8-6.3. Violation. [1971 Code § 4-15.3]
The Judge of the Municipal Court or the Superior Court Judge having
jurisdiction over juvenile matters shall be empowered to deny use of
playground facilities to any adult or child found guilty of a violation of any
of the provisions of this section after written notice to such adult or to the
parent or guardian of the child.
§ 8-7. GENERAL REGULATIONS.
§ 8-7.1. Motor Vehicles and Motor Boats. [1971 Code § 16-6.1]
No motor vehicles, ice boats, motor boats or snowmobiles of any kind shall
be permitted on Lake Carasaljo, Lake Manetta or the "Safety Pond". Motor
boats propelled solely by electric motors, batteries or motor vehicles or
motor boats operated by any branch of the government of the State of
New Jersey or permitted by special permit of the Township of Lakewood
for exhibition or government or proprietary functions shall be excepted.
Emergency vehicles such as first aid motor boats or police boats shall also
be permitted. All boats shall conform with New Jersey State regulations.
a. No motorcycles, snowmobiles, trail bikes, mopeds, autos, or other types
of motorized vehicles whatsoever shall be permitted in the following
places:
1. On the pathways around Lake Carasaljo;
2. On the pathways or trails within Lakewood Pine Park;
3. On the surface of any playground, baseball field or any recreational
facility within the Township;
4. In any area where a group of children or other persons are engaged
in other recreational activities.
b. No person shall drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park
roads or parking areas, or such areas as may on occasion be specifically
designated as temporary areas by the Parks and Recreation Advisory
Board for operation of motor bikes, mopeds or motorcycles or other
vehicles.
c. No person shall park a vehicle in other than an established designated
parking area. All parking shall be in accordance with posted directions
and in conformance with the instructions of any attendant who may be
present.
d. No person shall leave a vehicle standing or parked at night in
established parking areas or elsewhere in the park areas.
§ 8-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-7.2
AO:339
§ 8-7.2. Inflatable Boats, Rafts and Tubes; Foam and Fiberglass
Boards. [1971 Code § 16-6.1]
No inflatable boats, rafts and tubes of the type and construction commonly
manufactured for pool usage, or foam and fiberglass boards of any kind
shall be permitted on the waters of Lake Carasaljo, Lake Manetta or the
"Safety Pond".
§ 8-7.3. Boat Rental. [1971 Code § 16-6.2]
No person shall engage in the rental of boats or the conduct of boat
liveries upon the waters or lands of any of the parks, playgrounds, lakes,
waters or lands within the Township or its recreational facilities without
first obtaining a permit from the Township as authorized by the Township
Committee.
§ 8-7.4. Sale of Food and Drink. [1971 Code § 16-6.3]
No person shall engage in the sale of food, drink or merchandise within any
of the public parks, playgrounds, or other public recreational facilities of the
Township without first obtaining a permit from the Township as authorized
by the Township Committee.
§ 8-7.5. Bicycles. [1971 Code § 16-6.4]
§ 8-7.6. Litter. [1971 Code § 16-6.5]
a. No person shall leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when
such is provided and there is space available.
b. No person shall ride a bicycle without reasonable regard to the safety of
others.
c. No person shall leave a bicycle in such a position as to be hazardous to
any other person or object.
a. No person shall throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be
placed on the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, or any body of
water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary stream, storm sewer,
or drain flowing into such water, any substance, matter or thing,
whether it be liquid or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of
the waters.
b. No person shall bring in or dump any bottles, broken glass, ashes,
paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, refuse, or other trash
in any park or playground. No such refuse or other trash shall be placed
in any waters in or contiguous to any park or left anywhere on the
grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where
these are provided. If receptacles are not provided, all such rubbish or
waste shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for
its presence, and shall be properly disposed.
§ 8-7.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 8-7.7
AO:340
§ 8-7.7. Fires. [1971 Code § 16-6.6]
No person shall build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas
as may be designated by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board, the
Township Committee and/or Environmental Commission. No person shall
drop, throw or otherwise dispose of lighted matches, burning cigarettes or
cigars, tobacco or other inflammable material within any park or on any
highways, roads, or streets abutting or contiguous thereto.
§ 8-7.8. Miscellaneous Activities Regulated. [1971 Code § 4-11.1;
§ 16-6]
a. Prohibitions and Restrictions.
1. All ice fishing, where permitted, shall be at the person's own risk.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to place a burden upon
the Township to determine whether or not the ice on the lakes or
ponds is in a safe condition.
2. No person shall be permitted upon the ice of any of the lakes or
ponds in the Township in an intoxicated condition, nor shall any
person using the recreation facilities conduct himself in such
manner as to endanger the safety of others lawfully upon the
premises.
3. Any rules and regulations set forth in this chapter or hereinafter
adopted by the Township pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
shall be conspicuously posted in all places wherein such rules and
regulations are in effect.
4. No person shall willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper
with or displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches,
fireplaces, railing, pavings or paving materials, water lines or other
public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or
placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, State
posts, or other boundary markers, or other structures or
equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenance whatsoever,
either real or personal.
5. No person shall fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and
washrooms in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the
age of six years shall use the restrooms and washrooms designated
for the opposite sex.
6. No person shall dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees,
shrubs or plants or other wood or materials, or make any
excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency,
except as directed by the Township Committee or Department of
Public Works.
§ 8-7.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-7.8
AO:341
7. No person shall construct or erect any building or structure of
whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary, or run or string
any public service utility into, upon, or across park lands, except on
special permit of the Township Committee.
8. No person shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree
or plant or injure the bark, or pick flowers or seed of any tree or
plant, except as a part of a school class project, dig in or otherwise
disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure the natural beauty or
usefulness of any area.
9. No person shall climb any tree, or walk, stand or sit upon
monuments, vases, planters, fountains, railings, fences or upon any
other property not designated or constructed for such purposes.
10. No person shall tie or hitch an animal to any tree, plant or fixed
object.
11. No person shall park a vehicle in other than an established or
designated parking area, and such shall be in accordance with any
posted directions and in compliance with the instruction of any
attendant who may be present.
12. No person shall leave a vehicle standing or parked at night in an
established parking area or elsewhere in the park areas, without
Police permission and only in emergency.
13. No person shall frequent any waters or places designated for the
purposes of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, except
between such hours of the day as shall be designated by the Parks
and Recreation Advisory Board and/or Environmental Commission
for such purposes for each individual site.
14. No person shall erect, maintain, use or occupy, in any park or
playground, any tent, shelter, or structure of any kind without
written permit of the Township.
15. No nude swimming shall be permitted at any time in any park or
playground in the Township.
16. No person shall dress or undress in any area or in any vehicle, toilet
or other place within any public park or playground.
17. No person shall navigate, direct, or handle any boat in such a
manner as to annoy or frighten or endanger any other person or
boat.
18. No person shall carry or possess firearms or fireworks of any
description including but not limited to air-rifles, spring-guns, bow
and arrows, slings or other forms of weapons potentially inimical to
wildlife and dangerous to human safety. Shooting into park areas
from beyond park boundaries is forbidden. Lawfully regulated and
licensed trapping shall be permitted.
§ 8-7.8 LAKEWOOD CODE § 8-7.8
AO:342
19. No person shall picnic in a place other than those designated for
that purpose. Park attendants or Officers shall have the authority to
regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent
congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and
convenience of all.
20. No person shall leave a picnic area without first extinguishing all
fires and placing all trash in the disposal receptacles where
provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then trash
shall be carried out of the park area for proper disposal.
21. No person shall take part in or abet the playing of any games
involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls,
stones, arrows, javelins, horseshoes, quoits, or model airplanes
except in those areas set aside for such forms of recreation; the
playing of football, baseball, lacrosse and other sports is prohibited
except on the fields and courts or areas provided therefor. Rollerskating,
rollerblading and skateboarding shall be confined to those
areas specifically designated for such pastimes.
22. No person shall ride a horse except on designated bridle trails,
where permitted. Horses shall be thoroughly broken and properly
restrained, and ridden with due care, and shall not be hitched to
any rock, tree, shrub or other fixed object.
23. No person at any time shall bring alcoholic beverages, or consume
alcoholic beverages or be under the influence of intoxicating liquor
in a park or playground area. Special permits may be issued by the
Township Committee with advice of the Chief of Police and Parks
and Recreation Advisory Board and/or Environmental Commission
for group use of alcoholic beverages in parks or recreation areas.33
24. No person shall possess or cause to explode or discharge or burn,
any firecrackers, torpedoes, rockets, or other fireworks. This
prohibition includes any substance, compound, mixture, or article
that in conjunction with any other substance or compound would
be dangerous. Special permits may be provided by the Township
Committee or its designate for conducting properly supervised
fireworks in designated park areas.
25. No person shall allow the entry of a dog or other domestic animals
into areas clearly marked by the Parks and Recreation Advisory
Board and/or Environmental Commission by signs bearing the
words "Domestic Animals Prohibited in this Area" or other similarly
worded signs. Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting the
running of dogs at large. All dogs in those areas where such
animals are permitted shall be restrained at all times on adequate
leashes not greater than six feet in length.
33.Editor's Note: See Chapter 3, Section 3-4, for Special Permits and this chapter, Section
8-13.
§ 8-7.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-7.8
AO:343
§ 8-8. ICE SKATING AND ICE FISHING ON LAKE MANETTA AND
LAKE CARASALJO.
§ 8-8.1. Ice Skating. [1971 Code § 16-5.1]
26. No person shall solicit alms or contributions for any purpose,
whether public or private in any park or playground.
27. No person shall enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public" nor
shall any person use, or abet in the use of any area in violation of
posted notices.
28. No person shall gamble or participate in or abet any game of
chance except in such areas and such regulations as may be
designated by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board and/or the
Township Committee.
29. No person shall sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats or
benches or other areas or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening,
abusive, insulting or indecent language or engage in any disorderly
conduct or behavior tending to breach the public peace.
30. No person shall disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person
or party occupying any area or participating in any activity under
the authority of a permit; or in a peaceful and unlawful manner.
31. No person shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign,
placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever, nor shall any
person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatsoever on any
public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park without
permission of Parks and Recreation Advisory Board or the
Township Committee.
32. No remote control toy boats shall be permitted on the waters of
Lake Carasaljo, Lake Manetta or the "Safety Pond" and their
operation or use is expressly prohibited hereby.
33. Swimming at Lake Carasaljo. No person shall swim or bathe in any
area of Lake Carasaljo except in the water immediately contiguous
to the bathing beaches, and no person shall bathe or swim at any
time except when lifeguards duly assigned by the Township are on
duty.
a. No person shall ice skate upon the ice formed upon the waters of Lake
Manetta or upon the ice formed upon the waters of the canal
connecting Lake Manetta and Lake Carasaljo at any time.
b. Ice skating shall be permitted at the risk of those persons engaged in
the ice skating upon only that portion of Lake Carasaljo easterly of the
line set forth in subsection 8-8.2, which is east of the ice fishing area,
and said line separates the area wherein ice fishing is permitted from
the area in which the general public is permitted to ice skate.
§ 8-7.8 LAKEWOOD CODE § 8-8.1
AO:344
§ 8-8.2. Ice Fishing. [1971 Code § 16-5]
§ 8-9. LIFESAVING DEVICES FOR VESSELS.
§ 8-9.1. Definitions. [1971 Code § 16-6A.1]
As used in this section:
OPERATE — Shall mean to navigate or otherwise use a vessel.
VESSEL — Shall mean a boat or watercraft, other than a seaplane, on the
water, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water
including rowboats and canoes but not including surfboards, racing shells,
rowing skulls and racing kayaks.
c. Ice skating shall be permitted only after the Department of Public
Works has determined the ice to be safe and has posted signs having a
red ball not less than 18 inches in diameter with a white or light yellow
background, the signs to be within 500 feet of each other.
d. Ice skating shall be permitted on the area known as the pond of safety
or safety pond and at no time shall ice fishing be permitted on the pond.
e. It is specifically prohibited to throw sticks or stones or debris upon the
ice of Lake Carasaljo or any lake or pond when ice skating is permitted.
a. No person shall engage in that certain sport or recreation known as ice
fishing on the waters or ice of Lake Carasaljo, on the easterly portion of
the lake as divided by an imaginary straight line being on the south side
of Lake Carasaljo at the center line of Myrtle Place and extending
northerly on the same course as the center line of Myrtle Place to a
point in the north bank of Lake Carasaljo approximately 150 yards east
of the center line of Lakewood Avenue.
b. Ice fishing shall be permitted on the ice formed upon the waters of Lake
Manetta and that portion of Lake Carasaljo wherein ice fishing is
provided as set forth in paragraph a above, solely at the risk of the
persons participating in ice fishing, and ice skating from place to place
on the ice by those engaged in the recreation of ice fishing only shall be
permitted on Lake Manetta and the portion of Lake Carasaljo where ice
fishing is permitted, anything to the contrary in this chapter
notwithstanding.
c. No person engaged in ice fishing or for any other reason shall cut or
make holes in the ice of either Lake Carasaljo or Lake Manetta, except
that ice fishermen may cut holes in the ice in areas wherein ice fishing
is permitted. The holes shall not exceed 12 inches in diameter, and shall
be for the purpose of fishing through the ice only.
§ 8-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-9.2
AO:345
§ 8-9.2. Prohibition. [1971 Code § 16-6A.2]
No person shall operate or allow any person to operate any vessel in or
on Lake Carasaljo, Lake Manetta or the "Safety Pond" in the Township of
Lakewood unless such vessel has a serviceable United States Coast Guard
approved personal flotation device (PFD) for each person on board. Such
PFD's shall be of the type(s) and number(s) required by the United States
Coast Guard for a vessel of that class operating on navigable waters. Such
PFD's shall be readily accessible when the vessel is underway.
§ 8-9.3. Enforcement. [1971 Code § 16-6A.3]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Lakewood Police
Department through the issuance of a complaint and summons in a form
approved by the Administrative Director of the Courts.
§ 8-9.4. Penalties. [1971 Code § 16-6A.4; New]
For violation of any provisions of this section, the penalties shall be as
described in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 8-10. RULES AND REGULATIONS: PINE PARK, BROOK ROAD
SPORTS COMPLEX SHELTER AND LARRY D'ZIO PARK.
§ 8-10.1. Availability. [1971 Code § 16-9.1; Ord. No. 2002-44 § 2]
a. Organizations, boards, committees and groups organized within or
sponsored by the Township Committee of the Township of Lakewood
shall be permitted free use of the following locations in Pine Park: Swim
Club, Picnic Area #1, Picnic Area #2.
b. Organizations, boards, committees and groups organized within or
sponsored by the Township Committee of the Township of Lakewood
shall be permitted free use of the Brook Road Sports Complex Shelter
(hereinafter referred to as "BRSCS").
c. Organizations, boards, committees and groups organized within or
sponsored by the Township Committee of the Township of Lakewood
shall be permitted free use of the Larry D'Zio Park (hereinafter referred
to as "D'Zio Park").
d. Any Lakewood Township or school-related youth organization shall be
permitted to use the following locations in Pine Park on a rental fee
basis: Swim Club, Picnic Area #1, Picnic Area #2. The sponsoring
group or organization will be directly responsible for all Township
expenses related to large functions which require additional Township
personnel.
e. Any Lakewood Township or school-related youth organization shall be
permitted to use the BRSCS on a rental fee basis. The sponsoring group
or organization will be directly responsible for all Township expenses
related to large functions which require additional Township personnel.
§ 8-9.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 8-10.1
AO:346
§ 8-10.2. Prohibitions. [1971 Code § 16-9.2; Ord. No. 2002-44 § 3]
§ 8-10.3. Applications and Fees.34 [1971 Code § 16-9.3; Ord. No.
2002-44 § 4; Ord. No. 2018-23]
f. Any Lakewood Township or school-related youth organization shall be
permitted to use D'Zio Park. The sponsoring group or organization will
be directly responsible for all Township expenses related to large
functions which require additional Township personnel.
g. Lakewood residents, civic, social and nonprofit organizations, churches
and synagogues shall be permitted to use the following locations in Pine
Park on a cost/rental fee basis: Swim Club, Picnic Area #1, Picnic Area
#2. Rental fees shall be determined by the number of participants
involved and the existence of special requirements as determined by
the Township maintenance staff.
h. Lakewood residents, civic, social and nonprofit organizations, churches
and synagogues shall be permitted to use the BRSCS on a cost/rental
fee basis. Rental fees shall be determined by the number of participants
involved and the existence of special requirements as determined by
the Township maintenance staff.
i. Lakewood residents, civic, social and nonprofit organizations, churches
and synagogues shall be permitted to use D'Zio Park on a cost/rental fee
basis. Rental fees shall be determined by the number of participants
involved and the existence of special requirements as determined by
the number of participants involved and the existence of special
requirements as determined by the Township maintenance staff.
j. The Township Committee reserves the right to deny the use of the Pine
Park Swim Club and Pine Park Picnic Areas #1 and #2, the BRSCS and/
or D'Zio Park for any purpose not consistent with the best interests of
the community.
a. Utilization of the Pine Park Swim Club, Pine Park Picnic Areas #1 and
#2, the BRSCS and D'Zio Park must have the express approval of the
Township Committee.
b. Programs interfering with the regular Township work schedule or
programs classified as a nuisance by the Township Committee shall be
prohibited.
c. Activities interfering with or hindering the utilization by the general
public of the Pine Park Swim Club, Pine Park Picnic Areas #1 and #2,
BRSCS and/or D'Zio Park, are strictly prohibited.
a. A priority schedule and rate schedule for the use of the Pine Park Swim
Club, Pine Park Picnic Areas #1 and #2, BRSCS and D'Zio Park shall be
34.Editor's Note: See Section 8-11 for preference use of the Brook Road Sports Complex
Athletic Fields.
§ 8-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-10.3
AO:347
§ 8-10.4. Rental Fees. [1971 Code § 16-9.4; Ord. No. 2001-35 § 1;
Ord. No. 2002-44 § 5; Ord. No. 2018-23]
established by the Township Committee. The Township shall post signs
which state all park rules and regulations and fees.
b. Applications for the use of, Pine Park Picnic Areas #1 and #2 and D'Zio
Park shall be available in the Public Works Department. Application(s)
for the use of the above referenced locations must be filed with the
Public Works Department at least 10 days prior to the date(s) of the
proposed event(s).
c. Upon approval of an application, a permit to use Pine Park Picnic Areas
#1 and #2, BRSCS or D'Zio Park shall be issued by the Director of
Public Works or the Director's designee(s). In order for a date to be
reserved, rental fees and deposits shall be paid at the time the
application is approved.
d. Copies of the permit shall be distributed to the sponsor and the
Superintendent of Parks.
a. The rental fee schedule shall be part of the application for the use of
Pine Park Swim Club, Pine Park Picnic Areas #1 and #2, the BRSCS,
and D'Zio Park and shall be uniformly applicable to all organizations,
groups and individuals sponsoring picnics at the aforesaid locations.
b. Additional fees may be charged at the discretion of the Township
Committee for any special amenities and/or services such as lighting,
seating or special maintenance services.
c. Deposits, if required, will be refunded by the Director of Public Works
or the Director's designee if additional Township services are not
required and if the event venue is left clean and otherwise acceptable
condition as determined by the Superintendent or Assistant
Superintendent of Parks.
d. Rental Fee Schedule:
Residents Nonresidents
# Participants Fee
# Participants Fee
Under 50 $25.00 Under 50 $ 50.00
51-99 $50.00 51-99 $100.00
100-299 $75.00 +
$100.00 deposit
100-299 $150.00 + $100.00
deposit
300-499 $100.00 +
$200.00 deposit
300-499 $200.00 + $200.00
deposit
§ 8-10.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 8-10.4
AO:348
§ 8-10.5. Regulations. [1971 Code § 16-9.5; Ord. No. 2001-35 § 1;
Ord. No. 2002-44 § 6; Ord. No. 2018-23]
Residents Nonresidents
# Participants Fee
# Participants Fee
500 & up Fees to be
determined by
the Township
Committee
500 & up Fees to be
determined by the
Township
Committee
e. The Amphitheater at Lake Carasaljo. This rental fee schedule shall be
part of the application for the use of the amphitheater at Lake Carasaljo
and shall be applicable to all organizations, groups and individuals
sponsoring events at the location.
Rental Fee Schedule:
Residents Nonresidents
# Participants Fee
# Participants Fee
Under 50 $50.00 Under 50 $100.00
51-99 $100.00 51—99 $200.00
100-299 $150.00 +
$200.00 deposit
100—299 $300.00 + $200.00
deposit
300-499 $200.00 +
$400.00 deposit
300—499 $400.00 + $400.00
deposit
500 & up To be determined
by the Township
Committee
500 & up To be determined
by the Township
Committee
a. No permit will be issued until a signed hold harmless agreement is
submitted to the Public Works Director or the Director's designee.
b. Sponsoring organizations agree to be responsible for the entire event
venue and to pay for any damage which results from their use of said
location.
c. Law enforcement, security or maintenance personnel must be in
attendance when large crowds are involved. The Township Committee,
through its representatives, the Superintendent of Pine Park, the
Superintendent of the BRSCS, and the Superintendent of D'Zio Park,
will determine the need for the aforesaid support services and make
arrangements for the assignment of such personnel to an event
requiring law enforcement, security, and/or maintenance coverage.
§ 8-10.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-10.5
AO:349
d. Sponsoring organizations shall provide sufficient competent adult
supervision. An adequate number of supervisory staff will be agreed
upon at the time the permit is issued.
e. Alcoholic beverages are prohibited from the Pine Park Swim Club, Pine
Park Picnic Areas #1 and #2, the BRSCS, and D'Zio Park unless specific
approval is granted by the Township Committee.
f. Use of electrical equipment must have specific approval from the
Township Committee. Requests for such approval shall be made at the
time of application for use of the Pine Park Swim Club, Pine Park Picnic
Areas #1 and #2, the BRSCS, or D'Zio Park.
g. Any decorations, signs, etc., shall be erected in a manner which will not
be destructive to Township property. Fire and safety regulations shall
be adhered to at all times and all decorations shall be approved by the
Superintendent of Pine Park, the Superintendent of the BRSCS, or the
Superintendent of D'Zio Park.
h. In the event that admission fees are to be collected or when fees are to
be paid to any agency or group, the organization using the Pine Park
Swim Club, Pine Park Picnic Areas #1 and #2, the BRSCS, or the D'Zio
Park, shall directly assume all responsibility as applied to funds
collected or contracts entered into by the user.
i. Permits are not transferable. All rental fees, deposits and service
charges shall be paid in advance. At least 24 hours' notice must be
given to cancel reservations.
j. No person or organization shall conduct any temporary construction
work, such as installing temporary seating, platforms, runways or
additional lighting equipment, wiring, etc., without the specific
approval of the Superintendent of Pine Park, the Superintendent of the
BRSCS, or the Superintendent of D'Zio Park.
k. Requests for seating or any other special amenities or equipment shall
be made at the time of application to utilize the Pine Park Swim Club,
Pine Park Picnic Areas #1 and #2, the BRSCS, or D'Zio Park. Extra
compensation shall be paid to defray charges for supervision,
transferring equipment, setting-up equipment already in the event
venue, etc.
l. All arrangements to bring in scenery, costumes or other properties for
any activity shall be made at the time the application is submitted. Such
arrangements shall not interfere with the regular Township operation.
m. In the event of approval of an application for the use of the Pine Park
Swim Club, Pine Park Picnic Areas #1 and #2, the BRSCS, or D'Zio
Park, only those locations as set forth in the application and specifically
approved shall be utilized by the applicant and applicant's group. The
specified location shall only be utilized for the approved times pursuant
to the application filed with the Township Clerk.
§ 8-10.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 8-10.5
AO:350
§ 8-10.6. Enforcement. [1971 Code § 16-9.6; New; Ord. No. 2001-35
§ 1]
§ 8-10.7. Permit Required to Park Buses in Pine Park. [Ord. No.
99-33 §§ 1, 2]
§ 8-11. BROOK ROAD SPORTS COMPLEX ATHLETIC FIELDS.
§ 8-11.1. Availability. [1971 Code § 16-10.1]
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other ordinance to the contrary, first
preference for the use of the athletic fields located at Brook Road Sports
Complex shall be given to the following organizations as indicated below:
n. The Superintendent of Pine Park, the Superintendent of the BRSCS, or
the Superintendent of D'Zio Park will determine if the noise level of all
amplification systems utilized is excessive or acceptable.
o. Alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted at any event at the
amphitheater at Lake Carasaljo.
p. No permit will be issued for the use of the amphitheater unless
approved by the Township Committee.
a. The provisions of this section may be enforced by any member of the
Department of Parks and Recreation, member of Park Police or guards,
any Superintendent in charge of any particular park or playground, any
Police Officer of the Township or Special Police Officer or by the signing
of a complaint by any citizen observing a violation being committed.
All violators of this section or any of the provisions thereof shall be
subject to a penalty prescribed in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
b. The regulatory scheme and rules and regulations of this entire section
are hereby applicable to the use of the amphitheater and the North
Beach area for any events consistent with this section.
a. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any bus to park in Pine Park
without having first obtained a daily parking permit. Applications for
daily parking permits shall be made to a Pine Park officer at least 24
hours in advance of the date for the permit.
b. Daily parking permits for bus parking in Pine Park shall be issued at no
cost to the applicant.
a. Lakewood Pop Warner: August 1st through November 30th (football
fields).
b. Lakewood Little League: March 1st through July 31st (baseball fields).
c. Lakewood Soccer Club: March 1st through November 30th (soccer
fields).
§ 8-10.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-11.2
AO:351
§ 8-11.2. Applications. [1971 Code § 16-10.2]
All other organizations or individuals desiring to use the above-referenced
athletic fields shall make application to the Lakewood Community School/
Recreation Department. The Community School Director shall issue permits
for the use of the fields in accordance with the directives of subsection
8-11.1 as set forth above. Applications for permits for the use of these
facilities shall be available in the Township Clerk's Office, the Community
School Office/Recreation Office and the Pine Park Security Office and must
be filed with the Recreation Director no less than 10 days prior to the date
of the proposed event.
§ 8-11.3. Permits. [1971 Code § 16-10.3; Ord. No. 2018-23]
Upon approval of an application by the Community School Director and the
Director of Public Works, a permit to use any of the above fields shall be
issued by the Community School Director and shall be filed in the Public
Works Office and be distributed to the applicant and Superintendent of
Parks.
§ 8-12. FEEDING OF UNCONFINED WILDLIFE.
§ 8-12.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 98-65; Ord. No. 2005-78 § 1]
The purpose of this section is to establish an ordinance to prohibit the
feeding of unconfined wildlife in any public park or on any other property
owned or operated by the Township of Lakewood, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for failure to comply.
§ 8-12.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2005-78 § 1]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — Shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any
edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
a. Exceptions. Lakewood Little League, Lakewood Pop Warner and
Lakewood Soccer Club will be required to make application to the
Director of Public Works or the Director's designee prior to the date of
use of the fields as specified under subsection 8-11.1a.
§ 8-11.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 8-12.2
AO:352
WILDLIFE — Shall mean all animals that are neither human nor
domesticated.
§ 8-12.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2005-78 § 1]
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned
or operated by the Township of Lakewood, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation
centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers.)
§ 8-12.4. Posting of Notice. [Ord. No. 2005-78 § 1]
Notices prohibiting the feeding of wildlife shall be placed at all appropriate
places.
§ 8-12.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2005-78 § 1]
§ 8-12.6. Violations and Penalty. [Ord. No. 2005-78 § 1]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each and every violation. If
the violation is of a continuing nature, each and every day during which it
continues constitutes a separate and distinct offense.
§ 8-13. PERMIT FOR SPECIAL EVENTS IN PARKS.
§ 8-13.1. Permits. [1971 Code § 16-7.2; Ord. No. 2018-23]
Permits for special events in parks must be made in person at the
Department of Public Works at 1 America Avenue, Lakewood, New Jersey.
a. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Police
Department or other person whose duty it shall be to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
b. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
a. A current valid license or other bona fide government identification
must be presented at the time of the request. The following information
shall be submitted at the time of request:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The name and address of the person, persons, corporation, or
association sponsoring the activity, if any.
3. The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
4. The park or portion thereof for which such permit applies.
§ 8-12.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-13.1
AO:353
5. Any other relevant information that the Department of Public
Works shall find reasonably necessary for a fair determination as to
whether a permit should be issued.
6. The approximate number of persons attending the activity or event.
b. Standards for issuance of a use permit by the Parks and Recreation
Advisory Board and/or Environmental Commission shall include the
following findings:
1. That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the
park.
2. That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety,
and recreation.
3. That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated
will not include violence, crime, or disorderly conduct.
4. That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or
burdensome expense or Police operation by the Township.
5. That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the date and hour requested in the application.
6. Security must be hired by user for more than 200 people and the
permit can be denied if rules are not followed.
7. All scheduling of picnics shall be through the Parks Department.
Rain dates, if possible, will be rescheduled at no additional charge.
No refunds will be given.
c. Park fees.
1. Park fees will be calculated at the time of the request.
2. Fees totaling under $100.00 must be paid in full at the time of the
request.
3. Fees totaling more than $100.00 will require a deposit of $100.00
and the balance must be paid in full prior to the date of the activity
or event.
4. All fees and deposits must be paid by check or credit card, cash will
not be accepted. Deposits and payments are to be collected by the
Director of Public Works or the Director's designee.
5. Refunds will be issued if the Department of Public Works is notified
of a cancellation of the event or activity 72 hours prior to the
scheduled event or activity. If cancellation is less than 72 hours
prior to the scheduled event or activity, no refund shall be given.
§ 8-13.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 8-13.1
AO:354
§ 8-13.2. Enforcement. [1971 Code § 16-7.3]
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by any member of the
Department of Parks and Recreation, member of Park Police or guards,
any Superintendent in charge of any particular park or playground, any
Police Officer of the Township or Special Police Officer or by the signing
of a complaint by any citizen observing a violation being committed. The
Township shall post signs which state all park rules and regulations and
fees. Furthermore, signs will indicate that recycling is mandatory.
§ 8-13.3. Violations; Penalty. [1971 Code § 16-7.3]
All violators of this chapter or any of the provisions thereof shall be subject
to a penalty prescribed in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 8-14. JOHN PATRICK SPORTS COMPLEX.
§ 8-14.1. Smoking Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2006-44 §§ 1—4]
6. Any change in the date, time or location of the scheduled event or
activity must be made through the Department of Public Works.
7. Schools and organization or any group in excess of 25 persons must
provide a certificate of liability insurance naming Lakewood
Township as an additional insured. Liability insurance must be a
minimum of $250,000.00.
8. Alcohol is permitted in Pine Park. Consumption of alcohol requires
an additional $150.00 deposit which will be returned after a
satisfactory inspection of Pine Park by the Department of Public
Works.
9. Any request to use Town Square or the Township amphitheater, in
addition to the above, must have the approval of the Township
Manager's office.
a. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect citizens from
secondhand tobacco smoke.
b. Definition.
SMOKING — Shall mean the burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the
smoke from, or the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or any
other matter or substance which contains tobacco or any other matter
than can be smoked.
c. Smoking is hereby prohibited at the John Patrick Sports Complex.
d. This prohibition does not apply to the parking lot area.
§ 8-13.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 8-15
AO:355
§ 8-15. USE OF BALL FIELDS BY OUT-OF-TOWN GROUPS AND
ORGANIZED LEAGUES. [Ord. No. 2014-46]
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Chapter 8 to the contrary, the use of
all of the Township's ball fields by out-of-town groups and organized leagues
shall be subject to the following restrictions:
Chapter 9
TAXICABS
§ 9-1. TAXICAB RULES AND REGULATIONS ESTABLISHED. [Ord.
No. 99-29 § 2]
There is hereby established in the Township of Lakewood rules and
regulations regarding taxicabs.
§ 9-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 3; Ord. No. 2012-24 § 1]
As used in this chapter:
AUTOCAB — Shall mean and include any automobile or motor car,
commonly called taxi, engaged in the business of carrying passengers for
hire which is held out, announced or advertised to operate or run or which is
operated or run over any of the streets or public highways of this State, and
particularly accepts and discharges such persons as may offer themselves
for transportation from points or places to points or places within or without
the State.
PERSON — Shall mean and include any individual, copartnership,
association, corporation or joint stock company, their lessees, trustees, or
receivers appointed by any court whatsoever.
a. Times when the ball fields may be reserved:
1. Tuesdays: 6:00 p.m.-10:00 p.m. — only 3 of 4 fields can be reserved;
1 field must be held for local use;
2. Fridays: 8:00 a.m.-12:00 p.m.; 1:00 p.m.-5:00 p.m.; 6:00 p.m.-10:00
p.m. — only 3 of 4 fields can be reserved, except between 6:00 p.m.
and 10:00 p.m.;
3. Saturdays: 8:00 a.m.-12:00 p.m.; 1:00 p.m.-5:00 p.m.; 6:00
p.m.-10:00 p.m.
b. Each time slot can be rented for a $50.00 fee, except for the available
6:00 p.m. — 10:00 p.m. slots which will be charged at $75 and will
include lights.
c. Any use outside the above time periods shall require a letter to the
Township Manager or Mayor and possible Township Committee review.
§ 8-15 LAKEWOOD CODE § 9-2
AO:356
STREET — Shall mean and include any street, avenue, park, parkway,
highway or other public place.
TAXICABS — Shall mean any vehicle propelled by mechanical motor power,
engaged in the business of transportation of passengers for hire or pay
within the Township, either operated from stands in the public street or
public place, or on telephone calls to a central office or in any manner.
Specifically excluded from this definition are vehicles bearing livery plates
which are transporting, pursuant to a pre-arranged written contractual
agreement, persons to points within the Township for weddings, funerals
and other similar occasions. In order to qualify as a taxicab a vehicle
must have a minimum wheel base of 104 inches. Said agreements shall be
registered with the Township Clerk prior to each such occasion and shall
indicate the parties thereto.
§ 9-3. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 4]
The licensing of taxicabs shall be by the Township and such licenses
(hereinafter "taxicab medallions" or "medallions") when granted by the
Township Committee, shall be countersigned by the Township Clerk. All
fees shall be paid to the Township Clerk. The regulating and inspection of
taxicabs, the application for a medallion to own and operate taxicabs, the
licensing of drivers as provided for in this chapter and the enforcing of
the provisions of this chapter shall be under the control of the Township
Committee. The Township Committee is authorized and empowered to
establish reasonable rules and regulations for the inspection of taxicabs
and requirements of construction and condition of fitness for the safe and
adequate transportation of passengers and the general cleanliness of such
taxicabs.
§ 9-4. TAXICAB MEDALLION REQUIRED. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 5]
No person shall hire out, keep or use for hire or pay, or cause to be kept or
used for hire or pay, any taxicab within the Township without first having
obtained a medallion for that purpose.
§ 9-5. TAXICAB MEDALLIONS.
§ 9-5.1. Conditions for Issuance of Medallion. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 6A;
Ord. No. 2012-24 § 2]
a. No medallion shall be issued for any vehicle herein required to be
licensed until the owner thereof shall have filed an application for same,
addressed to the Township Clerk, setting forth the character of the
vehicle proposed to be licensed, the correct name of the owner thereof,
the residence or address of the principal office of such owner, and such
other facts as the Township may require; until the vehicle proposed to
be licensed shall have been inspected and approved, in writing, by the
Chief of Police of the Township of Lakewood; until there shall have been
paid to the Township Clerk the license fee hereinafter provided; and
until there shall have been submitted to the Township Attorney and
§ 9-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-5.1
AO:357
§ 9-5.2. Fees. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 6B; Ord. No. 2001-73 § 1; Ord. No.
2010-82; Ord. No. 2011-22 § 1]
The purchase price for a Township taxi medallion shall be $1,000. The
annual medallion renewal fee for each taxicab shall be $200 which shall
be payable on or before October 1. The licensing period shall extend from
October 1 until the following September 30. The fee imposed herein shall
be to defray the cost of administering, regulating and enforcing this section
and to defray the cost of the inspections required pursuant to the terms of
this section.
An annual medallion fee that remains unpaid after December 1 of the
licensing year shall revert back to the Township upon notice to the
medallion holder and the opportunity for a hearing.
§ 9-5.3. Issuance of Medallion. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 6C]
Upon approval and granting of a medallion for the operation of a taxicab
within the Township by the Township Committee, the Township Clerk shall
provide the medallion holder with a card containing the name of the
applicant, the Township number in one and one-half (1 1/2) inch letters, the
number of persons the vehicle is authorized to transport and notice that
approved by him as to both form and sufficiency, and filed with the
Township Clerk, a policy of insurance, with the premium prepaid
thereon, an insurance policy which shall be issued by an admitted
insurance company duly licensed to transact business under the
insurance laws of the State of New Jersey or a company registered
to do business in the State, the policy providing for not less than
$100,000 of motor vehicle liability insurance coverage to satisfy all
claims for damages, by reason of bodily injury to, or the death of,
any person or persons, resulting from, or on account of, an accident,
by reason of the ownership, operation, maintenance, or use of such
autocab upon any public street; and not less than $50,000 to satisfy any
claim for damages to property of any person or persons, resulting from,
or on account of, an accident, by reason of the ownership, operation,
maintenance, or use of such autocab upon any public street.
b. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the owner of an autocab from
obtaining any additional amount of motor vehicle liability insurance
coverage from a company licensed outside the State of New Jersey.
c. A license issued under this chapter shall be effective and operation
thereunder shall be permitted only so long as the insurance policy shall
remain in force to the full and collectible amounts as aforesaid.
d. The insurance policy shall provide for the payment of any final
judgment recovered by any person on account of the ownership,
maintenance, or use of the autocab or any fault in respect thereto, and
shall be for the benefit of every person suffering loss, damage or injury
as aforesaid.
§ 9-5.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 9-5.3
AO:358
in case of any complaint, complaint forms are available at the Lakewood
Police Department. Only after the vehicle has been inspected, will a decal
be issued. This decal shall be placed in the lower left hand corner of the
rear window of the vehicle.
Medallion is subject to forfeiture by the medallion holder back to the
Township, upon notice with an opportunity to be heard at a hearing before
the Lakewood Township Committee, if the medallion is not utilized for nine
consecutive months.
§ 9-5.4. Display. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 6D]
The information referred to in this section shall be displayed pursuant to
subsection 9-5.3.
§ 9-5.5. Regulations. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 6E; Ord. No. 2013-32]
§ 9-5.6. Transfer of Medallion. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 6F]
a. Not more than 40 taxi medallions shall be issued and outstanding at any
time.
b. No owner of a vehicle shall be issued a taxicab medallion until that
vehicle has been thoroughly and carefully inspected, especially with
regard to the brakes and front end, and examined by a person
designated by the Township Committee and found to be in a thoroughly
safe condition for the transportation of passengers. Side curtains,
shades and/or dark, smoke glass shall not be permitted on any such
vehicles.
c. No vehicle known as a two-door body or two-door hatchback shall be
issued a taxicab medallion.
a. It shall be unlawful for any owner of a licensed taxicab to sell, lease,
rent, assign, transfer or in any other manner dispose of a taxicab
medallion without the permission of the Township Committee, nor shall
any owner of a taxicab hire out or rent a taxicab to a taxicab driver or
any other person for use within the Township for a stipulated sum over
a definite period of time.
b. No taxicab medallion shall be transferred except to another vehicle
owned, registered and insured in the name of the person desiring to
transfer the medallion without the approval of the Township
Committee. Any medallion may be transferred with the payment of a
transfer fee of $300 upon obtaining the approval of the Township
Committee.
c. In the event the holder of a taxicab medallion desires to transfer such
medallion to another vehicle owned, registered and insured in his/her
name, the insurance card, containing the year and model of the vehicle,
shall be presented to the Township Clerk forthwith. A copy of the New
Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission Transfer Certificate shall be
§ 9-5.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-5.6
AO:359
§ 9-5.7. Criminal History Record Background Check. [Ord. No.
2012-24 § 3]
Prior subsection 9-5.7, Insurance, was deleted by Ordinance No. 2012-24.
See subsection 9-5.1 for insurance requirements.
§ 9-5.8. Register and Inspection of Taxicabs. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 6H]
submitted to the Township Clerk, upon receipt of same from the Motor
Vehicle Commission.
a. Each operator or driver of an autocab for which the owner thereof is
seeking the consent to operate in the Township of Lakewood shall
submit to the performance of a criminal history record background
check. The cost for the criminal history record background check,
including all costs of administering and processing the check, shall be
borne by the operator or driver of the autocab.
b. A person shall be disqualified from operating or driving an autocab if a
criminal history record background check required pursuant to this
section reveals a record of conviction of any of the following crimes:
1. In New Jersey or elsewhere any crime as follows: aggravated
assault, arson, burglary, escape, extortion, homicide, kidnapping,
robbery, aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault or endangering
the welfare of a child pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4, whether or not
armed with or having in his possession any weapon enumerated in
subsection r of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-1, a crime pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 2C:39-3, N.J.S.A. 2C:39-4, or N.J.S.A. 2C:39-9, or other
than a disorderly persons or petty disorderly persons offense for
the unlawful use, possession or sale of a controlled dangerous
substance as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:35-2.
2. In any other state, territory, commonwealth, or other jurisdiction of
the United States, or any country in the world, as a result of a
conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction, a crime which in
that other jurisdiction or country is comparable to one of the crimes
enumerated in paragraph b1 above.
c. If a person who has been convicted of one of the crimes enumerated in
b1 and/or 2 above can produce a certificate of rehabilitation issued
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:168A-8 or, if the criminal offense occurred
outside New Jersey, an equivalent certificate from the jurisdiction
where the criminal offense occurred, the criminal offense shall not
disqualify the applicant from operating or driving an autocab.
d. The provisions of this subsection 9-5.7 shall not apply to an operator or
driver of an autocab who has received the consent to operate in the
Township of Lakewood prior to November 29, 2011.
a. The Township Clerk shall keep a register of the name of each person
owning or operating a vehicle or vehicles licensed under this chapter,
§ 9-5.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 9-5.8
AO:360
§ 9-5.9. Owner's Duty to Maintain a Safe Vehicle; Suspension of
License; Summons and Complaint; Fine. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 6I]
together with the medallion number and the make and description of
such vehicle with the date and complete record of inspection of it.
b. The Township Police Department and Taxicab Compliance Officer(s)
shall maintain constant vigilance over all taxicabs to see that they are
kept clean and in a condition of safety for the transportation of
passengers and to this end, shall have the right at any and all time to
inspect any and all medallioned vehicles and shall maintain a record of
all inspections. A copy of the inspection records shall be kept in the
Township Clerk's office in compliance with paragraph a above. The
records shall also include all violations of this chapter and all violations
of the motor vehicle laws by the medallion holder.
c. Every taxicab owner shall cause to have his or her taxicab or taxicabs
inspected twice a year at a designated and authorized reinspection
center located in the Township of Lakewood. The reinspections shall be
paid for by the Township from the taxicab medallion fee referenced
above. In the event that any taxicab fails inspection, the subsequent
inspection of the vehicle is to be fully paid for by the licensee.
d. The owner or owners of any taxicab shall inspect or cause to be
inspected each taxicab at least once a day, but prior to each and every
shift, for any visible defects, cleanliness and to see that all required
information is posted in each taxicab. The inspection form will be filed
with the taxicab owner for a period of one year, the inspection form to
be used shall be designed by the Traffic and Safety Division of the
Lakewood Police Department.
a. Owner's Duty to Maintain a Safe Vehicle. The owner of a taxicab
medallion shall be responsible for maintaining all licensed vehicles in a
clean and safe condition for the transportation of passengers for hire.
b. Suspension of Taxicab Medallion. The owner of any licensed taxicab
found to be unsafe for the transportation of passengers after inspection
in accordance with subsection 9-5.8 shall be notified that the taxicab
medallion is suspended until the vehicle is made safe for operation. A
copy of the inspection report listing the unsafe items shall be given to
the operator with the notice that the taxicab medallion is suspended
until the vehicle is made safe which notice and report shall be signed by
the inspecting officer. An additional copy of the notice and report shall
be mailed to the owner's last known address.
c. Summons and Complaint. Any owner or operator who knowingly allows
his vehicle to transport passengers for hire after the medallion has been
suspended shall receive a complaint and summons returnable in the
Township of Lakewood Municipal Court served upon the owner by
mailing a copy to his last known address or by serving a copy upon the
operator of the vehicle.
§ 9-5.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-6
AO:361
§ 9-6. TAXICAB OPERATOR'S PERMIT.
§ 9-6.1. Application. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 7A]
Each applicant for a taxicab operator's permit under the terms of this
chapter shall conform to the following regulations:
a. Possess a valid State of New Jersey Driver's License and be a bona fide
resident of the State of New Jersey for at least one year.
b. Present the certificate of a reputable physician showing that he has
been examined within the past 60 days and that he is of sound physique
with good eyesight and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or
some infirmity of body or mind which might render him unfit for the
safe operation of a taxicab.
c. Be a citizen or a resident legal alien of the United States.
d. Has not been convicted of a crime, other than misdemeanor traffic
violations, and has not violated any provision of this chapter.
e. Not be addicted to the use of narcotics or alcoholic beverages. To that
end, the Township Committee reserves the right to impose a mandatory
drug and/or alcohol screening test pursuant to Federal and State laws
prior to the issuance or renewal of a taxicab operator's permit.
f. Produce affidavits of his good character from at least (2) reputable
citizens who have known him personally for at least two years and a
further affidavit from his last employer unless in the estimation of the
Township Committee, sufficient reason is given for its omission.
g. Fill out, upon a form provided by the Township Clerk, his full name,
residence, places of residence for the preceding five years, place of
birth, previous employment, whether he has ever been convicted of a
crime, including misdemeanor traffic violations, or a violation of this
chapter and whether his driver's license has ever been revoked and for
what cause, which statement shall be signed and sworn to by the
applicant and filed with the Township Clerk as a permanent record. He
shall also furnish four copies of passport size photographs front view.
The driver shall not be required to display his residence or other
personal information to the public other than that information required
by subsection 9-5.3, entitled Issuance of Medallion.
h. The applicant shall also indicate in the application form any conviction
for violations of any of the provisions of the motor vehicle laws of the
State of New Jersey, as well as any convictions for motor vehicle
violations from any State or territory of the United States of America,
for a period of five years antedating the date of the application. If the
answer is in the affirmative, he shall furnish a certified copy of his
Driver's Abstract from the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles and
provide details with respect to such conviction in writing.
§ 9-6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 9-6.1
AO:362
§ 9-6.2. Fee. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 7B]
The taxicab operator's permit fee for each driver of a taxicab shall be $50
per year. The licensing period shall extend from October 1 to September 30
of the following year. The fee imposed herein shall be to defray the cost of
administering, regulating and enforcing this section and to defray the cost
of the inspections required pursuant to the terms of this section.
§ 9-6.3. Taxicab Operator's Permit. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 7C]
i. The applicant shall be fingerprinted and cleared, at his own expense
and the print shall be placed on file with the Lakewood Police
Department.
j. The applicant shall indicate on the application form any criminal
conviction.
a. Issuance of Taxicab Operator's Permit. Upon satisfactory fulfillment of
the foregoing requirements, the Township Clerk, after the approval of
the Township Committee, shall issue to the applicant a taxicab
operator's permit which shall contain the photograph and permit
number of the operator.
b. Issuance of Temporary Taxicab Operator's Permit. Upon satisfactory
fulfillment of the foregoing requirements, except final police clearance,
the Township Clerk, after the approval of the Township Committee, may
issue the applicant a temporary taxicab operator's permit which shall
contain the photograph and permit number of the operator and the
decal. The temporary taxicab operator's permit shall be issued after a
preliminary approval has been completed by the Township of Lakewood
Police Department but prior to final clearance from all necessary local,
State and Federal police agencies. The temporary taxicab operator's
permit shall be effective until all final police clearances are received but
in no event shall such permit remain in effect longer than 90 days. The
temporary permit shall be automatically revoked if any of the
departmental clearances indicate the applicant has been convicted of a
crime that was not disclosed by the applicant in his application.
c. Display of Taxicab Operator's Permit. The information referred to in
subsection 9-6.3a and b herein shall be mounted in a protective holder
or bracket sufficient to prevent the permit from being defaced, and
shall be clearly visible on the dashboard so as to have the information
thereon visible to any passenger(s) in the rear seat.
d. Substance Abuse Screening. An applicant must not use narcotics or
alcoholic beverages. The Township Committee or Lakewood
Transportation Board reserve the right to impose substance abuse
screening pursuant to the appropriate Federal or State laws prior to the
issuance or renewal of a permit or whenever legally permissible.
§ 9-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-6.4
AO:363
§ 9-6.4. Revocation of Taxicab Operator's Permit. [Ord. No. 99-29
§ 7D]
If at any time within the licensed year a taxicab driver has been convicted of
a crime or traffic violation, he shall immediately notify the Township Clerk
of the conviction, the jurisdiction of the conviction, the offense for which he
was convicted, and the circumstances thereof. It shall be in the discretion
of the Township Committee to revoke his taxicab medallion and/or taxicab
operator's permit.
§ 9-6.5. Violations; Summons and Complaints; Waiver of Hearing.
[Ord. No. 99-29 § 7E; Ord. No. 2015-14]
a. Violations. The operator who is found guilty after a hearing in
Lakewood Municipal Court of a violation of any of the following shall be
subject to the following fines:
1. Operation of a taxicab without a valid taxicab medallion and/or
taxicab operator's permit, shall result in a one hundred ($100.00)
dollar fine.
2. Charge passenger excessive fare, not less than $100 nor more than
$200.
3. Failure to display taxicab operator's permit in vehicle pursuant to
subsection 9-5.3 and subsection 9-6.3c, not less than $100 nor
more than $200.
4. Filing false information on taxicab operator's permit application
required by this section, not less than $500 nor more than $1,000.
In addition to any fine imposed, the Court shall have the discretion
to suspend the offender's taxicab operator's permit for up to one
year in addition to the penalty prescribed in subsection 9-6.3b.
5. Violation of subsection 9-8.2, not less than $100 nor more than
$200.
6. Failure to display rates, not less than $100 nor more than $200.
7. Violation of any other section of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is listed, not less than $100 nor more than $200.
8. Anyone found guilty of breaking, violating, tampering, or
attempting to break, violate or tamper with any taxi meter shall be
subject to a fine of:
(a) $500 and 15 days incarceration if convicted of a first offense;
(b) $1,000 and 30 days incarceration if convicted of a second
offense;
(c) Surrender of medallions for all cabs under that license and 90
days incarceration if convicted of a third offense.
§ 9-6.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 9-6.5
AO:364
§ 9-7. TAXICAB STANDS.
§ 9-7.1. Established. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 8A]
The Township Committee may designate certain taxicab stands as provided
by law and the number of taxicabs permitted therein. The taxicabs shall
operate on a first-in, first-out basis at such taxicab stands. No taxicab shall
remain in a taxi stand for more than 30 consecutive minutes.
§ 9-7.2. Additional Stand. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 8B]
The Township Committee may establish other stands by resolution when
in their judgment that course shall be necessary. The continuance of such
stand shall thereupon be subject to the approval or disapproval of the
Township Committee, by resolution.
§ 9-7.3. Off-Street Parking. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 8C]
Any owner of a taxicab medallion who shall change his place of business
after February 25, 1960 shall provide off-street parking for all of his
taxicabs.
§ 9-8. METERS AND RATES.
§ 9-8.1. Meters. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 9A; Ord. No. 2017-2]
Every medallioned taxicab conducting business in the Township of
Lakewood, shall have an odometer installed within the taxicab. The
odometer shall be of a make, model equal or superior to the Pulsar
Taxicab medallion owners who are found guilty after a hearing
in Lakewood Township Municipal Court of a violation of any
of the above shall be subject to minimum and maximum fines
equal to twice the above amounts listed for operators.
Taxicab medallion owners and taxicab operator's permit
holders who are convicted of any of the above offenses for a
third time, shall be subject to a maximum fine equal to three
times the above maximum penalties.
b. Summons and Complaint. A summons and complaint citing a violation
of this chapter returnable in Lakewood Township Municipal Court shall
be served personally or by mail to the last known address of the person
charged with a violation of this chapter.
c. Waiver of Municipal Court Hearing. Any person or corporation charged
with a violation of any section of this chapter may waive the Court
hearing hereon by pleading guilty to the violation and making payment
to the Court Clerk of the maximum fine for the violation; provided
however that a Court appearance shall be required for any person or
corporation charged with a violation of Section 9-4.
§ 9-6.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-8.1
AO:365
Technology Systems, Inc. Pulsar Mileage Odometer Model 100. The cost of
the odometer shall be borne by the taxicab owner. The odometer shall be
placed in full view of the rear passenger(s).
a. No passenger shall be carried in any taxicab unless the taximeter shall
be in operation. This provision shall apply regardless of whether a
taxicab is engaged for a trip entirely within the boundaries of Lakewood
Township or partially outside thereof, and the taximeter shall be kept
operating continuously during the entire time that it is engaged in the
transportation of passengers, regarding the point of destination.
b. Within one month prior to submitting an application for issuance or
renewal of Taxicab Medallion, the taximeter of such taxicab must be
tested and sealed by the appropriate regulatory authority.
c. A taximeter shall be placed in each taxicab so that the reading dial
showing the amount to be charged will be well lighted and readily
discernible to a passenger riding in the taxicab.
d. Every taximeter used in the operation of taxicabs shall be subject to
inspection at any time by a duly authorized representative of Lakewood
Township, or by other appropriate authority. Upon the discovery of any
material inaccuracy of a taximeter or inconsistent with approved rates,
the operator thereof shall remove, or cause to be removed, from
service, the vehicle equipped with the inaccurate or inconsistent
taximeter until such taximeter shall have been replaced or repaired,
and tested and resealed.
e. Flag Drop Charges. The driver of any taxicab, while carrying
passengers, must immediately activate the meter once the vehicle is in
motion and is actively transporting passengers, and must be
deactivated by the driver once the passengers have reached the desired
destination, or the passenger verbally communicates the cancellation of
the service, and/or at the termination of the service.
f. Charge to Be Registered. All charges for taxicab service shall be
calculated and indicated by taximeter, and at all times while the taxicab
is engaged, the taximeter shall be activated to register the charges. No
taximeter shall be so operated as to cause any charge to be registered
thereon except during the time when the taxicab is engaged by a
passenger or passengers.
g. Receipt for Charges. No driver of any taxicab, upon receiving full
payment for a fare as indicated by the taximeter, shall refuse to give a
receipt when requested. The receipt shall show the name of the taxicab
company, name of the driver, date of service and taxicab number, total
amount of fare, origin of fare and destination.
h. Charges Must Be Indicated. Charges for transportation of passengers
in a taxicab operated in Lakewood Township shall not exceed the
amount shown on the taximeter installed in the taxicab and which is
verified by the Ocean County Weights and Measures. It is unlawful for
§ 9-8.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 9-8.1
AO:366
§ 9-8.2. Rates. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 9B; Ord. No. 2012-24 § 4]
any owner or driver of any taxicab to charge any passenger or
passengers any sum in excess of the sum indicated on the taximeter.
i. Fasten Seatbelt Sign. In every taxicab, there shall be a sign no smaller
than five inches by seven (5 x 7) inches, stating that all occupants in the
taxicab, including the driver, must wear his or her seatbelt at all times
while the vehicle is in motion.
j. Vehicle Inspection and Certification by Licensed Mechanic. The owner
of taxicab shall have each taxicab vehicle inspected by a licensed
mechanic within 60 days prior to applying for a Lakewood Township
Taxicab Medallion, Taxicab Medallion renewal or replacement of these
permits. No taxicab permit shall be granted unless the applicant
presents a signed and dated statement from a licensed mechanic who
inspected the vehicle certifying that the vehicle is in safe operating
condition. The statement from the licensed mechanic must include the
date of the inspection, the name of the business and name of the
mechanic: the vehicle identification number (VIN) and license plate
number to the taxicab vehicle. The business license shall not be
renewed until the above requirements have been satisfied, and the
dated statement submitted to the Lakewood Township Clerk.
a. The rates must be posted in accordance with Section 9-11a of the within
chapter.
b. The following rates will be in effect as of February 1, 2012:
Fee
Day
6:00 a.m. to 10:00
p.m.
Night
10:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Per Mile $1.50 $3.00
Animal Fee $1.00 $1.00
Drop Fee $5.00 $6.00
Drop Fee-Senior $4.00 $5.00
c. The rates set forth above shall be for single passengers and there shall
be a charge of $0.50 for each additional passenger regardless of age.
d. The following rates may also be charged:
1. Groceries. No charge for the first two bags and $0.25) for every two
bags, or part thereof, afterwards.
2. Laundry-luggage; foot lockers: $3.
3. Additional items. Taxicab owners have the right to make reasonable
charges for items not covered by this chapter.
§ 9-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-8.2
AO:367
§ 9-8.3. Requests for Rate Change. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 9C]
Taxicab medallion holders may request rate changes by submitting
proposed new rates in writing to the Township Clerk prior to August 1 of
each year.
§ 9-9. TAXICAB COMPLIANCE OFFICER.
§ 9-9.1. Creation. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 10A]
The position of Taxicab Compliance Officer is hereby established as a parttime
position within the Township of Lakewood.
§ 9-9.2. Qualifications. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 10B]
No person shall be appointed to the position of Taxicab Compliance Officer
unless he or she:
§ 9-9.3. Duties. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 10C]
The Taxicab Compliance Officer is charged with enforcing the provisions
of this chapter; in so doing, the Taxicab Compliance Officer shall work in
cooperation with the Lakewood Township Police Department and Township
Clerk.
The Taxicab Compliance Officer's duties include, but are not limited to
the following: inspection of taxicabs, issuance of summonses, maintenance
of records, renewal and transfer of taxicab medallions, handling resident
complaints, inspection of maintenance records, and tracking all taxicab
medallions and taxicab operator's permits. Additionally, the Taxicab
Compliance Officer shall report monthly to the Lakewood Transportation
Board.
4. Waiting time. Waiting time shall be charged at $.50 cents per
minute.
5. Extra stops. The charge will be $1 dollar for each stop plus waiting
time.
a. Is a resident of the Township of Lakewood;
b. Is able to read, write, and speak the English language well and
intelligently and has a high school diploma or its equivalent;
c. Is of good moral character;
d. Has not been convicted of any offense involving dishonesty or which
would make him or her unfit to perform the duties of this position.
§ 9-8.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 9-9.4
AO:368
§ 9-9.4. Compensation. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 10D]
The salary range for said part-time position shall be as set forth in the salary
range ordinance of the Township of Lakewood.
§ 9-10. OPERATION OF TAXICABS.
§ 9-10.1. Cruising. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 11A]
No driver of any taxicab shall seek employment by repeatedly and
persistently driving his taxicab to and from in a short space or otherwise
interfering with the proper and orderly access to or egress from any theater,
hall, hotel, public resort, railway station or other place of public gathering
and no driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab.
§ 9-10.2. Lost Property. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 11B]
Every driver of a taxicab who discovers any property lost or left in the
taxicab must report in writing to the Police Department with brief
particulars and description of the property, within 24 hours after his finding
thereof, unless sooner claimed or delivered to the owner. Any unclaimed
property in a taxicab must be turned over to the Police Department within
24 hours of its discovery by the driver or owner of the taxicab and held until
claimed or released by the Police Department in accordance with Police
Department regulations
§ 9-10.3. General Regulations. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 11C]
a. Every taxicab shall have a permanent illuminated taxi sign and be
plainly marked as a taxicab, and such illuminated taxi sign shall be in
operation when the taxicab is commercially employed. Additionally,
every taxi company shall have its own color which will be registered
with the Township Clerk. All taxis owned by a company shall be painted
accordingly.
b. Every taxicab owner shall operate each medallioned taxicab on a
regular basis for at least eight hours per day for a minimum of five days
weekly, and there shall be no inoperative medallions allowed. In the
event a taxicab medallion is not used for a period of nine consecutive
months, the medallion shall revert back to the Township of Lakewood,
after notice to the medallion holder, with an opportunity to be heard
before the Lakewood Township Committee.
c. Every taxicab owner shall operate his business from an established
place of business, located in a proper zone, and the established
business be advertised in the telephone book, listing the address and
telephone number of the business. Additionally, every taxicab owner
shall have obtained the proper business license from the Township
Clerk's office.
§ 9-9.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 9-10.3
AO:369
§ 9-11. DISPLAYING OF LICENSE AND RATES. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 12]
§ 9-12. ADVERTISING. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 13]
In addition to a sign containing the name and telephone number of the
taxicab company, each vehicle shall be allowed to carry an advertisement
fastened to the rear of the vehicle which shall comply with all relative motor
vehicle regulations of the State of New Jersey and it shall not be higher than
the lowest part of the rear window of the vehicle so as not to interfere with
the rear view vision of the driver.
§ 9-13. SEPARATE LIABILITY. [Ord. No. 99-29 § 14]
Owners and operators of taxicabs shall be separately charged with
allegations of violations of any portion of the within chapter. No conviction
of an operator of a taxicab shall result in an automatic conviction of the
d. Every licensed taxicab operator while operating a medallioned vehicle
for the transportation of passengers for hire in the Township shall be
properly attired in a clean shirt, shall be clean shaven or possess a
neatly trimmed beard or moustache. It shall be unlawful for the
operator to wear an undershirt as an outer garment while so employed,
nor shall be attired in shorts.
e. Every taxicab owner shall repair all body damage to each vehicle within
30 days from the date the damage is discovered.
f. The applicant for a taxicab operator's permit shall be examined by a
reputable doctor licensed to practice medicine in the State of New
Jersey and shall file with his application for the issuance or renewal of
an operator's permit a certificate from a doctor dated within 30 days of
the filing showing that the applicant is in good general health.
g. Each taxicab operated within the Township of Lakewood shall have a
sign painted on each rear door. The sign shall contain the owner's name
and the words "Taxicab" or "Taxi" in letters which are not less than four
nor more than eight inches in height.
h. The owner of each taxicab medallion is to have insurance as required
herein which shall name the Township of Lakewood as a coinsured.
a. A Lakewood Taxi Rate Card listing the rates as contained in subsection
9-8.2 herein shall be displayed in a prominent fashion in the vehicle so
as to be able to be read by any passenger therein.
b. There shall also be a notice prominently displayed in the passenger
compartment of the vehicle informing the passengers of their right to
occupy the taxicab alone at no additional charge. The notice shall be no
less than eight inches by ten inches (8" x 10") in area and contain
lettering no less than 1/2 inch in size. In addition, should the Township
issue a form of notice, the form shall be the only one used in any
taxicab.
§ 9-10.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 9-13
AO:370
owner of the taxicab for a violation of any portion of this chapter. Similarly,
no conviction of an owner of a taxicab shall result in an automatic conviction
of the operator of the taxicab for a violation of any portion of this chapter.
Chapter 10
PERSONNEL POLICIES
[Note: See also Code Appendix B, Personnel Policies and Procedures
Manual.]
[The general power of a municipality to establish personnel policies
is derived from N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, subject to limitations contained in
N.J.S.A. 40:11-1, et seq., Officers and Employees.]
§ 10-1. PERSONNEL POLICIES.
§ 10-1.1. New Jersey Department of Personnel. [1971 Code § 5-1]
The New Jersey Department of Personnel, N.J.S.A. 11A:1 et seq., and the
Administrative Code, N.J.A.C. 4A:1 et seq., applicable to municipalities
provide the basic framework for employment in the Township government.
This chapter and all its provisions shall at all times be subject to this statute
and this code, which prescribe basic minimum standards. To the extent that
this chapter may in any respect provide minimum standards which are less
than those embodied in this statute and this code, the latter rules shall
be deemed applicable; however, to the extent that the provisions of this
chapter contain benefits or provisions which are in excess of the minimum
requirements of these rules, the provision of this chapter shall be deemed
to be controlling.
§ 10-1.2. General Policies. [1971 Code § 5-1.2]
The following principles shall constitute the personnel policies of the
Township of Lakewood.
a. Employment in the Township government shall be based on merit and
fitness, free of personal and political considerations.
b. Just and equitable incentives and conditions shall be established and
maintained in order to promote efficiency and economy in the operation
of the Township government.
c. Positions with similar duties and responsibilities shall be classified and
compensated on a uniform basis.
d. Appointments, promotions and other personnel actions requiring the
application of the merit principle shall be based on systematic tests and
evaluations of knowledge and performance, and where appropriate
these shall be carried out through the Township's participation in the
New Jersey State Department of Personnel.
§ 9-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-1.2
AO:371
§ 10-1.3. Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual Adopted. [Ord.
No. 2017-1 adopted February 15, 2017; Ord. No. 2017-36 adopted
September 14, 2017; amended by Ord. No. 2019-7]
The Township hereby adopts the amended Personnel Policies and
Procedures Manual dated August 31, 2017 which is applicable to and
binding on the Township of Lakewood and all civilian non-police
personnel.35
§ 10-2. RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS.
§ 10-2.1. Appointment. [1971 Code § 5-1A.1]
Except as is otherwise provided by law or provided herein, all officers and
employees appointed to positions of employment for the Township after the
effective date of this section, shall be bona fide residents of the Township of
Lakewood. A bona fide resident for the purpose of this section is a person
having a permanent domicile within the Township and one which has not
been adopted with the intention of again taking up or claiming a previous
residence acquired outside of the Township.
§ 10-2.2. Eligibility of Applicants for Positions and Employment in
the Classified Service of the Township. [1971 Code § 5-1A.2]
The Township Committee hereby limits the eligibility of applicants for
positions and employment in the classified service of the Township to bona
fide residents except as otherwise provided herein or by law.
§ 10-2.3. Unavailability of Qualified Residents for Employment;
Nonresident Employees to Become Residents Within One Year of
Appointment. [1971 Code § 5-1A.3]
Whenever the Township Committee shall by resolution determine that there
cannot be recruited a sufficient number of qualified residents for available
specific positions of employment, the Township officials or the Civil Service
Commission, as the case may be, shall advertise for other qualified
applicants who shall be classified as follows:
e. Every effort shall be made to stimulate high morals by fair
administration of this chapter, and by consideration of the rights and
interests of employees, consistent with the best interest of the public
and the Township.
f. Continuation of employment shall be subject to good behavior,
satisfactory performance of work, necessity for the performance of
work, and availability of funds.
35.Editor's Note: The Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual may be found on file at the
Office of the Township Clerk and online with the Lakewood Township Code in Appendix B.
§ 10-1.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-2.3
AO:372
Class a Other residents of Ocean County.
Class b Other residents of counties contiguous to Ocean County.
Class c Other residents of the State.
Class d All other applicants.
The Township shall first appoint all those in Class a, and then those in each
succeeding class in the order above listed after all qualified applicants in
the preceding class or classes have been appointed or have declined an
offer of appointment.
It shall be specified at the time of employment that all nonresidents
subsequently appointed to positions of employment for the Township of
Lakewood, after the effective date of this section, shall become bona fide
residents of the Township within one year of their appointment.
§ 10-2.4. Specific Positions and Employment Requiring Special
Talents or Skills; Filling without Reference to Residency. [1971
Code § 5-1A.5]
Whenever the Township Committee shall determine by resolution that there
are certain specific positions or employment requiring special talents or
skills which are necessary for the operations of the Township and which are
not likely to be found among the residents of the Township, such positions
or employment so determined shall be filled without reference to residency.
Any such resolution shall set forth in detail the reasons upon which such a
determination is made.
§ 10-2.5. Preference in Promotion to Bona Fide Residents. [1971
Code § 5-1A.6]
When promotions are based on merit as determined by suitable promotion
tests or other objective criteria, officers and employees who are bona fide
residents shall be given preference over a nonresident in any instance
when all measurable criteria are equal. The preference over a nonresident
granted by this section shall in no way diminish, reduce, or affect the
preference granted pursuant to any other provision of law.
§ 10-2.6. Preemption by Order of Court or of State or Federal
Agency to Eliminate Discrimination. [1971 Code § 5-1A.7]
Any requirements concerning eligibility, appointment or promotion
contained in this section shall be subject to any order issued by any Court,
or by any State or Federal agency pursuant to law, with respect to a
requirement of action to eliminate discrimination in employment based
upon race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, marital status or sex,
except that any such nonresident appointees shall become bona fide
residents of the Township within one year of appointment.
§ 10-3. CLASSIFIED AND UNCLASSIFIED SERVICE.
§ 10-2.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-3.1
AO:373
§ 10-3.1. Unclassified Service. [1971 Code § 5-2.1]
The unclassified service shall include the following:
§ 10-3.2. Classified Service. [1971 Code § 5-2.2]
The classified service shall include all other positions in the Township
government that are not specifically placed in the unclassified service by
the above provisions of this chapter, or which are not excluded from the
classified service pursuant to N.J.S.A. 11:22-2.
§ 10-4. SCOPE OF PERSONNEL CHAPTER PROVISIONS. [1971 Code
§ 5-3]
The provisions of this chapter apply only to the classified service unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10-5. CLASSIFICATION PLAN.
§ 10-5.1. Establishment of Plan. [1971 Code § 5-4.1]
The Municipal Manager shall make or cause to have made an analysis of
the duties and responsibilities of all full-time positions in the Township,
except the Municipal Manager's own position. Such analysis shall be made
upon recommendation of the New Jersey Department of Personnel or at
the direction of the Township Committee. The Municipal Manager shall
recommend to the Township Committee a position-classification plan based
upon the analysis of positions. Within 30 days after the adoption of a
position-classification plan by resolution of the Township Committee, the
Municipal Manager shall assign each position to an appropriate class in
accordance with the position-classification plan and with the approval of the
New Jersey Department of Personnel.
§ 10-5.2. Basis of Position Classification. [1971 Code § 5-4.2]
Each position shall be assigned or allocated to an appropriate job
classification on the basis of the kind and level of its duties and
responsibilities so that all positions in the same classification shall be
sufficiently alike to permit the use of a single descriptive title, the same
a. All elected officials and members of citizen boards and committees.
b. Municipal Manager, Municipal Clerk, Township Engineer, Assistant
Township Engineer, department directors, Township Attorney and legal
assistants.
c. Volunteer personnel and personnel appointed to service without
compensation.
d. Consultants and counsel rendering temporary professional service.
e. All other offices or positions that are so classified by N.J.S.A. 11:22-2.
§ 10-3.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-5.2
AO:374
tests of competence and the same salary range, thus carrying out the
basic principle of classification which is equal pay for equal work. A job
classification may contain one position or a number of positions. The
Municipal Manager shall from time to time review the job classifications
and submit a report thereof to the Township Committee.
§ 10-5.3. Change in Classification. [1971 Code § 5-4.3]
§ 10-5.4. Abolition of Position. [1971 Code § 5-4.4]
A position may be abolished or the number of personnel reduced by the
Township Committee for reasons of economy or for reasons of a
reorganization within a department or departments. A permanent employee
must receive written notice of such action 45 days prior to its effective date.
In the Police Department such events shall be governed by the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:11-10, et seq. Every effort shall be made by the Township,
in cooperation with the New Jersey Department of Personnel, to reassign
any such permanent employee to another position in the Township service
for which the employee may be qualified. If no such position is available
immediately, the name of the such employee shall be kept on file and
he must be offered employment should a vacancy occur in a position for
a. The classification plan may be amended from time to time with the
approval of the New Jersey Department of Personnel. Such changes
may result from the need for creating new positions, changes in
organization or changes in assigned duties and responsibilities.
b. The Municipal Manager shall review all requests for creation of new
positions, the abolition or consolidation of present positions,
reclassification of positions to different job classes, or the reallocation
of positions to new salary ranges. In such review, he shall study the
current duties and responsibilities of the position concerned and with
the approval of the New Jersey Department of Personnel take
appropriate action necessary to insure the correct classification and
allocation of the position.
c. Each department director shall report to the Municipal Manager any
changes in the department head's organization or assignment of duties
and responsibilities to a given employee which would result in changes
in the position-classification plan or the classification of any of the
positions in said department.
d. An employee may submit a written request to the Municipal Manager at
any time for a review of the duties and responsibilities of his position.
Such a request shall be submitted through the employee's department
director and shall include the employee's own description of his current
duties and responsibilities. The Municipal Manager shall then make an
investigation of the position to determine its correct allocation. The
Municipal Manager shall report any findings in writing to the Township
Committee and shall furnish a copy to the employee requesting the
review and to his department director.
§ 10-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-5.4
AO:375
which he is qualified, prior to taking applications for the vacancy. If an
employee is demoted because of economy or departmental reorganization,
said employee shall be placed in the new salary range no lower than
the same step the employee held in said employee's prior position before
demotion.
§ 10-6. PAY PLAN.
§ 10-6.1. Notice to Employee. [1971 Code § 5-5.1]
After each class of position has been assigned to a salary range and the pay
plan and rules for its administration have been adopted by the Township
Committee, each employee shall be advised of his rate of pay and the salary
range to which his position title has been assigned.
§ 10-6.2. Basis for Further Increase. [1971 Code § 5-5.2]
When an employee attains the maximum rate of the salary range for his
position, he shall not receive further salary increases, unless:
§ 10-6.3. New Appointments. [1971 Code § 5-5.3]
A new employee shall be paid at the minimum of the approved salary range
for the position for which the employee is appointed. In exceptional cases,
the Municipal Manager may appoint at a rate above the minimum, but not
in excess of one step below the maximum.
§ 10-6.4. Demotions; Resignations. [1971 Code § 5-5.4]
An employee demoted for disciplinary reasons to a classification having
a lower salary range shall receive such salary as the Municipal Manager
specifies, which salary shall not exceed the maximum step of the new range.
If the employee resigned in good standing, said employee's service shall be
considered continuous for the purpose of vacation. The employee's service
shall not be considered continuous for purposes of promotion.
§ 10-6.5. Temporary Appointments. [1971 Code § 5-5.5]
When a vacancy is filled by a temporary appointment, the employee shall
be paid at the minimum of the approved salary range for the position. In
exceptional cases the Municipal Manager may appoint at a rate above the
minimum, but not in excess of one step below the maximum.
a. The employee's position is reclassified.
b. The employee is promoted to another position having a higher salary
range.
c. The employee's positions salary range is increased.
d. A general salary increase is granted to all employees.
§ 10-5.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-6.6
AO:376
§ 10-6.6. Re-employments. [1971 Code § 5-5.7]
§ 10-6.7. Transfers. [1971 Code § 5-5.8]
If an employee is transferred or reassigned into another department or
division within the Township service, said employee shall not lose any
vacation or sick leave credits.
§ 10-7. APPOINTMENT.
§ 10-7.1. Basis for Original Appointment. [1971 Code § 5-6.1]
Original appointments to vacancies in the Township service shall be based
upon merit, fitness and ability, which shall be determined by competitive
examinations insofar as practicable, and shall be in accordance with the
New Jersey Department of Personnel.
§ 10-7.2. Temporary Appointments. [1971 Code § 5-6.2]
In the absence of an appropriate list or for the filling of temporary or
seasonal positions, or temporarily in the case of emergencies, vacancies
may be filled by temporary appointments by the appointing authority. Such
temporary appointments shall have a maximum duration of six months.
§ 10-7.3. Provisional Appointments. [1971 Code § 5-6.3]
Pending the establishment of an appropriate eligible list, vacancies in
permanent positions may be filled by provisional appointments. Such
appointments shall continue only until an appropriate eligible list is
established. Such provisional employees shall possess minimum
qualifications established for the vacant position.
§ 10-7.4. Probationary Period. [1971 Code § 5-6.4]
a. When an employee is re-employed following a resignation in good
standing or a dismissal, to a position in the same classification, the
employee shall enter the position at a salary step determined by the
appointing authority within the appropriate range. If the employee
resigned in good standing, said employee's service shall be considered
continuous for the purpose of vacation. The employee's service shall not
be considered continuous for purposes of promotion.
b. In the case of re-employment, within two years of a resignation in good
standing, an employee may be rehired without processing by the New
Jersey Department of Personnel.
a. All employees appointed permanently to the classified service shall
serve a probationary period of 90 days. At the expiration of the
probationary period, the appointing authority, in consultation with the
Municipal Manager, may discontinue the service of any such employee
if in the appointing authority's opinion, the employee is unwilling or
§ 10-6.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-7.4
AO:377
§ 10-7.5. Permanent Status. [1971 Code § 5-6.5]
Classified employees who satisfactorily complete their probationary period
shall have permanent employment status conditioned upon good behavior
and satisfactory job performance. They shall be subject to removal by the
appointing authority only for cause or for reason of economy, after proper
notice and the opportunity to be heard, as set forth by the New Jersey
Department of Personnel.
§ 10-8. PROMOTIONS.
§ 10-8.1. Definitions. [1971 Code § 5-7.1]
As used in this chapter:
PROMOTION — Shall mean an advancement in classification having:
§ 10-8.2. Effect of Reclassification. [1971 Code § 5-7.2]
When there is a major change in the duties or responsibilities of a position
resulting in its reallocation to a higher classification, the position shall be
considered vacant and subject to filling under promotional procedures. The
incumbent in the reclassified position may be permitted to serve pending
promotional procedures.
§ 10-8.3. Permanent Promotions. [1971 Code § 5-7.3]
unable to perform the duties of his position in a satisfactory manner,
or if the employee is of such reputation and habits as not to merit
continuance in the service of the Township. In every case the Municipal
Manager shall notify the employee in writing of the discontinuance and
of the reasons for the same, and shall forward a copy of the notice to
the New Jersey Department of Personnel.
b. A 90 day probationary period shall also apply to an employee promoted
to a higher classification. Such probationary status will in no way affect
the rights and status in the original or lower classification.
c. Each new Police Officer shall be required to satisfactorily complete a
basic police training program recognized by the New Jersey Police
Training Commission during the first year and prior to receiving a
permanent appointment. The probationary period shall not commence
for a Police Officer until said Police Officer has completed such a
recognized Police training program and shall expire at the end of the
first full year after said Police Officer's appointment.
a. New duties of greater difficulty or responsibility.
b. A salary range having greater maximum.
§ 10-7.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-8.3
AO:378
§ 10-8.4. Provisional Promotions. [1971 Code § 5-7.4]
Pending the availability of a suitable eligibility list, the appointing authority
may fill vacancies by a provisional promotion. Such provisional promotion
shall have a maximum duration of six months.
§ 10-9. SEPARATION FROM SERVICE.
§ 10-9.1. Types of Separation. [1971 Code § 5-8.1]
Classified employees who have acquired permanent employment status
may be temporarily suspended from the Township's employ by layoff or
suspension, or permanently separated by resignation or dismissal, subject
at all times to the rules and regulations of the New Jersey Department of
Personnel.
§ 10-9.2. Layoff. [1971 Code § 5-8.2]
Whenever there is a lack of work or a lack of funds requiring a reduction
in the number of employees in a department of the Township government,
the required reductions shall be made in such job classification or
classifications as the Township Committee may designate. As determined
by the appointing authority, employees shall be laid off in the inverse order
of their length of service within each affected job class in a particular
department or division. All provisional employees shall be laid off before
probationary employees, and all probationary employees shall be laid off
before any permanent employee. Permanent (including probationary)
employees so affected shall be given a minimum of 45 days notice.
Provisional employees so affected shall be given a minimum of two weeks'
notice or two weeks pay in lieu thereof.
§ 10-9.3. Retirement. [1971 Code § 5-8.3]
a. Vacancies shall be filled by utilizing competitive promotional
examinations in accordance with the New Jersey Department of
Personnel.
b. Where the appointing authority, after consultation with the New Jersey
Department of Personnel, finds that no employee is qualified for
promotion to the vacancy, he may order an open competitive
examination, open to candidates outside the Township's employ. In postexamination
selection, the appointing authority shall give appropriate
consideration to the applicant's qualifications, record of past
performance, and the length and quality of said employee's service.
c. Selection shall be made from the top three interested candidates as
determined by the examination process of the New Jersey Department
of Personnel.
§ 10-8.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-9.3
AO:379
§ 10-9.4. Resignation. [1971 Code § 5-8.4]
An employee may resign from his position by tendering a written
resignation to his department director, who in turn shall forward it to the
Municipal Manager. Unless there are disciplinary charges pending against
the employee, the Municipal Manager shall notify the employee in writing
of acceptance of his resignation in good standing. An employee shall give
a minimum of two weeks written notice before the effective date of his
resignation, and failure to do so may result in loss of vacation and sick
credits. Oral resignation shall be considered as binding but not as being a
resignation in good standing.
a. Employees enrolled in the Public Employees Retirement System of the
State of New Jersey are subject to the requirements and provisions of
that plan.
b. Employees are eligible to retire with full benefits and with reduced
benefits as set forth by PERS.
c. Employees who retire after 15 years or more of service with the
Township of Lakewood, or 15 years of combined service with the
Lakewood Board of Education and Township of Lakewood, provided the
last nine years of employment are served with the Township of
Lakewood, except in the case of an employee reaching the retirement
age of 65 for men and women and having been in the employ of the
Township for a minimum of 10 years, employees who are in full
disability after five years or more of service, and members of the
Township Committee of the Township of Lakewood who serve three
complete terms of office, shall be entitled to remain enrolled in any
health insurance program available to Township employees at the date
of their retirement, by prepaying the estimated annual premium
thereon as determined by the Township Treasurer within 30 days of the
date of retirement for Township employees and within 30 days of the
date of termination of term of office for members of the Township
Committee and after entering into an individual contract with the
Township which shall be approved by resolution. In any event, the
Township shall comply with provisions of COBRA.
d. Employees who retire after 25 or more years of service with the
Township of Lakewood shall be entitled to remain enrolled in any health
insurance program available to Township employees at the date of their
retirement, upon the completion of the requisite application forms.
e. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the
Township of Lakewood shall assume financial responsibility only for the
payment of that amount which would constitute the employee's
contribution to the health benefits package. The employee shall assume
financial responsibility for the payment of that amount attributable to
the enrollment of any family members in said health benefits plan.
§ 10-9.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-9.5
AO:380
§ 10-9.5. Involuntary Separation of Full-Time Unclassified
Employees. [1971 Code § 5-8.5]
In the event of the involuntary separation of a full-time unclassified
employee, the employee shall receive 60 days notice (including
accumulated vacation leave), or be compensated at the rate of one day's
wages for each day less than the 60 for which notice is required to be given,
except in cases of disciplinary dismissal for cause.
§ 10-9.6. Death; Extension of Employee Benefits to Dependent
Families. [1971 Code § 5-8.6]
§ 10-10. COMPENSATION.
§ 10-10.1. Pay Periods. [1971 Code § 5-9.1]
The Township normally shall pay its employees on a payroll schedule that is
once every week or a total of 52 times annually.
§ 10-10.2. Computation of Daily and Hourly Rates. [1971 Code
§ 5-9.2]
Each payroll period normally shall consist of five working days, so that
the daily rate of pay of each employee normally shall be l/260th of said
employee's annual salary. The hourly rate shall be computed by dividing the
daily rate by the number of hours in the employee's prescribed workday.
§ 10-10.3. Deductions for Leave without Pay. [1971 Code § 5-9.3]
Deductions in salary for leave without pay shall be computed on the basis of
hourly rate.
§ 10-10.4. Compensation for Overtime. [1971 Code § 5-9.4]
a. Dependent family members of a deceased Township employee with a
minimum of one year of continuous service to the Township, shall be
entitled to remain enrolled in any health insurance program available to
said Township employee on the date of said employee's death by
prepaying the estimated annual premium thereon, as determined by the
Township Treasurer, within 30 days of the date of death and after
entering into an individual contract with the Township which shall be
approved by resolution.
b. Dependent family member is defined as a surviving spouse and any
minor child of the deceased Township employee who would be entitled
to remain enrolled in said insurance programs, had the employee lived
beyond November 1, 1981.
Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, nothing
in this subsection shall be construed to extend benefits to families of
Township employees who died prior to November 1, 1981.
§ 10-9.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-10.4
AO:381
§ 10-10.5. Salary Increments. [1971 Code § 5-9.5]
Salary increments may be granted to each employee effective January 1
of each year until the employee's salary has reached the maximum salary
provided for said employee's position title. No employee, however, shall
be granted an annual salary increment until said employee's department
director has certified in writing to the Municipal Manager that during the
past year the employee's performance and service were such as to make
him deserving of an increase, setting forth the basis for such conclusion.
In the case of employees who will have served less than one full year as of
January 1, the salary increase, if any, to be effective at that time shall be
specified by the appointing authority at the time of employment.
§ 10-10.6. Longevity. [1971 Code § 5-9.6]
Longevity increases shall not be granted to any employee, whether parttime
or full-time, hired on or after May 1, 1991.
§ 10-10.7. Preservation of Rights. [1971 Code § 5-9.7]
Longevity rights existing for all Township employees hired prior to May
1, 1991 are not affected by the limitations set forth in Subsection 10-10.6
hereof.
§ 10-11. HOSPITAL, MEDICAL, DENTAL BENEFITS.
§ 10-11.1. Employees Entitled to Benefits. [1971 Code § 5-9A.1; Ord.
No. 2004-9 § 1]
All full-time permanent Township employees and members of their
immediate family, shall be entitled to hospital, medical and dental benefits
in accordance with the terms and provisions of the plans currently in effect.
Effective July 1, 2003, all employees who receive accidental disability
pension from the State of New Jersey as the result of an on the job injury
a. Overtime employment and extra work in excess of the established
regular hours shall be compensated by compensatory leave to be
granted by the department head which shall be taken within six months
of the time the extra work was performed; provided that with the
recommendation of the Municipal Manager and approval of the
Township Committee this period may be extended to one year.
b. In the event the work of the department does not permit the allowance
of compensatory time off, and in the case of an emergency, the
Municipal Manager shall recommend to the Township Committee and
the appointing authority, payment for such overtime work at the regular
hourly rate. Such overtime payment cannot be made in any year for the
overtime worked in a previous year, except November and December
which may be carried over to January and February of the year
following.
§ 10-10.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-11.1
AO:382
as an employee of the Township of Lakewood shall receive medical benefits
from the Township to the extent received while employed with the Township
as a full-time permanent employee in accordance with the terms and
provisions of the medical benefit plans currently in effect.
§ 10-11.2. Waiver of Employee Coverage of Health Benefits. [Ord.
No. 2016-13]
The purpose of this subsection is to permit the waiver of eligible employees
healthcare coverage and establish a consideration for the same.
§ 10-12. HOURS OF WORK.
§ 10-12.1. Regular Work Week. [1971 Code § 5-10.1]
The normal work week of the Township shall be a five day period as follows:
Administration 35 hours
Clerical 35 hours
Police Department 40 hours
Clerical 35 hours
Public Works Department 40 hours
Clerical 35 hours
Inspection and Health Departments 37 1/2 hours
a. N.J.S.A. 40A:10-17.1 permits a municipality which enters into a contract
providing group healthcare benefits to allow employees who are
eligible for healthcare coverage to waive that coverage.
b. All full-time employees who are eligible for other healthcare coverage
may waive the municipal healthcare coverage. The compensation for
waiving such coverage shall not exceed 25% or $5,000, whichever is
less, of the amount saved by the municipality as a result of the
employee's waiver of coverage.
c. The amount so established shall be paid in two installments. The first
installment to be paid on June 30th of each year and the second
installment to be paid on December 31st of each year. The employee
waiving the coverage and seeking the reimbursement or refund will be
compensated as set forth above or on a pro rata basis should the
employee not be employed for the full six month period.
d. The waiver must be in writing on a form to be prescribed by the
municipality and filed with the Finance Department.
e. The decision of the Township of Lakewood as set forth herein and the
amount of consideration to be paid therefor shall not be subject to the
collective bargaining process pursuant to and as set forth in N.J.S.A.
40A:10-17.1
§ 10-11.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-12.1
AO:383
Clerical 35 hours
Engineering Department 35 hours
Construction Inspector 37 1/2 hours
Clerical 35 hours
Library, 35 hours except for nine weeks in the summer when they have
a 30 hour work week. At the direction of the Township Committee, the
Municipal Manager shall set forth the hours of work for each department,
including the amount of time that shall be allowed for lunch. In specialized
departments, such as the Fire Department, hours of work may be
scheduled on an extended basis.
§ 10-12.2. Emergency. [1971 Code § 5-10.2]
The Municipal Manager or a department head may require any officer or
employee to be in attendance for work on any day or days whenever either
determines that a public exigency or emergency so requires.
§ 10-13. HOLIDAYS.
§ 10-13.1. Paid Holidays. [1971 Code § 5-11.1]
The following official holidays with pay shall be observed by the Township:
New Year's Day.
Martin Luther King's Birthday.
Lincoln's Birthday.
President's Day.
Good Friday.
Memorial Day.
Independence Day.
Labor Day.
Columbus Day.
General Election Day.
Veteran's Day.
Thanksgiving Day.
Post-Thanksgiving Day (Friday).
Christmas Day.
§ 10-12.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-13.2
AO:384
§ 10-13.2. Number of Personal Days. [1971 Code § 5-11.2]
Each employee shall be entitled to three paid personal days per year in
addition to the holidays authorized pursuant to this chapter. These personal
days shall be approved by the employee's department head.
§ 10-13.3. Compensation for Working on Holidays. [1971 Code
§ 5-11.3]
Where it is necessary in order to maintain regular service to require an
employee to work on an official holiday, such employee, except department
heads, shall be compensated by receiving pay at his hourly rate or by being
permitted to take compensatory time with pay on a regular working day at
a time approved by the appointing authority for each hour worked on the
holiday.
§ 10-13.4. Holidays Not Charged against Vacation or Sick Leave.
[1971 Code § 5-11.4]
In the event that an official holiday is observed during an employee's
vacation, said employee shall be entitled to an additional vacation day, and
should an official holiday occur while an employee is on sick leave, the
employee shall not have that holiday charged against his sick leave.
§ 10-13.5. Requirement for Holiday Pay. [1971 Code § 5-11.5]
To be eligible to receive holiday pay an employee shall work the regularly
scheduled work day before the holiday and the regularly scheduled work
day after the holiday, unless the employee has been excused by said
employee's supervisor or unless his supervisor is satisfied that the
employee's absence was justified.
§ 10-14. VACATIONS.
§ 10-14.1. Amounts of Vacation Leave. [1971 Code § 5-12.1]
All permanent, full-time employees of the Township, whether in the
classified or unclassified service, except members of the Police Department,
shall be granted annual leave with pay for vacation purposes during each
calendar year in accordance with the following schedule, based on length of
employment as of date of employment:
Length of Employment Vacation Time
1 year to 10 years 12 working days
10 years and one day to 15 years 18 working days
15 years and one day and greater 24 working days
All cumulative vacation permitted by New Jersey Department of Personnel
regulations shall be counted in satisfaction of the vacations provided for
herein and shall not be in addition thereto.
§ 10-13.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-14.1
AO:385
In determining length of service for this purpose, the total years of service
of each employee in all capacities shall be added together.
§ 10-14.2. Part-Time, Temporary or Probationary Employees. [1971
Code § 5-12.3]
Permanent part-time employees are eligible for vacation leave on a prorated
basis. Temporary or seasonal employees shall not be eligible for vacation
leave. New probationary and provisional employees shall be entitled to one
working day of vacation leave for each month of service.
§ 10-14.3. Accumulation and Termination of Employment. [1971
Code § 5-12.4; Ord. No. 2013-25]
Township employees, whether part-time or full-time, hired on or after May
1, 1991, should not be permitted to carry over vacation leave beyond that
which has been earned in the one year period immediately preceding the
date of termination of employment. This is applicable to all employees hired
on or after May 1, 1991 regardless of the reason for their termination
of employment with the Township. At the time of separation from service
for the Township, the employee shall be entitled to be paid for any full
days' vacation leave accumulated and not previously used at the rate of the
employee's pay at the time of the termination of employment.
§ 10-14.4. Choice of Time. [1971 Code § 5-12.5]
Vacations shall be scheduled by the Municipal Manager and department
heads so as to cause the least interference with the efficient conduct of
Township business. So far as possible, the preference of employees shall
be accepted, with the preferences of those employees having seniority
given first recognition. Subject to the approval of the appointing authority,
vacation leave may be taken from time to time in units of full days.
§ 10-14.5. (Reserved)36
§ 10-15. LEAVES OF ABSENCE.
§ 10-15.1. Sick Leave. [1971 Code § 5-13.1; Ord. No. 2012-39; Ord.
No. 2016-38]
a. As used in this subsection, "sick leave" means paid leave that may be
granted to each full-time classified and full-time unclassified employee
who through sickness or injury becomes incapacitated to a degree that
makes it impossible for the employee to perform the duties of his
position or who is quarantined by a physician because the employee has
been exposed to a contagious disease. Part-time permanent employees
36.Editor's Note: Former Subsection 10-14.5, Termination of Employment, containing
portions of 1971 Code § 5-12.6 was repealed by Ordinance No. 2013-25. See Subsection
10-14.3 for termination of employment.
§ 10-14.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-15.1
AO:386
are eligible for sick leave on a prorated basis. Part-time and full-time
temporary employees are not eligible for sick leave.
b. Full-time employees shall accumulate sick leave on the basis of 15 days
of sick leave per year. In the first year of employment, employees shall
be entitled to one day of sick leave for each month of employment.
c. Sick leave can be accumulated without limit during each employee's
length of service. At the time of separation from service, the employee
shall be entitled to pay on the basis of 1/2 day per full day of verifiable
sick leave accumulated and not previously used. However, in no event
shall this amount exceed the sum of $15,000 per employee hired after
January 1, 1996.
d. Accumulated sick leave may be used by an employee for personal
illness, illness in the employee's immediate family, (not to exceed five
working days in one calendar year without the approval of the
Municipal Manager), quarantine restrictions, pregnancy or disabling
injuries. The term "immediate family" shall mean and refer only to the
employee's spouse, child, parent or brother or sister or any member of
the immediate household.
e. When an employee is absent from work because of illness for more than
one day, the employee's supervisor may require the employee to submit
a certificate from the employee's physician or the Township Physician
relating to the employee's illness. In the case of illness of a chronic or
recurring nature causing an employee's periodic or repeated absence
for one day or less, the employee's department director may require
one medical certificate for every six month period.
f. Supplemental Sick Leave. The purpose of this subsection is to permit
Lakewood Township employees to assist other employees during time of
injury of serious illness in cases when all accrued leave time has been
exhausted.
1. Employees shall be permitted to donate their own accrued sick,
vacation and/or personal days into a pool of days to be used by
other Township employees.
2. Employees may also make a direct donation to a fellow employee.
3. Time can be donated at any time during the year by notifying the
Manager's office or the Personnel Office.
4. The donated time shall go into the sick leave bank of each
individual collective bargaining unit to be used by bargaining unit
employees who are sick or injured.
5. Requests for donated time shall be made through the Manager's
office and shall not be unreasonably withheld.
6. Applications for use of supplemental leave should include a
physician's recommendation that the employee is unable to work
§ 10-15.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-15.1
AO:387
§ 10-15.2. Death in the Family Leave. [1971 Code § 5-13.2]
In the event of a death in the immediate family of the employee, the
employee shall be entitled to three days leave with pay, or five continuous
days if such death occurs outside the State of New Jersey. Such leave
shall not be charged against accumulated vacation leave or sick leave.
Immediate family shall be defined as: spouse, children, parents, brothers,
sisters, brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law, spouse's parents, and grandparents
of employee or spouse or the death of a relative who resides with the
employee or spouse or with whom the employee resides.
§ 10-15.3. Special Leave. [1971 Code § 15-3.3]
§ 10-15.4. Leave of Absence as a Result of Injury in the Line of Duty.
[1971 Code § 5-13.4]
§ 10-15.5. Maternity Leave. [1971 Code § 5-13.5]
Maternity leave may be granted for a period of six months provided that
the request for such leave is made in writing to the appointed authority no
later than the fourth month of pregnancy. This leave may be extended for
an additional six months with the approval of the Municipal Manager and
the appointing authority. Requests for maternity leave must be favorably
endorsed by the Municipal Manager and approved by the appointing
authority before becoming effective. If granted, such leave shall be without
pay. Under no circumstances shall an employee work beyond the eighth
month of pregnancy.
§ 10-15.6. Military Leave. [1971 Code § 5-13.6]
and should be submitted to the employee's Department Head. The
Department Head will submit the request to the Township Manager
who will recommend approval or denial. The approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
a. In the event that an employee is unable to report to work due to a
weather emergency or civil emergency, the employee may charge the
time off to accumulated vacation leave or personal day, provided that
the employee provides proper notification to his supervisor.
b. In the event that an employee wishes to observe a religious or national
holiday for which no regular holiday has been declared, the employee
may charge the time off to accumulated vacation time, provided that
the employee gives proper notification to his supervisor.
a. When a full-time employee is injured in the line of duty, the employee
shall receive those benefits provided by N.J.S.A. 34:15-12.
a. Any permanent employee, part-time or full-time, who is a member of the
National Guard, Naval Militia, Air National Guard, or a reserve
component of any of the Armed Forces of the United States and is
§ 10-15.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-15.6
AO:388
§ 10-15.7. Leave without Pay. [1971 Code § 5-13.7; Ord. No.
2019-29; amended 10-3-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-44]
Leave without pay may be granted to full-time and part-time permanent
employees and to full-time unclassified employees. It shall be granted only
when the employee has used his accumulated sick and/or vacation leave in
the case of illness, or his vacation leave if leave without pay is requested
for reasons other than illness. Requests for leave without pay shall be
initiated in writing by the employee. The request shall go the Municipal
Manager who may or may not permit it. The Municipal Manager shall give
his decision to the employee within 10 days of the employee requesting the
leave without pay. Such leave, except for military leave without pay, shall
not be approved for a period greater than six months at any one time.
§ 10-15.8. Requests for Leave. [1971 Code § 5-13.8]
A request for any type of leave shall be made on a form prescribed by
the Municipal Manager. Such request, whenever possible, shall be made
far enough in advance to permit approval, and at the same time to permit
coverage for the particular employment so that municipal service shall not
suffer. In the case of sick leave, the employee shall notify his supervisor
immediately if he is unable to report to work.
§ 10-16. POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
§ 10-16.1. Policy. [1971 Code § 5-14.1]
It shall be the policy of the Township to appoint all employees, either
classified or unclassified, without regard to political considerations. For the
purpose of this section, Township employees are defined to include fulltime,
temporary, probationary, seasonal or part-time personnel appointed
by the Township receiving an annual or hourly reimbursement for their
services from the Township.
required to engage in field training, shall be granted a military leave of
absence with regular pay for the period of such training as is authorized
by law. The paid leave of absence shall be in addition to the employee's
vacation. Permanent part-time employees shall receive pay for such
leave on a prorated basis.
b. When a full-time or part-time permanent employee has been called to
active duty or inducted into the military or naval forces of the United
States, the employee shall be granted an indefinite leave of absence
without pay for the duration of the active military service, provided that
the employee does not voluntarily extend such service. Each employee
shall be reinstated without loss of privileges or seniority provided that
the employee reports for duty with the Township within 60 days
following his honorable discharge from military service. The employee
shall notify the Township of his intent to report for duty 30 days prior to
his discharge from military service.
§ 10-15.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-16.2
AO:389
§ 10-16.2. Certain Political Activities Prohibited. [1971 Code
§ 5-14.2]
§ 10-16.3. Rights Preserved. [1971 Code § 5-14.3]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent Township employees
from becoming or continuing to be members of any political party, club or
a. Municipal employees shall not engage in any political activity during
paid municipal hours.
b. Nothing in this section shall be construed as a prohibition or prevention
of any municipal employee from seeking any public office, whether
municipal, County, State or Federal.
c. Any employee running for public office or political position of any kind
shall refrain from electioneering from his office or by using his office or
any of the personnel thereof. No electioneering shall be done on paid
municipal time, nor shall such employee use any municipal grounds or
facilities for campaigning, other than in the same manner and to the
same degree as used by other candidates for the same office. For
example, the municipal employee shall have the freedom to
communicate with the other municipal employees or the general public
by making speeches on municipal property as shall any other candidate.
d. No person or group of persons seeking political office or speaking on
behalf of persons seeking political office shall be permitted to address
groups of municipal workers during the working hours of such
municipal workers for the purpose of furthering the campaign or party
doctrines of any candidate for public office or political party.
e. Should any municipal employee be elected to a municipal, County or
State or Federal office, said employee shall comply with New Jersey
Department of Personnel rules and regulations regarding employees
elected to office, and, if not at the time of election subject to New Jersey
Department of Personnel, shall take a leave of absence upon taking the
oath of office to which said employee is elected, such leave of absence
to continue during the terms of the elected office, but in any event no
longer than six years. At the end of six years, such leave of absence
shall be considered retirement from such position in preference of the
elected office.
f. Employees of the Township shall not directly or indirectly use or seek to
use their authority, influence or position to control or modify the
political action of another person, except as otherwise provided by law.
g. No person shall demand or require payment of a contribution to a
political party from any Township employee, nor for any candidate in
any election or political campaign whatsoever. This, however, shall not
be construed to prohibit any municipal employee from making a
completely voluntary contribution to any person or political party
within the limits otherwise prescribed by law.
§ 10-16.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-16.3
AO:390
organization, provided that they do not serve as officers of such party, club
or organization. Township employees may attend meetings, express views
on political matters during non-working hours and off Township property;
circulate petitions on public questions or vote with complete freedom in any
election.
§ 10-17. OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT. [1971 Code § 5-16]
Full-time employees in either the classified or unclassified service shall not
accept outside employment or engage in outside business activities without
the prior approval of the Municipal Manager. Applications for permission
to accept outside employment shall be made in writing to the Municipal
Manager. The application shall set forth pertinent information concerning
the type of activity to be engaged in, the name and address of the
prospective employer, and the hours of such employment.
No application for permission to accept outside employment shall be
approved by the Municipal Manager if in the Municipal Manager's judgment
there is any reasonable probability that such outside employment will
interfere with the employee's performance or compromise the employee's
position with the Township through a conflict of interest or if such
employment shall exceed 20 hours per week.
§ 10-18. DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS.
§ 10-18.1. Dismissal or Demotion. [1971 Code § 5-17.1]
A permanent employee may be dismissed from the service or demoted for
cause. The causes sufficient for removal from the service shall include, but
not be limited to the following:
a. Neglect of duty.
b. Absence without leave or failure to report after authorized leave has
expired or after such leave has been disapproved or revoked; provided,
however, that any regular member or officer of the Police Department
or Fire Department who is absent from duty without a just cause for a
term of five days continuously and without leave of absence shall at the
expiration of such five days cease to be a member of the Police
Department as provided by N.J.S.A. 40:47-3, as amended.
c. Incompetency, inefficiency or incapacity due to mental or physical
disability.
d. Insubordination or serious breach of discipline.
e. Intoxication while on duty.
f. Commission of a criminal act.
g. Participating in any political activity prohibited by this chapter.
§ 10-16.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-18.1
AO:391
§ 10-18.2. Suspension. [1971 Code § 5-17.2]
When in the opinion of the Municipal Manager after consultation with
the appointing authority, an employee's performance or conduct justifies
disciplinary action short of dismissal, the appointing authority may suspend,
fine or furlough the employee without pay or with reduced pay.
An employee who is suspended, fined or demoted more than three times in
any one year, or more than five days at any one time, or for a period of more
than 15 days in the aggregate in any calendar year shall have the right of
appeal to NJDOP which shall have the power to revoke or modify the action
of the appointing authority. In unusual circumstances where the safety or
welfare of the employee or others is threatened, the Municipal Manager or
appointing authority may temporarily suspend the employee pending formal
action by the appointing authority.
§ 10-19. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES.
§ 10-19.1. General Policy. [1971 Code § 5-18.1]
It is the policy of the Township of Lakewood that the Township or its agents
shall not discriminate regarding race, creed, color, gender, religion, national
origin or disability in admission to, access to or operations of its programs,
services and activities including hiring and employment practices. It is
the Township's policy that every citizen and employee be treated fairly,
courteously and with respect at all times. Conversely, citizens are expected
to treat each other and employees in the same fashion. Likewise, each
employee is expected to accord the same treatment to associates,
supervisors and citizens.
h. Disobedience of the departmental rules and regulations established
pursuant to this Code.
i. Conduct unbecoming a public employee.
a. Introduction. The grievance is established to provide a forum for any
employee, lacking an alternative forum, and any citizen to seek redress
for alleged discrimination or violation of any other element of the policy
set forth above.
b. Grievance. Grievance is defined as a complaint by a citizen or employee
that said person's rights under said policy have been violated.
c. In order for a grievance to be considered, it must be submitted in
writing and comply with the following criteria:
1. It shall set forth the name, address and telephone number of the
grievant, the party allegedly aggrieved.
2. It shall set forth the date of the occurrence or event giving rise to
the grievance.
§ 10-18.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-19.1
AO:392
§ 10-19.2. Grievance Procedure. [1971 Code § 5-18.2; Ord. No.
98-57]
3. It shall state the specific provision(s) of any ordinance, statute or
administrative code or administrative order which forms the basis
of the grievance.
4. It shall set forth the specific relief sought.
5. Alternative means of filing complaints will be made available to
persons with disabilities.
a. The grievant shall submit the grievance to the appropriate party no
later than 30 calendar days following the event which gave rise to the
grievance. The appropriate party shall be one of the following:
1. For ADA compliance issues:
Director of Public Works
Township of Lakewood
231 Third Street
Lakewood, New Jersey 08701
Telephone: (732) 364-2500
FAX: (732) 367-5401
2. For alleged discrimination:
Aide to the Mayor
Township of Lakewood
121 Second Street
Lakewood, New Jersey 08701
Telephone: (732) 364-2500
FAX: (732) 905-5991
3. Regarding specific department:
Department Head of
Department of
231 Third Street
Lakewood, New Jersey 08701
Telephone: (732) 364-2500
FAX: (732) 905-5991
4. All other concerns:
§ 10-19.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-19.2
AO:393
§ 10-19.3. Severability Clause. [1971 Code § 5-18.5]
If any section, subsection, part, clause or phrase of this section shall be
declared invalid by judgment of any Court of competent jurisdiction, such
section, subsection, part, clause or phrase shall be deemed to be severable
from the remainder of this section.
§ 10-19.4. Sexual Harassment Policy. [1971 Code § 5-18]
The Township of Lakewood expressly prohibits any form of sexual
harassment in the workplace. Improper interference with the ability of
employees to perform their designated duties will not be tolerated. All
employees have a right to work in an environment free of discrimination
which includes freedom from sexual harassment, in any form, and states
that all employees at all levels of the Township of Lakewood must refrain
from offensive or inappropriate sexual and/or sexually harassing behavior
in the workplace. All employees at all levels of the Township of Lakewood
will be held responsible for insuring that the workplace is free from sexual
harassment.
Municipal Manager
231 Third Street
Lakewood, New Jersey 08701
Telephone: (732) 364-2500
FAX: (732) 905-5991
Said appropriate party shall, upon receipt of the grievance,
designate a time within 15 calendar days for discussion of the
grievance with the aggrieved party.
b. If the grievance is not satisfactorily adjusted, within five calendar days
following a decision in a., the grievance shall be presented in writing to
the Municipal Manager or his designee by the aggrieved party. The
Municipal Manager or his designee shall, upon receipt of the grievance,
designate a time within 15 calendar days for discussion or a hearing of
the grievance with any affected party. The decision rendered shall be
final and binding upon the parties.
a. Supervisory Responsibility. Each department head/supervisor is
responsible for creating an atmosphere free of sexual harassment and
to promptly investigate complaints and take corrective action on any
such complaints, as warranted. Township employees must bear the
responsibility for respecting the rights of their co-workers.
b. Definitions. As used in this subsection, the following words and phrases
shall have these accompanying specific definitions:
1. CHARGED PARTY - Shall mean any person, including a Township
employee, against whom a charge of sexual harassment is filed.
§ 10-19.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-19.4
AO:394
2. COMPLAINANT - Shall mean any Township employee who brings
or files a charge of sexual harassment.
3. HOSTILE WORK ENVIRONMENT SEXUAL HARASSMENT - Shall
mean a factual finding by the Municipal Manager or his appointed
designee that a charged party has committed an offense or offenses
rising to the level of sexual harassment, to wit: Whereby (1) the
complained of conduct would not have occurred but for the
complainant's gender; and (2) it was severe or pervasive enough to
make any reasonable woman (if the complainant is female, or a
reasonable man, if the complainant is male) believe that (3) the
conditions of employment are altered and the working environment
is hostile or abusive.
4. INVESTIGATOR - Shall mean the person supervising or
administering the investigation regarding a sexual harassment
complaint or complaints. The respective department head of each
complainant is herewith designated the investigator of that
particular complainant's informal complaint. The Municipal
Manager or his appointed designee is herewith designated as the
investigator of all formal complaints.
5. QUID PRO QUO SEXUAL HARASSMENT - Shall mean a factual
finding by the Municipal Manager or his appointed designee that a
charged party has committed an offense or offenses arising to the
level of quid pro quo sexual harassment, which shall be deemed to
occur when an employer attempts to make an employee's
submission to sexual demands a condition of his or her
employment. Quid pro quo sexual harassment involves an implicit
or explicit threat that if the employee does not accede to the sexual
demands of the employer, the employee, be it male or female, will
lose his or her job, receive unfavorable performance reviews, be
passed over for promotions, or suffer other adverse employment
consequences.
6. RETALIATION - Shall mean any act of any Township official,
department or division head or employee taken to punish,
discourage or intimidate those persons who have or may either
become a complainant or those persons who have or may assist in
the investigation of any sexual harassment complaint.
7. SEXUAL HARASSMENT - Shall include the following:
(a) Any unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors
and other verbal and physical conduct of a sexual nature when:
(1) Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or
implicitly a term or condition of a person's employment; or
(2) Submission to or rejection of such conduct by a person is
used as a basis for employment decisions affecting that
person; or
§ 10-19.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-19.4
AO:395
(3) Such conduct has the purpose or effect of unreasonably
interfering with a person's work performance; or
(4) Such conduct creates an intimidating, unpleasant or
offensive work environment.
(b) Hostile work environment sexual harassment; and
(c) Quid pro quo sexual harassment.
c. Complaint Procedure.
1. Who May File. Any Township employee who believes that they have
been a victim of sexual harassment or who has witnessed an act or
acts of sexual harassment against a fellow employee with the
Township may file a complaint alleging sexual harassment.
2. Informal Complaints
(a) A complaint alleging sexual harassment must first be made
verbally to an employee's department head, regardless of the
work assignment/department of the charged party. The
complainant's department head is responsible for investigating
informal charges and arranging a mutually satisfactory
disposition of the complaint within five days of its presentation,
or at a mutually agreed upon time.
(b) If the complainant is informed by his department head that the
department head is unable, within the confines of the
discretion permitted said department head to arrange a
mutually satisfactory disposition of the complaint, the
complainant may file a formal written complaint. If the
complaint of sexual harassment involves the complainant's
division/department head, the formal complaint procedures as
set forth hereinbelow may be immediately instituted by the
complainant.
(c) Any filing of a complaint to a person other than the
complainant's division/department head or the Municipal
Manager or the Municipal Manager's appointed designee must
be accompanied by the sworn statement of the complainant
that the persons to whom the complaint should otherwise have
been directed cannot, in the mind of the complainant, be
objective about the sexual harassment charge or charges the
complainant desires to file.
3. Formal Complaints.
(a) A formal complaint of sexual harassment must first be filed by
the above-referenced individuals with the Municipal Manager
or said official's appointed designee. If, pursuant to Subsection
10-19.4c2(c) hereof, the complaint cannot be filed with the
Municipal Manager or said official's appointed designee, said
§ 10-19.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-19.4
AO:396
complaint shall next be filed with the Mayor of the Township.
If the complainant cannot file his complaint with any Township
official as set forth hereinabove, the complaint must then be
filed with the Office of the Attorney General, representing the
New Jersey Division on Civil Rights.
d. Contents of Filing. The filed complaint must include the following
information:
1. The name, department and position or title of the complainant;
2. The name, department and position or title of the charged party;
3. The nature and circumstances, set forth in detail, of the alleged
sexual harassment, including, but not limited to, the injuries or
consequences suffered by the complainant, the names of any
witnesses to such actions and the duration of the actions alleged;
4. Whether such harassment has been previously reported to a
supervisor or other persons, and if so, the dates of reporting and
identity of the party or parties to whom such harassment has
previously been reported.
5. Nothing in this section shall prevent the complainant from
providing other information or documentation they believe is
essential to the fair adjudication of their case.
6. The filing of an informal complaint may be made orally. A formal
complaint must be in writing deemed accurate and signed by the
complainant prior to its submission to the Municipal Manager or
said official's appointed designee.
e. Investigation of Filed Formal Complaint. A formal complaint of sexual
harassment shall be investigated pursuant to the following regulations:
1. The Municipal Manager or said official's appointed designee (if the
claim involves the Municipal Manager, or if the complainant has
declared the apparent non-objectivity of the Municipal Manager),
shall be responsible for the prompt and thorough investigation of
each filed formal complaint.
2. The investigation shall commence and be completed within 20
business days of the receipt of the complaint by the Municipal
Manager or said official's appointed designee.
3. It shall be the duty of the individual responsible for the
investigation to:
(a) Interview the complainant in detail;
(b) Interview all potential witnesses, including those who may
have knowledge of similar incidents;
(c) Interview the charged party in detail;
§ 10-19.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-19.4
AO:397
(d) Review municipal files for similar incidents involving the
complainant and the charged party; and
(e) Assess the presence or absence of corroborative evidence for
either party.
(f) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit or prevent the
Municipal Manager or said official's appointed designee from
pursuing other unspecified avenues of investigation which the
investigator believes is/are essential to a comprehensive
investigation of the filed formal complaint.
f. Hearing Procedures Upon Formal Written Charges. There shall be a
disciplinary hearing upon the filing of formal written charges by the
municipality, pursuant to the following rules:
1. Within 35 business days of the completion of the investigation by
the Municipal Manager or said official's appointed designee, the
Municipal Manager or said official's appointed designee shall
convene and preside at a disciplinary hearing in order to determine
the merits of the allegation(s) of sexual harassment.
2. The hearing shall be tape recorded. A transcript of the proceedings
may be requested by the charged party or by the complainant. The
party requesting the transcript must bear the expense for
transcription and/or reproduction of the proceedings.
3. The charged party shall be notified in writing of the hearing date at
least 30 days before the hearing and provided with a copy of the
complaint and appropriate disciplinary forms pursuant to Civil
Service Regulations.
4. The charged party shall be entitled to request one postponement in
order to obtain legal counsel. In no event, however, shall the
hearing on the charge(s) occur more than 35 days after the
completion of the investigation as described hereinabove.
5. The hearing shall be deemed informal in nature although the
charged party shall be entitled to state all defenses, present
relevant evidence, call witnesses on their behalf, and confront all
witnesses against them, including the complainant. Should the
complainant fail to appear at the hearing, the charged party shall
be entitled to have the complaint dismissed.
6. The hearing shall occur only in the presence of the Township
Attorney or other designated legal counsel who shall participate in
such hearings in order to assure confidentiality, resolve disputes
concerning the introduction of evidence and prepare a complete
and accurate record.
7. The Municipal Manager or said official's appointed designee shall
render a written determination as to the guilt or innocence of the
§ 10-19.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-19.4
AO:398
charged party within 10 business days of the hearing. If the
Municipal Manager or said official's appointed designee
determines that the charged party is guilty, the Municipal Manager
or said official's appointed designee shall recommend appropriate
remedial action to be imposed on the charged party.
8. Where the charged party is found not guilty of the alleged sexual
harassment, or the evidence is so inconclusive as to make a
determination as to whether acts of sexual harassment occurred
impossible, the Municipal Manager or said official's appointed
designee shall notify all parties that it has reached such a decision.
9. The Municipal Manager shall maintain a complete file of all
documents received in reference to any complaint for a period of
not less than five years from the date of the final decision.
10. If filed informal or formal charges of sexual harassment involve the
Municipal Manager, the Mayor and/or Municipal Attorney shall
investigate said charges and preside at the disciplinary hearing
therefor if applicable.
g. Standards for Determination of Guilt. The Municipal Manager or said
official's appointed designee shall determine that the charged party is
not guilty of the offense of sexual harassment unless, based upon the
testimony elicited and/or documentation provided at the time of
hearing, substantial, credible evidence supports the conclusion that:
1. The facts as alleged by the complainant are true;
2. Those facts constitute sexual harassment as defined hereinabove;
3. The charged party is the person who committed the acts amounting
to sexual harassment as defined hereinabove.
h. Remedial Action. The Municipal Manager or said official's appointed
designee shall be permitted to impose the following penalties or
conditions of employment upon a Township employee found to have
committed the offense of sexual harassment. These remedies, as listed,
are not to be cumulative in any manner:
1. Discharge or demotion;
2. Suspension or written reprimand which shall become a permanent
part of the guilty employee' s employment file;
3. Transfer of the guilty party;
4. Require the guilty employee to undergo psychological therapy at
his/her expense; and
5. Re-issue to the guilty employee the policy statement of the
Township of Lakewood against sexual harassment.
§ 10-19.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-19.4
AO:399
The Township of Lakewood hereby expressly makes it the official Township
policy to encourage all of its employees to utilize the procedures detailed
herein when they witness conduct directed towards other Township
employees which might constitute the offense of sexual harassment.
i. Prevention of Sexual Harassment in the Workplace; Dissemination of
the Township Policy Prohibiting Sexual Harassment. The Municipal
Manager shall be obligated to perform the following tasks:
1. Post in at least two or more prominent locations within the
municipal building and all other municipal facilities the document
entitled "Policy Prohibiting Sexual Harassment in the Workplace
for the Township of Lakewood";
2. Provide to all current employees of the Township of Lakewood a
true and complete copy of this subsection and policy within 30 days
of its effective date; obtain from all Township employees a written
certification that each employee has received a copy of the
subsection and policy; and permanently maintain this certification
in each employee' s personnel file;
3. Provide to all persons hired as employees of the Township of
Lakewood subsequent to the effective date of this subsection and
policy a true and complete copy of same at the time of their
appointment/hire date; maintain the integrity of the certification
process for the aforesaid new hires as detailed in Subsection
10-19.4i2 hereinabove;
4. Issue a memorandum to all Township employees on or about
January 1 of the calendar year following the adoption of this
subsection and each January 1 thereafter concerning the policy of
the Township prohibiting sexual harassment in the workplace;
5. Discuss the policy prohibiting sexual harassment in the workplace
during any new employee orientation meetings, seminars or
training sessions held subsequent to the effective adoption date of
this subsection and policy.
j. Periodic Training of Township Employees Regarding Sexual
Harassment. All department/division heads and supervisory employees
of the Township of Lakewood shall undergo training, in one or more
sessions, with a person trained to lead or implement such training, said
training to include a detailed discussion of the following:
1. The procedures for the filing of a sexual harassment charge or
charges as outlined in this subsection;
2. The specifics of "quid pro quo" sexual harassment and "hostile work
environment" sexual harassment and the differences between the
two types;
3. The components of "unwelcome" conduct;
§ 10-19.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-19.4
AO:400
4. The proper method of insuring a complete and prompt
investigation of sexual harassment charges and/or complaints;
5. Management's obligations regarding harassment of which it is
aware, or, alternatively, of which it should be aware;
6. Procedures to be implemented to insure the confidential nature of
information gathered during an investigation;
7. The manner in which the interests of both the charged party and
the complainant can be balanced;
8. Record-keeping requirements;
9. The above-described personnel shall be required to undergo this
training on or before January 1 of the calendar year subsequent to
the adoption of this subsection and policy and every three years
thereafter;
10. All other employees of the Township of Lakewood shall be offered
the opportunity to voluntarily undergo training led by persons
trained to lead such sessions, to raise their awareness and
understanding of the consequences of their behavior and reduce
confusion about which actions or conduct is/are acceptable and
which is/are not. These employees shall be offered this opportunity
to undergo this voluntary training on or before January 1 of the
calendar year following the adoption of this subsection and every
five year(s) thereafter.
k. Applicability of this Subsection to Non-Employees of the Township of
Lakewood. Non-employees of the Township of Lakewood, including but
not limited to, those interacting with Township employees as vendors of
goods and services, independent contractors, substitute or temporary
workers or fill-ins, shall also be subject to each and every term of this
subsection should it be alleged by a complainant that they committed
an act or conducted themselves in such a way as to commit the offense
of sexual harassment.
l. Retaliation.
1. There will be no retaliation against employees for reporting sexual
harassment or assisting the Township of Lakewood in the
investigation of a complaint alleging sexual harassment. However,
if after investigating any complaint of harassment or unlawful
discrimination, the Township of Lakewood discovers that the
complaint is not bona fide or that an employee has provided false
information regarding the complaint, disciplinary action may be
taken against the individual who provided false information.
Because a charge of sexual harassment is a grave and serious one,
false accusations of sexual harassment are, and will be treated as, a
disciplinary offense and result in a level of punishment appropriate
for persons actually engaging in such behavior.
§ 10-19.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-19.4
AO:401
2. A person who knowingly and/or recklessly fails to give truthful
statements and/or testimony during the course of the investigation
and/or at the time of any hearing, shall also be guilty of having
made false accusations.
m. Monitoring and Evaluation of Subsection/Policy Provisions.
1. The Municipal Manager or said official's appointed designee shall
monitor the efficacy of the Township's ordinance and policy
prohibiting sexual harassment on a constant basis subsequent to
the adoption date thereof.
2. On or before January 1 of the calendar year following the adoption
of said ordinance and policy, and every two years thereafter, the
Municipal Manager or said official's appointed designee shall
supply a written evaluation of the procedures and policies
implemented by the aforesaid ordinance and policy to the
governing body (and shall, if necessary, propose appropriate
modifications thereto) in order to ensure:
(a) The permanent prohibition of any form of sexual harassment in
the workplace;
(b) That each division/department head and all supervisory
personnel have discharged their responsibilities in creating an
atmosphere free of sexual harassment;
(c) That all informal and formal complaints of sexual harassment
are promptly and thoroughly investigated;
(d) That hearing procedures are scrupulously adhered to;
(e) That standards determining guilt are stringently enforced;
(f) That remedial action is imposed immediately upon a finding of
guilt;
(g) That the policy prohibiting sexual harassment is distributed to
Township employees, and that all Township employees
complete a certification pursuant to Subsections 10-19.4i2 and
i3 hereof;
(h) That the follow-up memorandum from the Municipal Manager
or appointed designee is properly and promptly distributed
pursuant to Subsection 10-19.4i4 hereof;
(i) That discussion of the Township's policy prohibiting sexual
harassment is the subject of any employee forum, in-service
training session, seminar or orientation program pursuant to
Subsection 10-19.4i5 hereof;
(j) That all division/department heads and supervisory employees
satisfy the mandatory training provisions of Subsection
§ 10-19.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-19.4
AO:402
10-19.4j hereof, and that all other employees have the
opportunity to undergo such training pursuant to Subsection
10-19.4j10 hereof;
(k) That non-employees of the Township of Lakewood adhere to
the Township's policy prohibiting sexual harassment;
(l) That there will be no retaliation against employees for
reporting sexual harassment or assisting in the investigation of
a complaint alleging sexual harassment.
n. Policy Prohibiting Sexual Harassment in the Workplace for the
Township of Lakewood.
1. It is the policy of the Township of Lakewood that all of its
employees have a right to a workplace free of all discrimination,
including sexual discrimination. The Township Committee and the
Township Administration strongly disapprove of sexual harassment
of its employees in any form and states that all employees at all
levels of the Township will be held responsible for insuring that this
workplace is free of such harassment.
2. Sexual harassment may include, but is not limited to, the following
activities and/or behavior, which are specifically and strictly
prohibited in the Township of Lakewood.
3. Unwelcome sexual advances, such as offensive sexual flirtations,
repeated requests for dates or love letters after rejection of
overtures;
4. Discussing sexual activity;
5. Repeated remarks to a person with sexual or demeaning
implications;
6. Unwelcomed intentional touching, such as patting, pinching,
fondling or brushing against another's body;
7. Requests for sexual acts or favors with or without accompanying
promises or threats or reciprocal favors or actions relating to
employment;
8. Other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature made to any
employee which states or suggests a connection between the
response of the recipient of that conduct and that person's terms of
employment with the Township;
9. Any verbal or physical conduct which has the purpose or effect of
substantially interfering with another employee's ability to perform
their job;
10. Any verbal or physical conduct that has the purpose or effect of
creating an intimidating, hostile or abusive work environment;
§ 10-19.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-19.4
AO:403
§ 10-20. PERSONNEL RECORDS. [1971 Code § 5-19]
The Municipal Manager shall provide that adequate personnel records are
maintained for each employee of the Township. Such records shall include
dates of appointments and promotions, job titles, salaries, commendations,
11. Any verbal or physical conduct which would not have occurred but
for the sex of the individual to whom it is directed;
12. Posting or circulation of offensive or suggestive books, photos,
cartoons or pictures, or remarks about another' s body, whether or
not the individual about whom the comments have been made is an
employee of the Township;
13. The use of offensive words directed at a specific gender, group or
race;
14. Practical jokes about gender-specific traits.
o. Such Conduct May Result in a Disciplinary Action and Subject the
Offending Party to Dismissal.
1. Employees who have complaints of sexual harassment against
anyone at work, including any supervisors, co-employees,
nonemployees pursuant to Subsection 10-19.4k hereof, or visitors,
or who witness acts of sexual harassment committed against other
Township employees are urged to immediately report such conduct
pursuant to the Ordinance Prohibiting Sexual Harassment annexed
hereto and made a part hereof, in order to ensure a prompt
investigation.
2. Employees should normally bring the complaint to the attention of
their direct supervisor pursuant to the above-referenced
ordinance. However, if doing so would, for whatever reason, make
them uncomfortable, the employee should bring the complaint to
the attention of the Municipal Manager or the Mayor, as the
circumstances of the complaint dictate.
3. The Township shall investigate all complaints in a complete,
impartial and prompt manner. All investigations will be supervised
by the Township Attorney or other legal counsel where
circumstances so dictate.
4. The Township shall make every effort to maintain the
confidentiality of the information gathered during the course of a
sexual harassment investigation. However, because an allegation of
sexual harassment is a very serious matter for all concerned, and
will not be taken lightly by this Township, should the Township
learn that a complaint is not bona fide or that an employee provided
false information, that employee will be subject to disciplinary
action.
§ 10-19.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-20
AO:404
disciplinary actions, leave of any type taken and accumulated, merit ratings,
and any appropriate additional information.
§ 10-21. MEDICAL EXAMINATIONS. [1971 Code § 5-20]
The Municipal Manager may schedule medical examinations for any and all
Township employees annually, or more frequently if required.
§ 10-22. TRAINING PROGRAMS.
§ 10-22.1. Development of Programs. [1971 Code § 5-21.1]
The responsibility for the development of training programs shall be
assumed jointly by the Municipal Manager and the department heads
subject to the approval of the Township Committee. Such training programs
shall include lectures, demonstrations, assignment of reading matter, or
other methods as those responsible may deem to be desirable.
§ 10-22.2. Approved Courses. [Code § 5-21.2]
The Township may assume tuition cost of training courses taken by the
employees of the Township which, on recommendation of the Municipal
Manager and with the approval of the Township Committee, are deemed to
be of benefit to the employee and the Township. Such training programs
shall be taken on the employee's own time, unless otherwise recommended
by the Township Manager and approved by the Township Committee.
§ 10-22.3. Record. [Code § 5-21.3]
Successful completion of special training courses shall be filed with the
employee's personnel record and may be considered toward said
employee's advancement or promotions in the future.
§ 10-23. SURETY BONDS.
§ 10-23.1. Required. [1971 Code § 5-22.1]
Every officer or employee of the Township who by virtue of his office or
position is entrusted with the receipt, custody or expenditure of public
moneys or funds, and any other officer or employee who may be required to
do so by the Township Committee shall, before entering upon the duties of
his office or position, execute and deliver a surety bond in such amount as
may be fixed by the Township Committee, binding him to the Township in
its corporate name and conditioned upon the true and faithful performance
of the employee's duty. Each officer or employee required by law to give
bond shall execute such bond with sufficient surety and deliver the same to
the Municipal Clerk, except that the Municipal Clerk shall deliver his own
bond to the Township Treasurer, before the Municipal Clerk enters upon the
discharge of his duties of the office or employment.
§ 10-20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-23.2
AO:405
§ 10-23.2. Failure to Obtain. [1971 Code § 5-22.2]
If any officer or employee shall neglect to execute and deliver his bond
as herein required within 30 days after due notification of his election or
appointment, said officer's or employee's office or position may be declared
vacant by the Township Committee.
§ 10-23.3. Form and Requisites. [1971 Code § 5-22.3]
In every case in which any person is required by the laws of the State or by
any ordinance of the Township to give a bond for the faithful performance
of his duties, such bond shall be secured by a corporate surety authorized
to do business in this State and the premium therefor shall be paid by the
Township. Each such bond shall be approved by the Township Attorney as
to form and sufficiency, and nothing in this section shall be construed to
prevent the use of one or more blanket bonds when so approved.
§ 10-24. ALCOHOL AND DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE.
§ 10-24.1. Statement of Policy. [1971 Code § 5-23.1]
The Township of Lakewood has a legal obligation and vital interest in
maintaining a safe and efficient workplace for its employees and a safe
community for its citizens. Employees using, or under the influence of
alcohol or illegal drugs while on duty cannot satisfactorily perform their
duties. Such employees threaten the safety and well-being of their
coworkers and the public. Additionally, the Drug Free Workplace Act of
1988 (41 U.S.C. § 702 et seq.) and U.S. Department of Transportation
(hereinafter referred to as "the USDOT") Regulations (49 CFR Part 40)
require the Township to maintain a drug and alcohol-free workplace and to
conduct alcohol and drug testing in certain circumstances.
The purpose of this section is to establish uniform standards for preemployment
and employment drug and alcohol testing and to ensure
confidentiality, reliability, and fairness in drug and alcohol testing.
The Township recognizes that a healthy and productive workforce, safe
working conditions free from the effects of drugs and alcohol, and
maintenance of the quality of services rendered in this Township is
important to the Township, its employees, and the general public. The
Township further recognizes that the abuse of drugs and alcohol creates
a variety of workplace problems, including increased injuries on the job,
increased absenteeism, an increased financial burden on health and benefit
programs, increased workplace theft, decreased employee morale,
decreased productivity, and a decline in the quality of services.
Additionally, certain drug and alcohol testing procedures are necessary
to protect persons participating in workplace drug and alcohol testing
programs.
§ 10-23.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-24.1
AO:406
Therefore, in balancing the interests of the Township, its employees and
the welfare of the general public, the Township Committee concludes that
fair and accurate testing for drugs and alcohol in the workplace is in the
best interests of all. Accordingly, the following regulations are intended to
establish and govern a drug-free workplace and regulate the possession and
use of alcoholic beverages and drugs, and shall include pre-employment,
random, post-accident, return-to-duty and follow-up testing for drugs and
alcohol.
§ 10-24.2. Definitions. [1971 Code § 5-23.2]
As used in this section:
ALCOHOL — Shall mean any fluid having an alcohol content of more than
five-tenths (0.05%) percent including, but not limited to, beer, ale, wine
and distilled liquors. "Alcohol" means the intoxicating agent in beverage
alcohol, ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or other low-molecular weight
alcohols including methyl and isopropyl alcohol from whatever source or by
whatever process produced.
ALCOHOL CONCENTRATION (OR CONTENT) — Shall mean the alcohol in
a volume of breath expressed in terms of grams of alcohol per 210 liters of
breath as indicated by an evidential breath test.
ALCOHOL USE — Shall mean the consumption of any beverage, mixture, or
preparation, including any medication, containing alcohol.
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Shall mean any fluid or solid capable of being
converted into a fluid, suitable for human consumption, and having an
alcohol content of more than one-half of one percent by volume.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean a motor vehicle or
combination of motor vehicles used in commerce to transport passengers or
property if the motor vehicle:
CONFIRMATION TEST. — For alcohol testing, Shall mean a second test,
following a screening test with a result of 0.02 or greater, that provides
quantitative date of alcohol concentration. For drug testing, "confirmation
test" shall mean a second analytical procedure to identify the presence
of a specific drug or metabolite which is independent of the screening
test and which uses a different technique and chemical principle from
that of the screening test in order to ensure reliability and accuracy. Gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) shall be the only authorized
confirmation method for cocaine, marijuana, opiates, amphetamines, and
phencyclidine.
Has a gross combination weight rating of 26,000 or more pounds
inclusive of a towed unit with a gross vehicle weight rating of more than
10,000 pounds; or
a.
b. Has a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,000 or more pounds; or
Is designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver, or
transports hazardous materials.
c.
§ 10-24.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-24.2
AO:407
DIAGNOSIS/TREATMENT SPECIALIST (HEREINAFTER REFERRED TO AS
"DTS") — Shall mean a licensed physician or a licensed certified
psychologist, social worker, employee assistance professional, or addiction
counselor with knowledge of, and clinical experience in, the diagnosis and
treatment of alcohol and drug-abuse and related disorders.
DRIVER — Shall mean any Township employee who is required to hold a
commercial driver's license (hereinafter referred to as "CDL") in the State
of New Jersey or any Township employee who operates a commercial or
municipal motor vehicle while on duty. This includes, but is not limited
to: full-time, regularly employed drivers; casual, intermittent or occasional
drivers; leased drivers and independent, owner-operator contractors who
are either directly employed by, or under lease to, an employer, or who
operate a commercial or municipal motor vehicle at the direction, or with
the consent of, an employer. For the purposes of pre-employment/pre-duty
testing only, the term "driver" includes a person applying to an employer to
drive a commercial or municipal motor vehicle.
DRUG ABUSE — Shall mean illegal drugs and/or the misuse of prescription
or non-prescription drugs.
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA — Shall mean any material or equipment used or
designed for the testing, packaging, storing or use of a CDS.
DRUGS — Shall mean mind and behavior altering substances as defined
by the Controlled Dangerous Substance Act, 21 U.S.C. § 812 (schedule I-V)
and N.J.S.A. 24:21-1, et seq. and analogous substances designed to produce
an effect substantially similar to that of a controlled dangerous substance
(hereinafter referred to as "CDS").
EMPLOYEE — Shall mean a person, independent contractor or person hired
by an independent contractor who performs services for the Township. The
term "employee" shall also include the term "driver".
EMPLOYER — Shall mean the Township of Lakewood and includes its
agents, officers and representatives.
ILLEGAL DRUGS — Shall mean any substance for which the possession,
sale, distribution, manufacture, or use by unlicensed persons is prohibited
by law, but not when used pursuant to a valid prescription or when used as
otherwise authorized by law.
JOB APPLICANT — Shall mean a person, independent contractor or person
hired by an independent contractor who applies to become an employee of
the Township.
MEDICAL REVIEW OFFICER (HEREINAFTER REFERRED TO AS "MRO")
— Shall mean a licensed physician responsible for receiving laboratory
results generated by an employer's drug testing program who has
knowledge of substance-abuse disorders and has appropriate medical
training to interpret and evaluate an individual's positive test result
together with his medical history and any other relevant biomedical
information.
§ 10-24.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-24.2
AO:408
MUNICIPAL VEHICLE — Shall mean any vehicle with "municipal" license
plates or registered to the Township.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean the Township of Lakewood.
NON-PRESCRIPTION DRUG — Shall mean substances that are not legally
controlled and are available without a medical prescription, but which,
when improperly or inappropriately used, may hamper the ability to
perform assigned duties or impair judgment, alertness, or any other
physical, emotional, and mental capacities.
ON-DUTY — Shall mean, for the purposes of this section, an employee,
unless absent, is on-duty during their scheduled shift and during such
additional times when the employee is working at the direction of the
Township.
PERFORMING A SAFETY-SENSITIVE FUNCTION — Shall mean an
employee is considered to be performing a safety-sensitive function during
any period in which the employee is actually performing, ready to perform,
or immediately available to perform any safety-sensitive functions,
specifically including driving a commercial or municipal motor vehicle.
POSSESSION — Shall mean and include having a specified item, substance
or article on one's person, in a locker assigned to an individual, or in a
personal or municipal vehicle used by an individual.
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS — Shall mean controlled and noncontrolled
substances for which possession and use are legal when prescribed by
licensed medical personnel.
PRESCRIPTION/NON-PRESCRIPTION DRUG MISUSE — Shall mean the
overuse or inappropriate use of any prescription or non-prescription
medication, and includes the ingestion of substances specifically prescribed
for another individual.
REASONABLE SUSPICION — Shall mean an articulable belief based on
specific objective facts and reasonable inferences drawn from those facts.
Reasonable suspicion of alcohol and/or drug abuse or misuse is based
upon behavioral and performance factors which include, but are not limited
to, decrease in work performance level, willful misconduct, excessive
absenteeism and tardiness, citizen complaints, excessive use of sick leave,
acts of negligence causing injuries or accidents, poor traffic safety record,
and other documented and supportable reasons.
REFUSAL TO SUBMIT TO AN ALCOHOL OR BLOOD TEST — Shall mean
that an employee:
Fails to provide adequate breath for testing without a valid medical
explanation after the employee has received notice of the requirement
for breath testing in accordance with the provision of this policy; and/
or
a.
Fails to provide adequate urine for controlled substances testing
without a valid medical explanation after the employee has received
b.
§ 10-24.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-24.2
AO:409
SCREENING TEST (ALSO KNOWN AS INITIAL TEST). — In alcohol testing,
"screening test" shall mean an analytical procedure to determine whether a
driver may have prohibited concentration of alcohol in his system. In drug
testing, "screening test" shall mean an immunoassay screen to eliminate
"negative" urine specimens from further consideration.
SUPERVISOR. — For department heads, "supervisor" shall mean the
Municipal Manager or his appointed designee. For all other employees,
"supervisor" means their respective department head (and/or the
department head's appointed designee) as defined in the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Lakewood.
UNDER THE INFLUENCE — Shall mean the detected presence of a drug
or alcohol in an individual's system at or above the level of a positive test
result. An employee shall be deemed to be "under the influence" of alcohol
if that employee's blood alcohol concentration (hereinafter referred to as
"BAC") is found to be 0.04% or more by weight of alcohol in the employee's
blood as measured by a Breathalyzer test. Any employee whose urine is
found to have any detectable level of drugs shall be deemed to be "under
the influence" of drugs.
WORKPLACE — Shall mean any site where work is being performed by an
on-duty Township employee on behalf of the Township, including, but not
limited to, Township facilities, commercial or municipal vehicles and any job
site.
§ 10-24.3. Persons Subject to Drug and Alcohol Testing. [1971 Code
§ 5-23.3]
All employees who hold or are required to hold a CDL in the State of New
Jersey and who may be required to drive a commercial or municipal vehicle
during the course of their employment with the Township are subject to
pre-employment, reasonable suspicion, post-accident, return-to-work and
random testing pursuant to this policy and pursuant to 49 CFR 382 et seq.
All sworn Police Officers are subject to alcohol and drug testing as required
by the New Jersey Attorney General's Drug Testing Guidelines. Said
guidelines also provide for testing circumstances/occasions and procedures
for sworn Police personnel.
All other Township employees are subject to pre-employment, post-accident,
reasonable suspicion, and return-to-work testing pursuant to this policy.
Job applicants are subject to pre-employment testing.
notice of the requirement for urine testing in accordance with the
provisions of this policy; and/or
Engages in conduct that obstructs any stage of the testing process,
which conduct includes, but is not limited to, tampering with,
contaminating, altering and/or substituting, any test sample.
c.
§ 10-24.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-24.4
AO:410
§ 10-24.4. Drug and Alcohol Testing Circumstances/Occasions
Defined. [1971 Code § 5-23.4]
The Township may conduct the specified drug/alcohol tests on employees
in the various groups defined in Subsection 10-24.3 hereinabove under the
following circumstances:
a. Prior to Employment. Drug screening shall be required of all persons
who receive pre-employment physicals.
b. After an Accident or Injury. Drug/alcohol testing shall be required
where the circumstances indicate an impairment may have contributed
to the accident. When in doubt, supervisors shall require post-accident
testing of the employee(s) involved.
c. Upon Reasonable Suspicion that an Individual Is Under the Influence of
Drugs and/or Alcohol. Supervisors who have been trained in the
recognition of the signs and symptoms of drug and alcohol use shall
require drug and/or alcohol testing when said supervisor has
individualized reasonable suspicion that an employee is under the
influence of drugs and/or alcohol. The supervisor(s) shall document the
circumstances which constitute the basis for their determination of the
existence of reasonable suspicion, including, but not limited to:
1. A pattern of abnormal or erratic behavior including, but not limited
to, fighting, confrontational behavior, insubordination, poor or
declining work performance, excessive use of sick leave or a
pattern of sick leave use, tardiness;
2. Direct observation of drug and/or alcohol possession or use;
3. Observation of symptoms of drug and/or alcohol use, including
possession of drug paraphernalia;
4. Information obtained from another person whom the supervisor
believes to have personal knowledge about the individual's drug
and/or alcohol use and whom the supervisor believes to be reliable.
d. Upon Return-to-Work after Previous Infractions. Employees who have
been convicted of a criminal offense involving drugs and/or alcohol,
who have been disciplined for matters involving drugs and/or alcohol,
or who voluntarily admit to an alcohol and/or drug-abuse problem, and
who have been permitted to return to work in any job title, shall submit
to unannounced drug and/or alcohol tests for up to 60 months following
their return to duty. All return to work drug testing is done at the
employee's expense.
e. Random Testing.
1. Random tests shall occur at unpredictable dates and times during
the year. The selection of the individuals to be tested shall be
random from among employees who have a CDL or who drive
commercial or municipal vehicles while on duty.
§ 10-24.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-24.4
AO:411
§ 10-24.5. Drug and Alcohol Testing Procedures. [1971 Code
§ 5-23.5]
2. The Municipal Manager or his appointed designee may employ
such methods and procedures as he deems necessary to insure that
the random selection process is maintained.
3. All random alcohol and drug tests shall be unannounced.
4. If a driver or other employee is selected for a random alcohol and/
or drug test, he shall proceed to the test site immediately.
5. Upon notification of selection, the employee will report to the
designated collection center within one hour of notification. Failure
to report will be viewed as an attempt to elude the test or alter its
results and could result in disciplinary action up to and including
termination.
a. Drug and alcohol test specimens shall be collected, analyzed and the
results thereof shall be reported to the Township in accordance with the
rules established by the USDOT which provide for the method of
specimen collection, chain of custody, analysis and confirmatory tests
by a U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (hereinafter
referred to as "DHHS") certified laboratory, the interpretation of the
results by a MRO, and referral to a DTS, if appropriate.
b. In addition to the USDOT rules, these additional procedures are
established for post-accident and reasonable-suspicion testing:
1. Post-Accident Testing Procedures. As soon as practicable following
an accident, all employees involved shall be tested if:
(a) The employee was performing a safety-sensitive function with
respect to the vehicle, equipment or tool, and a supervisor
believes the actions of the employee may have contributed to
the accident; or
(b) The employee receives a police-issued citation (summons)
under State law or Township ordinance for a moving traffic
violation arising from the accident.
2. Alcohol and Drug Tests.
(a) An alcohol test required by this policy shall in all possible
instances be administered within the two hours immediately
following the accident. If an alcohol test cannot be
administered within the two hours immediately following the
accident, the alcohol test shall be administered within the
eight hours immediately following the accident or as soon as
practicable after the accident.
§ 10-24.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-24.5
AO:412
§ 10-24.6. Prohibitions and Regulations. [1971 Code § 5-23.6]
(1) A test for drugs required by this policy shall in all possible
instances be administered within the 32 hours
immediately following the accident.
(2) A driver or other employee who is subject to post-accident
testing shall remain available for such testing or may be
deemed by the employer or supervisor to have refused to
submit to testing. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to require the delay of necessary medical
attention for injured people following an accident or to
prohibit a driver or other employee from leaving the scene
of an accident for the period necessary to obtain
assistance in responding to the accident, or to obtain
necessary emergency medical care.
3. Reasonable Suspicion Testing Procedures.
(a) An employee shall submit to alcohol and/or drug testing when
the employer or supervisor has reasonable suspicion to believe
that the employee is under the influence of alcohol and/or
drugs or has otherwise violated this policy. The supervisor's
determination that there is reasonable suspicion to require the
employee to undergo an alcohol and/or drug test shall be based
on the standard detailed in Subsection 10-24.3 of this policy.
(b) The required observations for alcohol and/or drug reasonable
suspicion testing shall be made by a supervisor. The person
who makes the determination that reasonable suspicion exists
to conduct a test shall not conduct the alcohol and/or drug test.
(c) The employee will report to the designated collection center
within one hour of notification. Until such time as alcohol and/
or drug tests can be performed, no employee shall report for
duty or remain on duty while the employee is, or is reasonably
suspected to be, either under the influence of, or impaired by,
alcohol, drugs, or drug misuse, nor shall an employee be
permitted to perform or continue to perform safety-sensitive
functions until:
(1) In the case of alcohol, an alcohol test is administered and
the employee's BAC measures less than 0.02%; or 24
hours have elapsed following the determination that there
is reasonable suspicion to believe that the employee has
violated the prohibitions of this policy concerning the use
of alcohol and/or drugs: and/or
(2) In the case of drugs, a drug test is administered and the
results are negative.
a. It is a violation of this section for any employee to:
§ 10-24.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-24.6
AO:413
1. Refuse to submit to any drug and/or alcohol test required pursuant
to and in accordance with these regulations;
2. Possess, consume or be under the influence of alcohol and/or
drugs, or possess drug paraphernalia when the employee is:
(a) On duty or at a workplace; and/or
(b) Wearing any clothing identifiable as Township uniform; and/or
(c) Operating a commercial or municipal vehicle while on duty.
b. Alcohol Regulations.
1. No employee shall report for duty or remain on duty while having a
BAC of 0.04% or greater. No supervisor, having knowledge that an
employee has both consumed alcohol in a sufficient quantity and
within seven hours prior to reporting for work such that one may
reasonably conclude that the person has a BAC of 0.0.4% or
greater, shall permit the employee to remain on duty.
2. No employee shall consume alcohol within seven hours prior to
their scheduled shift. No supervisor having knowledge that an
employee has consumed alcohol within seven hours of their shift
shall permit the employee to remain on duty.
3. No employee shall report for or remain on duty while possessing
alcohol, nor shall any employee consume alcohol while on duty or
during lunch or other breaks. No supervisor having knowledge that
an employee either possesses alcohol or has consumed alcohol
while on duty or during lunch or other breaks shall permit the
employee to remain on duty.
4. No driver or other employee required to take a post-accident
alcohol test pursuant to this policy shall use alcohol for eight hours
immediately following the accident, or until he undergoes a postaccident
alcohol test, whichever occurs first.
5. Any supervisor who allows any employee under their supervision to
remain on duty when said supervisor has knowledge of any of the
conditions set forth in Subsection a2 hereinabove, shall be subject
to the same disciplinary action as any employee found to be in
violation of any of the provisions of this subsection, including
termination.
c. Drug Regulations.
1. No employee shall report for duty or remain on duty when he uses
any drug, except when the use thereof is pursuant to the
instructions of a physician, providing that the physician has advised
the employee that the substance does not adversely affect said
employee's ability to safely work at their usual occupation.
§ 10-24.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-24.6
AO:414
2. No supervisor having knowledge that an employee has used a drug
shall permit the employee to remain on duty, except as specified in
Subsections c3 and c4 herein. Any supervisor who allows any
employee under his supervision to remain on duty when said
supervisor has knowledge that the employee has taken any drug
(except as provided in Subsections c3 and c4 herein) shall be
subject to the same disciplinary action as any employee found to be
in violation of any of the provisions of this section, including
termination.
3. The use and possession of prescription drugs in accordance with
the prescribed directions therefor shall not be a violation of this
section. The use and possession of a reasonable amount of over-thecounter
medications in accordance with the manufacturer's
directions shall not be a violation of this section.
4. Employees who are using prescription or over-the-counter drugs
which may impair the performance of their duties or otherwise
adversely affect the employees' ability to safely work at his usual
occupation shall report this information to their supervisor at the
beginning of their shift and produce the original container in which
the medication was dispensed at the time of purchase.
5. Employees who are called in for unscheduled duty and who are
under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs, or who are using
prescription or over-the-counter drugs, which may impair the
performance of their duties or otherwise adversely affect the
employees' ability to safely work at their usual occupation shall
immediately report their condition to the person calling the
employee in for such unscheduled duty or to a supervisor. Any
employee reporting such a condition shall be excused from
unscheduled duty by his supervisor.
6. Any employee or supervisor who calls another employee in his
department in for unscheduled duty after being informed by said
employee that he is under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs or
is using prescription or over-the-counter drugs which may impair
the performance of his duties or otherwise adversely affect the
employee's ability to safely work at his usual occupation, and who
then allows said employee to actually assume on-duty status, or
orders same, shall be subject to the same disciplinary action as any
employee found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this
section, including termination.
7. Employees convicted of any criminal drug and/or alcohol offenses
shall report said conviction to their department head on the next
business day immediately following said conviction. The
department head shall immediately notify the Municipal Manager
of the employee's conviction of any such offense(s). The Municipal
Manager or his appointed designee shall take appropriate action
based on the foregoing, pursuant to this section.
§ 10-24.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-24.7
AO:415
§ 10-24.7. Rehabilitation and Discipline. [1971 Code § 5-23.7]
a. Due to the impact of drug and/or alcohol use on the safety of the
employee, his co-workers, the general public, and the economic impact
of accidents on those persons as well as the Township, any person found
to have violated this section shall be considered to have committed a
gross violation and may be subject to major disciplinary action,
including termination, for the first offense. For the purposes of this
section, the employee's refusal to submit to drug and/or alcohol testing,
or tampering with, contamination, alteration or substitution of, any
sample, or any such conduct which may alter test results, shall be
construed to be the same as a failed drug and/or alcohol test.
Disciplinary action may include termination.
1. Employees who test positive during alcohol breath testing (first
offense) in the range of .02 to .039 will be suspended from work for
a minimum of 24 hours and will be required to pass a return-to-duty
breath alcohol test before returning to work. In addition, said
employee will be subject to disciplinary action. (All return-to-duty
testing is done at the employee's expense.)
2. Employees who test positive during alcohol breath testing (first
offense) in the range of .04 or higher will be suspended from work
and subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination.
At a minimum the employee must remain suspended until:
(a) The employee is evaluated by a DTS.
(b) The employee complies with and completes all
recommendations made by the DTS and be able to document
same.
(c) The employee submits to a return-to-work drug test and proof
of a negative test result must be received by the Township. (All
return-to-work testing is done at the employee's expense.)
3. Employees who test positive during alcohol breath testing (second
offense) in the range of .04% or higher will be terminated.
b. No supervisor shall permit an employee who has tested positive for
drug and/or alcohol use to report for, or remain on, duty. Any supervisor
who permits any employee who has tested positive for drug and/or
alcohol use to report for, or remain on, duty, shall be subject to the same
disciplinary action as any employee found to be in violation of any of the
provisions of this section, including termination.
c. Other Conditions.
1. Post-Accident Testing. Receipt by the Township of a negative
alcohol and drug test result is required prior to return to duty. A
positive test result will disqualify an employee from further
employment or reinstatement at that time or any time in the future.
§ 10-24.7 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-24.7
AO:416
Refusal to comply with the testing process will be considered
insubordination and will carry the same disciplinary action as a
positive test result.
2. Return-to-Duty Testing. (All return-to-duty testing is done at the
employee's expense.) When the employee is cleared to return to
work after a positive random or reasonable suspicion test, he will
be required to pass an alcohol and drug test. Upon receipt of a
negative finding, the Township will review the employee's
employment record and will then determine whether or not the
employee will be allowed to return to work. If an employee is
allowed to return to work, he will be subject to follow-up testing, as
determined by the Township.
3. Follow-up Testing. (All follow-up testing is done at the employee's
expense.) Any employee returning to work with the Township after
being suspended for a positive alcohol or drug test or returning to
work after a leave of absence for voluntary substance abuse
treatment will be subject to random follow-up testing. The
employee will be tested at least six times in the first 12 months
after returning to duty, and may be subject to follow-up testing for
up to 60 months.
Any employee who tests positive for drugs or alcohol during the
follow-up testing process will be terminated.
d. All employees who have an alcohol abuse problem and who wish to
obtain treatment are encouraged to contact their health-care provider
and their supervisor to report their condition and obtain treatment.
Employees suffering from this illness will be provided with the
treatment available through their chosen health-benefit program.
Employees voluntarily receiving treatment shall be treated as any other
employee with an ordinary illness would be treated, except for followup
testing. Employees who voluntarily report their alcohol abuse, enroll
and participate in, and successfully complete the course of treatment
prescribed by a DTS and maintain an alcohol-free condition, shall not be
disciplined for their historical alcohol abuse.
e. All employees are reminded that the illegal use of drugs is a criminal
violation and that all employees are prohibited from engaging in
criminal behavior at all times.
f. Non-law enforcement employees who are rehabilitated drug users shall
not be disciplined for their historical drug use if they maintain a drugfree
condition.
g. Past or present drug use by Police Officers constitutes gross
misconduct in office and would serve to undermine public confidence in
the entire Police Department. Accordingly, Police Officers who have
used drugs illegally shall be terminated.
§ 10-24.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-24.8
AO:417
§ 10-24.8. Severability. [1971 Code § 5-23.8]
All other sections of Chapter 10 of the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Lakewood shall remain in full force and effect except to the
extent modified hereby. If any subsection or paragraph of § 10-24 hereof
is declared to be unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative, in whole or in
part, by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such subsection or paragraph
shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative,
remain in full force and effect and no such determination shall be deemed
to invalidate the remaining subsections or paragraphs of this section, which
shall be liberally construed for the protection of the health, safety and
welfare of Township employees and citizens of the Township of Lakewood.
§ 10-25. DETERMINATION OF POSITIONS ELIGIBLE FOR THE
DEFINED CONTRIBUTIONS RETIREMENT PROGRAM.
§ 10-25.1. Findings. [Ord. No. 2008-33 Preamble]
The State Legislature recently adopted Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007
(N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.) to create the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program to provide retirement benefits to various County and municipal
officials.
N.J.S. 43:15C-2 requires the Governing Body of each County, municipality,
and other local entity to adopt as appropriate, either a resolution or
ordinance to determine the positions that are substantially similar in nature
to the advise and consent of the Senate for appointments by the Governor
of the State, pursuant to guidelines or policy that shall be established by
the Local Finance Board in the Department of Community Affairs, and for
which officials appointed to such positions shall be eligible for and shall
participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement Program, subject to the
provisions of law.
The Township Committee of the Township of Lakewood has considered the
guidelines issues by Local Finance Board.
§ 10-25.2. Eligible Positions. [Ord. No. 2008-33 § 1]
Pursuant to N.J.S. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Program:
a. Municipal Manager.
b. Director of Economic Development, Director of Code Enforcement and
Zoning, Community Center Director, Director of Senior and Social
Services, Director of Community Development Block Grants, Director of
Public Works.
c. Township Attorney.
d. Municipal Engineer.
§ 10-24.8 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-25.2
AO:418
§ 10-25.3. Exempt Positions. [Ord. No. 2008-33 § 2]
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S. 43:15C-2:
§ 10-25.4. Additional Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2008-33 § 3]
If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in Subsection
10-25.2 and the individual is not serving in positions as described in
Subsection 10-25.3 above, the Pension Certifying Officer of the municipality
may determine that the individual is not required to join the Defined
Contribution Retirement Program if that individual:
§ 10-25.5. Compliance with N.J.S. 43:15C-1 et seq. [Ord. No.
2008-33 § 4]
This section shall be implemented, construed and subject to the aforesaid
Chapter 92, of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S. 43:15C-1 et seq.) as amended from
e. Municipal Prosecutor.
f. Municipal Court Judge.
g. Public Defender.
h. Appointment members of the Lakewood Township Municipal Utilities
Authority.
a. Tax Collector.
b. Chief Financial Officer.
c. Construction Code Official.
d. Qualified Purchasing Agent.
e. Tax Assessor.
f. Registered Municipal Clerk.
g. Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector.
h. Principal Public Works Manager.
a. Was an active participant in the Public Employee Retirement System on
July 1, 2007 and continuously since that time; or
b. Has been appointed pursuant to a valid promotional process; or
c. Is appointed on a temporary, interim, or "acting" basis to a position
requiring State Certification as set forth in Subsection 10-25.3 herein,
and is in pursuit of the required certification; or
d. Meets such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local
Finance Board or Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 10-25.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-25.5
AO:419
time to time, and any regulations or guidance documents from the Local
Finance Board or Division of Pensions and Benefits.
§ 10-26. BACKGROUND CHECKS.
§ 10-26.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2015-58; Ord. No. 2017-39]
As used in this section:
CRIMINAL HISTORY BACKGROUND CHECK — Shall mean a determination
of whether a person has a criminal record by cross-referencing that
person's name, fingerprints, social security number and date of birth, with
those on file with the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification (SBI)
Division and the State Bureau of Identification in the New Jersey State
Police.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD INFORMATION OR CHRI — Shall mean
information collected by criminal justice agencies concerning persons and
stored in the computerized databases of the New Jersey State Police SBI
Criminal History Information System, the National Law Enforcement
Telecommunications Systems or other State computerized repositories
containing criminal history record information consisting of identifiable
descriptions and notations of arrests, indictments, or other formal criminal
charges, and any dispositions, arising there from, including convictions,
dismissals, correctional supervision and release.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the Township of Lakewood Police Department.
DIRECTOR — Shall mean the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
EMPLOYEE — Shall mean an individual 16 years of age or older who
receives compensation from the Township or a youth program to perform
services for a youth program and has the potential for unsupervised direct
access to youth.
NOTIFICATION — Shall mean the response provided by the Department
of Law and Public Safety, Division of the State Police, to the request for a
criminal history background check pursuant to N.J.S.A. 15A:3a-1 et seq.
QUALIFIED PARTICIPANT — Shall mean an employee or volunteer who has
completed a criminal history background check revealing no disqualifying
information.
SPONSORED PROGRAM — Shall mean any program which receives
benefits, either directly or indirectly, including but not limited to the
provision of funding or equipment from the Township.
SPONSORED PROGRAMS — Shall mean any program which, while not
directly sponsored by the Township with funding, the providing of
equipment or other benefits, uses Township facilities, including but not
limited to sports fields and Township buildings.
UNSUPERVISED DIRECT ACCESS TO MINORS — Shall mean the ability
to have interaction with a person who is younger than 18 years of age
without the constant and uninterrupted observation of a parent or guardian
§ 10-25.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-26.1
AO:420
of the youth or without the constant and uninterrupted observation of a
representative of law enforcement or a supervising qualified participant.
VENDOR — Shall mean any individual, compensated or uncompensated,
who manages, works or runs a revenue generating operation at Township
facilities and has the potential for unsupervised direct access to youth.
VOLUNTEER — Shall mean any individual 16 years of age or older who on
an uncompensated basis performs services for a youth program and has the
potential for unsupervised direct access to youth.
VOLUNTEER REVIEW OPERATION OR VRO — Shall mean the unit located
within the State Bureau of Investigation in New Jersey State Police that
is responsible for administering criminal background checks for volunteers
and employees for youth programs as specified in this section.
YOUTH — Shall mean any individual under 18 years of age.
YOUTH PROGRAMS — Shall mean any program which allows for
participation in activities or services by persons under 18 years of age,
including but not limited to, sporting activities, passive recreation groups,
clubs, camps, field trips, cultural organizations, social groups and other
activities or services. Specifically included are such organizations as paid/
volunteer fire companies, emergency management, medical organizations,
and paid/volunteer ambulance squads. Specifically excluded are public and
non-public schools.
§ 10-26.2. Criminal Background Check Costs. [Ord. No. 2015-58;
Ord. No. 2017-39]
The cost of the background checks are to be borne by the volunteer,
employee, vendor or by the youth organization. The cost is the current
program fee determined by the Volunteer Review Operation. Township
employees who require such a criminal background check as a part of the
employee's employment duties shall be reimbursed by the Township for the
cost of the background check from a fund established by the Township. Only
a qualified, approved participant may serve as an employee or volunteer of
a Township sponsored or Township supported youth program or act as a
vendor at Township facilities.
§ 10-26.3. Disqualifications. [Ord. No. 2015-58; Ord. No. 2017-39]
A person shall be disqualified from serving as an employee or volunteer of a
youth program or vendor if that person's criminal history background check
reveals a record of conviction of any of the following crimes or offenses:
a. 2C:11 HOMICIDE
All offenses
2C:12 ASSAULT; ENDANGERING; THREATS
All offenses
§ 10-26.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-26.3
AO:421
§ 10-26.4. Request for Criminal Background Checks.37 [Ord. No.
2015-58; Ord. No. 2017-39]
2C:13 KIDNAPPING
All offenses
2C:14 SEXUAL OFFENSES
All offenses
2C:15 ROBBERY
All offenses
2C:20 THEFT
All offenses
2C:24 OFFENSES AGAINST THE FAMILY,
CHILDREN AND INCOMPETENTS
All offenses
2C:35 CONTROLLED DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES
All offenses except Paragraph (4) of
Subsection a of N.J.S.A. 2C:35-10
b. Conduct in any other state or jurisdiction which, if committed in New
Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly persons
offenses described in Subsection a of this subsection.
c. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize an excluded sex
offender as defined in N.J.S.A. 2C:7-22 to serve as an employee,
volunteer in a youth organization, vendor or any other entity from
which the excluded sex offender is otherwise statutorily disqualified.
a. The Township requires that all employees and volunteers of youth
programs and vendors as described herein, either sponsored by the
Township or supported by the Township, get a background check by
applying to the Lakewood Township Police Department for an
identification number that is required for live scan finger printing
required by the State of New Jersey. No person shall be permitted to act
as an employee or volunteer of a youth program, nor as a vendor of
either Township sponsored or supported programs or facilities, until the
results of the criminal history background check has been received and
approved by the Chief of Police or his/her designee.
b. Any person who through prior compliance with the background check
requirements of this section or who by virtue of such person's
occupation has been required by statute or otherwise to undergo a
criminal history background check that is as comprehensive as the
37.Editor's Note: This section was adopted October 8, 2015 by Ord. No. 2015-58 and amended
November 8, 2017 by Ord. No. 2017-39.
§ 10-26.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-26.4
AO:422
§ 10-26.5. Criminal History Background Check Procedures. [Ord.
No. 2015-58; Ord. No. 2017-39]
check required by this section may, in the discretion of the Chief of
Police or his/her designee, be exempt from the requirements of this
section. However, such prior criminal history background check must
have been completed within the preceding year in order to be exempt.
c. Notwithstanding prior compliance with the requirements of this
section, no individual shall be permitted to continue as an employee or
volunteer of a Township sponsored or Township supported youth
program or vendor unless the latest criminal history background check
provided to the Police Department was performed within the preceding
12 month period.
d. Current members of a paid/volunteer fire company, emergency
management, emergency medical organization or ambulance squad
subject to this section who have not complied with the requirement for
a criminal history background check shall have 60 days from the
effective date of these amendments to obtain the required criminal
history background check. The Chief of Police or his/her designee may
extend such deadline for good cause shown.
a. All Township sponsored or Township supported youth organizations and
vendors shall submit a complete list of names and addresses for all
employees or volunteers subject to this section. In addition, each such
organization shall provide such additional information as may be
required by the Chief of Police or his/her designee. Each individual
shall, through the organization, submit an executed consent form
authorizing the required criminal history background check.
b. The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall coordinate the required
background checks, including the fingerprinting through the State's
approved live scan electronic fingerprinting vendor and the taking of
photographs for identification cards for qualified participants.
c. It is the responsibility of each youth organization and its management,
including officers, directors and coaches, to ensure that all individuals
who serve as employees or volunteers of such youth program submit
and obtain a criminal history background check and the refusal or
failure of any Township's supported youth program shall result in
immediate dismissal from any Township sponsored youth program and
the refusal or failure of any Township's supported youth program to
comply with the requirements of this section shall result in a denial of
the use of Township facilities.
d. It is the responsibility of each vendor that has the potential for
unsupervised direct access to youth to ensure that all individuals who
serve as employees or volunteers submit and obtain a criminal history
background check and the refusal or failure of any vendor shall result in
immediate dismissal and the refusal or failure of any vendor to comply
§ 10-26.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-26.5
AO:423
§ 10-26.6. Notification. [Ord. No. 2015-58; Ord. No. 2017-39]
with the requirements of this section shall result in a denial of the use
of Township facilities.
e. Scope of services provided by the Lakewood Police Department:
1. Process all employees, volunteers and vendors to ensure complete
and accurate submission of required information.
2. Photograph all volunteers, employees and vendors subject to this
section.
3. Receive the results of the criminal history background checks and,
if appropriate, approve each individual status.
4. Issue photograph identification cards to qualified participants,
which identification cards shall be valid for one year from issuance
unless otherwise revoked by the Township. In the event of a
revocation of an issued identification card, the individual shall
immediately return such card to the Department and the failure to
do so shall be a violation of this section.
5. Maintain current lists of all employees and volunteers of youth
organizations and vendors subject to this section and verify
compliance on a continual basis.
6. The Chief of Police or his/her designee shall be responsible for the
maintenance of all records generated as a result of this section. All
such information shall be deemed confidential and maintained in a
secure location. Such records shall be only retained for such period
of time as is necessary to ensure compliance with this section.
a. The individual applying for the criminal history background check shall
authorize the Chief of Police or his/her designee to be the recipient of
the affirmative or negative response from the State Police Bureau of
Investigation. If appropriate, the Chief of Police or his/her designee
shall then proceed to process the individual's identification card. If the
individual wishes to obtain a copy of the criminal history record itself, a
request must be submitted to the New Jersey State Police.
b. If the individual believes that the result of the criminal history
background check is factually inaccurate or that the individual's
criminal history record is in some way factually inaccurate, the
individual must contact the New Jersey State Police directly.
c. Neither the Chief of Police or his/her designee nor other individuals in
the Township government are privy to the special contents of the
applicant's criminal history background check. However, the individual
employee or volunteer may obtain a copy of the actual criminal history
background check from the New Jersey State Police and may
§ 10-26.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 10-26.6
AO:424
§ 10-26.7. Appeal Process and Appeal Panel. [Ord. No. 2015-58;
Ord. No. 2017-39]
confidentially provide it to the Chief of Police or his/her designee for
the purposes of an appeal pursuant to Subsection 10-26.7.
a. If a disqualification notice from the State of New Jersey is received, the
volunteer or employee may obtain from the State Police a full criminal
history record and any dispute regarding the accuracy of completeness
of such record shall be directed to the State Police. If, however, the
individual disputes the appropriateness of the disqualification notice on
grounds other than the accuracy or completeness of the individual's
criminal history record, the individual may appeal the determination by
filing a written notice of appeal with the Chief of Police or his/her
designee no later than 20 days after receiving the determination. Once
an appeal notice is received by the Chief of Police or his/her designee, a
meeting with the Appeal Panel shall be scheduled.
b. There is hereby established pursuant to this section an Appeal Panel
consisting of the Township Manager, the Township Chief of Police and
the Township Director of Public Works. Each individual will serve
without compensation. The Township Manager, the Chief of Police and
the Director of Public Works may select a designee to serve in their
place on the Appeal Panel. A meeting of the Appeal Panel shall require
at least two of its members or designees to be present. Any decision of
the Appeal Panel shall require agreement by at least two members or
their designees.
c. The Appeal Panel shall meet with the individual who has filed an appeal
and review such information and documentation as may be submitted
for consideration. The Appeal Panel may, in its discretion, consider
evidence of rehabilitation if documented to the Appeal Panel by clear
and convincing evidence.
d. The Township Manager shall preside at the appeal and, if deemed
appropriate, may take testimony under oath. Technical rules of
evidence shall not be applicable and a verbatim recording is not
required.
e. The determination of the Appeal Panel shall be final and not subject to
any further appeal. The Appeal Panel may, however, if deemed
appropriate by the Township Manager agree to reconsider a denied
appeal if the individual produces new or additional information.
f. The Appeal Panel may establish such procedures as it deems
appropriate for the processing and hearing of appeals.
§ 10-26.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 10-26.7
AO:425
Chapter 11
TRAFFIC
[Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2016-20 changed the name of
Silvestro Drive to Claire Drive.]
§ 11-1. DEFINITIONS.
§ 11-1.1. Words and Phrases. [1971 Code § 11-1; New]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey
Statutes shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used herein.
§ 11-1.2. Official Time Standards. [1971 Code § 11-2; New]
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time as may be in
current use.
§ 11-2. AUTHORIZATION FOR THE CLOSING OF ANY STREET.
§ 11-2.1. Procedure for Street Closing. [New]
§ 11-2.2. Closing Streets When School is in Session. [1971 Code
§ 11-11; Ord. No. 96-53 § 1]
The following shall apply:
a. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, disability or inability to act, the
ranking Police Officer, is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for
the closing of any street or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on
any day or days during specified hours on any day or days whenever he
finds that such closing is necessary for the preservation of the public
safety, health or welfare.
b. Any regulations promulgated by the Chief of Police and in accordance
with Subsection a above, shall provide for the posting of proper
warning signs of such closing on any street or portion thereof during
the time the same is closed in pursuance thereof.
c. Any violation of this regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
d. Any regulation adopted that mandates the closing of any street for a
period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
a. Resolutions and Ordinances. The Township Committee, as the chief
executive authority, is hereby authorized to enact resolutions to provide
§ 10-26.7 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-2.2
AO:426
§ 11-3. TOW-AWAY. [New]
Any vehicle parking in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any peace
officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall bear
the reasonable costs of removal and storage which may result from such
removal before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 11-4. PENALTIES. [New]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute or in
this chapter, every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this
chapter or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more
than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 11-5. EFFECT OF CHAPTER. [New]
If any part or parts of this chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
for the closing of any street or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic in
any day or days or during specified hours on any day or days whenever
it finds that such closing is necessary for the preservation of the public
safety, health, or welfare, and such closing shall be for a period of 90
days or less. Ordinances enacted for the aforestated purposes shall
remain in effect for an indefinite period of time.
b. Pursuant to the foregoing, the following closure is hereby authorized:
Location Time/Duration
From the corner of Spruce and
Vine Streets, going north until
Green Street.
Monday through Thursday, from the
hours of 12 noon to 5:00 p.m. from
September through June while
school is in session.
Seventh Street between Clifton
and Lexington Avenues. [Ord.
No. 96-53]
Monday through Friday from 8:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m. between the
months of September through June.
c. Signs. The resolution for street closing shall provide for the posting of
proper warning signs by the Township Police Department in any street
or any portion thereof during the time the street is closed.
d. Penalties. Any person violating this section or any resolution or
regulation promulgated pursuant hereunto shall be fined not less than
$25 nor more than $500 or imprisoned for a term of not more than 15
days or both.
§ 11-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-6
AO:427
§ 11-6. REPEAL. [New]
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Lakewood are hereby
repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, except
that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment
of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance
hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 11-7. PARKING.
§ 11-7.1. Regulations Not Exclusive. [New]
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other, more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey Statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 11-7.2. Parking Prohibited During State of Emergency. [New]
§ 11-7.3. Temporary Parking Prohibition for Snow Plowing and
Removal. [1971 Code § 11-3.3; New]
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the
ranking Police Officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
conditions, accidents, road construction, fire or public celebrations
dictate or require avoidance of hazards or other conditions which
interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY
NO PARKING signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the
operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the
posting of the signs.
b. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
a. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the streets or highways, an emergency shall exist and no vehicle shall
be parked on the streets or highways or portions thereof listed below.
The parking prohibitions listed below shall remain in effect after the
snow has ceased, until the streets have been plowed sufficiently, and to
the extent that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation shall be deemed
a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic and
any Police Officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The
owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage which
§ 11-6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-7.3
AO:428
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
c. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon signs being
erected as required by law.
d. Unless other penalties are expressly provided by New Jersey Statute,
any person convicted of a violation of this subsection or any supplement
thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
Name of Street Side Location
Alley (18') A Between Ponderosa Drive and
Ponderosa Drive.
Alley (18') B Between Ponderosa Drive and
Ponderosa Drive.
Alley (18') C Between Ponderosa Drive and
Ponderosa Drive.
Alley (18') D Between Ponderosa Drive and
Ponderosa Drive.
Alley (18') E Off Ponderosa Drive.
Alley (18') F Off Ponderosa Drive.
Alley (18') G Off Sequoia Street and
Ponderosa Drive
Alley (18') H Off Sequoia Street.
Alley (18') I Runs off Alley B.
Alley (18') J [Ord. No.
2009-5 § 1]
Runs between Alley C and Alley
D.
Carey Street Both Between Madison Avenue and
Forest Avenue.
Carol Avenue [Ord.
No. 2001-10]
Both From Spruce Street to Oak
Street School entrance.
Central Avenue Both Between Route U.S. 9 (River
Avenue) and Township Line.
Clifton Avenue Both Between State Highway 88
(Main Street) and Eighth Street.
East Fourth Street Both Entire length.
Eighth Street Both Between Madison Avenue and
Princeton Avenue.
First Street Both Entire length.
Forest Avenue Both Between Lake Drive and Ninth
Street.
§ 11-7.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-7.3
AO:429
§ 11-7.4. Temporary Suspension of Parking Regulations. [Ord. No.
2011-37 § 1]
The Mayor and/or the Chief of Police, or in the Chief's absence, the ranking
Police Officer, are authorized to suspend for such period of time as they may
deem necessary, the enforcement of any parking regulations or prohibitions
imposed by this chapter.
§ 11-8. CONSTRUCTION ZONE: TRAFFIC CONTROLS FOR STREETS
AND HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OPERATION
AND ADOPTION OF MANUAL ON UNIFORM TRAFFIC CONTROL
DEVICES FOR STREETS AND HIGHWAYS (Municipal Roads Only).
§ 11-8.1. Controls Established for Construction Zone. [New]
The Governing Body hereby finds and declares that problems of traffic
control occur when traffic must be moved through or around street
construction, maintenance operations, and utility work, above and below
ground which requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the normal
flow of traffic; and that such obstructions are or can become dangerous
when not properly controlled. In order to better promote the public health,
safety, peace and welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and
regulations directed to the safe and expeditious movement of traffic through
construction and maintenance zones and to provide safety for the work
force performing these operations.
Name of Street Side Location
Fourth Street Both Entire length.
Lexington Avenue Both Between State Highway 88
(Main Street) and Eighth Street.
Monmouth Avenue Both Between First Street and Eighth
Street.
Municipal Parking
Lots
Both All lots.
North Drive Both Between Route U.S. 9 (Madison
Avenue) and Case Road.
Private Way Both Between Second Street and
Ninth Street.
Second Street Both Entire length.
Seventh Street Both Between Madison Avenue and
Forest Avenue.
State Highway 88
(Main Street)
Both Entire length.
Third Street Both Entire length.
§ 11-7.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-8.1
AO:430
The Township of Lakewood, in the County of Ocean, State of New Jersey,
does hereby adopt the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
hereafter known as M.U.T.C.D., except as hereby supplemented and
amended, as it controls and regulates whenever construction maintenance
operations of utility work obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Any person,
contractor, or utility who fails to comply with the provisions of M.U.T.C.D.
while performing such work is in violation of this section.
§ 11-8.2. Pre-Construction Meetings. [New]
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of a
public utility agreement the public utility wishing to conduct work on, under
or above the roadway, to contact the Police Department in order to arrange
a pre-construction meeting in order to submit plans for the safe movement
of traffic during such period of construction or work. Any person, contractor
or utility who fails to comply with this section prior to the start of such work
or whose plans are not approved by the Police Department is in violation of
this section.
§ 11-8.3. Hazardous Conditions. [New]
The person, contractor, or utility shall provide the Police Department with
at least two emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case of
emergency problems at the construction or maintenance site prior to the
start of any work. If for any reason emergency contact cannot be reached,
or if the emergency contact person does not respond to the call from
the Police Department to correct a hazardous condition, the Township
may respond to correct such hazardous condition. The reasonable fees for
such emergency service by the Township shall be charged to the person,
contractor, or utility for such condition.
§ 11-8.4. Hours. [New]
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations, or utility work on
any roadway in the Township before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00
p.m. This time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or
after 4:00 p.m. by the Officer in Charge of the Police Department. If it is
determined by the Officer in Charge that the construction or maintenance
operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay
traffic or cause a safety or health hazard, the work shall then be permitted
only between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
§ 11-8.5. Road Closing and Detours. [New]
Road closing and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Police Department.
§ 11-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-8.6
AO:431
§ 11-8.6. Traffic Directors. [New]
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when determined by the Police Department that same is necessary to
provide for the safe and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 11-8.7. Stop Work. [New]
The Police Department shall have the authority to stop work, including the
removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material within the street rightof-
way, backfilling of open excavations and/or other related work, in order to
abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any violation of this section.
§ 11-8.8. Site Preparation. [New]
It is to be expressly understood that no materials, vehicle or equipment are
to be placed in the roadway or sidewalk or until all construction, signs, light
devices and pavement markings are installed.
§ 11-8.9. Violations and Penalties. [New]
Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof for a first offense, pay a fine of not less than
$100 nor more than $500 and/or be imprisoned in the County Jail for a
term not exceeding 90 days. For a second offense, the person, contractor or
utility shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a fine of not less than $250 and/or
be imprisoned in the County Jail for a term not exceeding 90 days.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 11-8.10. Inconsistent Regulations. [New]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this section are hereby repealed to the extent of any such
inconsistency.
§ 11-8.11. Approval by the Commissioner of Transportation. [New]
This section shall take effect after approval by the Commissioner of
Transportation 20 days after passage and publication as prescribed by law.
§ 11-9. (RESERVED)
§ 11-10. STOPPING OR STANDING.
§ 11-8.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-10.1
AO:432
§ 11-10.1. Stopping or Standing Prohibited. [1971 Code § 11-12A;
Ord. No. 96-61; Ord. No. 98-13; Ord. No. 2005-102 § 1; Ord. No.
2012-11; Ord. No. 2012-20; Ord. No. 2014-72; Ord. No. 2014-94;
Ord. No. 2015-3]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle on any day (except Sundays and
public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets described.
Note: An asterisk following the street name indicates that the Sunday and
public holiday exception does not apply. Stopping or standing prohibitions
will apply on all days at all times.
Name of Street Sides Location
All Fire Zones within the Township [Ord. No. 2006-35 § 1]
Arosa Hill [Ord.
No. 2010-88]
South From the prolongation of the curblines
of Arosa Hill and Engleberg Terrace
and extending in a westerly direction
to encompass the cul-de-sac of Arosa
Hill as according to the Schedule A
prepared by the Traffic and Safety
Division. (Schedule A may be found on
file in the Traffic and Safety Division
office.)
Albert Avenue
[Ord. No.
2013-55]
West From the prolongated curblines of the
intersection of Pine Street and Albert
Avenue and extending 200 feet to the
west.
Albert Avenue
[Ord. No.
2013-55]
East From the prolongated curblines of the
intersection of Pine Street and Albert
Avenue and extending 200 feet to the
west.
Ashley Avenue East Between Center Street and
Cedarbridge Avenue.
Center Street South Between Martin Luther King Drive
and Ashley Avenue.
Central Avenue
[Ord. No.
2001-106 § 1]
From New Central Avenue to South
Lake Drive.
Charming Way
[Ord. No.
2014-94]
South From a point of the prolongated
curblines of Route #9 and Charming
Way and continuing 230 feet in a
westerly direction.
§ 11-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-10.1
AO:433
Name of Street Sides Location
Clifton Avenue East a. Starting at the Fifth Street
northerly curbline to a point 100 feet
north.
b. From the southeasterly curbline of
East Kennedy Boulevard to a point 300
feet southerly therefrom.
c. From the northeasterly curbline of
East Kennedy Boulevard to a point 300
feet northerly therefrom.
Clifton Avenue West a. From the southwesterly curbline of
East Kennedy Boulevard to a point 300
feet southerly therefrom.
b. From the northwesterly curbline of
East Kennedy Boulevard to a point 300
feet northerly therefrom.
c. Between the northerly line of Fifth
Street, to the southerly line of Sixth
Street, with the exception of the
public bus stop therein.
Clifton Avenue Both In a northerly direction from Kennedy
Boulevard to the end of the
jurisdiction of Lakewood Township.
Clover Street Both a. From the northerly curbline of State
Highway 88 to a point 100 feet
northerly therefrom.
b. From State Highway 88 to 100 feet
south of the southerly entrance road
to Lake Shennandoah.
Country Club Road West Starting at Country Club Drive to a
point 375 feet north thereof.
Courtney Avenue Both From the easterly curbline of Route
U.S. 9 to a point 100 feet easterly
therefrom.
§ 11-10.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-10.1
AO:434
Name of Street Sides Location
East Kennedy
Boulevard
North a. From the northeasterly curbline of
Clifton Avenue to a point 300 feet
easterly therefrom.
b. From the northwesterly curbline of
Clifton Avenue to a point 300 feet
westerly therefrom.
c. From the westerly curbline of
Berkowitz Avenue in a westerly
direction to a point 758 feet thereof.
East Kennedy
Boulevard
South a. From the southeasterly curbline of
Clifton Avenue to a point 300 feet
easterly therefrom.
b. From the southwesterly curbline of
Clifton Avenue to a point 300 feet
westerly therefrom.
East Ninth Street
[Ord. No. 2006-82
§ 1]
Both Beginning at a point in the northerly
line of East Ninth Street a distance of
352 feet more or less from its
intersection with the easterly line of
Princeton Avenue; thence
a. Southerly and at right angles to the
first course a distance of 60 feet more
or less to a point in the southerly line
of East Ninth Street; thence
b. Westerly along the southerly line of
East Ninth Street a distance of 40 feet
more or less to a point; thence
c. Northerly and at right angles to the
third course a distance of 60 feet more
or less to a point in the northerly line
of East Ninth Street the point and
place of beginning. Also being that
portion of East Ninth Street as shown
on the Official Tax Map of the
Township of Lakewood.
East Spruce Street South From the southeasterly curbline of
Route U.S. 9 to a point 108 feet
therefrom.
Emmanuel Drive
[Ord. No. 2010-75
§ 1]
South Between Martin Luther King Drive
and Warren Avenue
§ 11-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-10.1
AO:435
Name of Street Sides Location
Engleberg Terrace
[Ord. No.
2010-88]
North From the prolongation of the curblines
of Brook Road and Engleberg Terrace
and extending in a westerly direction
to its terminus at Arosa Hill. See
attached Schedule A prepared by the
Traffic and Safety Division. (Schedule
A may be found on file in the Traffic
and Safety Division office.)
First Street* South Starting 198 feet west of Lexington
Avenue for a distance of 31 feet.
First Street [Ord.
No. 2010-87]
North From the end of the curb radius at
intersection with Lexington Avenue
180 feet west.
First Street [Ord.
No. 2010-87]
South From the end of the curb radius at
intersection with Lexington Avenue
110 feet west.
Forest Avenue East a. 200 feet north of the northerly
curbline of County Line Road. 200 feet
south of the southerly curbline of
County Line Road.
b. 200 feet north of the northerly
curbline of 14th Street. 200 feet south
of the southerly curbline of 14th
Street.
Forest Avenue Both a. From the northerly curbline of C.R.
#9 (County Line Road) to the
southerly curbline of C.R. #6
(Kennedy Boulevard).
b. From Sixth Street to a point 150
feet north thereof.
c. From Sixth Street to a point 100
feet south thereof.
Gusmer Drive Both Entire length.
Hope Chapel Road From the northerly curbline of County
Line Road to the southerly curbline of
Cathedral Drive.
Hope Chapel Road
[Ord. No. 2003-55
§ 1]
Both Starting at a point of the prolongation
of the curblines of Hope Chapel Road
and Country Club Drive in a southerly
direction to the Lakewood-Jackson
border.
§ 11-10.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-10.1
AO:436
Name of Street Sides Location
Kennedy Boulevard
[Ord. No. 2003-74
§ 1]
North Starting at a point of the prolongation
of the southwest curbline of Kennedy
Boulevard and Berkowitz Avenue and
continuing 75 feet in an easterly
direction.
Laurelwood Avenue Both From the southerly curbline of C.R. #9
(County Line Road) to a point 100 feet
south thereof.
Lawrence Avenue East The entire length from Ninth Street to
Eleventh Street.
Lehigh Avenue Both Entire length.
Linden Street West Beginning at the point where
Somerset Avenue and Linden Street
meet on the west side to a point 400
feet therefrom.
Locust Street [Ord.
No. 2014-72; Ord.
No. 2015-3]
South Starting from a point 145 feet east of
the easterly curbline of Jared Court,
east (aka the exit from Covington
Village) and extending 304 feet in a
westerly direction.
Lucerne Drive
[Ord. No.
2010-88]
West From the prolongation of the curblines
of East County Line Road and Lucerne
Drive to its terminus in a northerly
direction at Engleberg Terrace. See
attached Schedule A prepared by the
Traffic and Safety Division. (Schedule
A may be found on file in the Traffic
and Safety Division office.)
Martin Luther King
Drive
Both From the southerly curbline of Cedar
Bridge Avenue to a point 100 feet
south thereof.
Massachusetts
Avenue [Ord. No.
2010-39 § 1]
East From the southerly curbline of
Enclave Boulevard to a point 1390 feet
south therefrom.
Massachusetts
Avenue [Ord. No.
2010-39 § 1]
West From the southerly curbline of
Fairways Boulevard to a point 625 feet
south therefrom.
§ 11-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-10.1
AO:437
Name of Street Sides Location
Milano Drive [Ord.
No. 2010-88]
East From the prolongation of the curblines
of East Kennedy Boulevard and Milano
Drive extending in a northerly
direction to its terminus at Arosa Hill.
See attached Schedule A prepared by
the Traffic and Safety Division.
(Schedule A may be found on file in
the Traffic and Safety Division office.)
Monmouth Avenue East From the prolongation line on the
northeast corner of Ninth Street and
Monmouth Avenue to a point 130 feet
north thereof.
Ninth Street North From the prolongation line on the
northeast corner of Ninth Street and
Monmouth Avenue to a point 175 feet
east thereof.
Ninth Street Both Beginning at a point 80 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Route U.S. 9 to a
point 80 feet west of the westerly
curbline of Route U.S. 9.
Paris Court North Beginning 50 feet east of the northerly
curbline of New Hampshire Avenue
and extending 230 feet therefrom.
Park Avenue West Between East County Line Road and
East Fourth Street.
Pine Street Both a. For a distance of 700 feet west of
the prolongation lines of New
Hampshire Avenue.
b. From the easterly curbline of Route
U.S. 9 to a point 150 feet easterly
therefrom.
c. From a point 300 feet west of the
westerly curbline of New Hampshire
Avenue to a point 300 feet east of the
easterly curbline of New Hampshire
Avenue.
Pine Street [Ord.
No. 2013-12]
South From the easterly prolongation
curblines of Pine Street and Marc
Drive starting at a point 342 feet
easterly and extending for a distance
of 165 feet easterly.
§ 11-10.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-10.1
AO:438
Name of Street Sides Location
Pine Street [Ord.
No. 2013-55]
South From the prolongated curblines of the
northwest intersection of Pine Street
and Albert Avenue and extending 200
feet north.
Pine Street [Ord.
No. 2014-6]
South From a point of the prolongated
curblines of Eagle Lane and
continuing 75 feet in each direction.
Pine Street [Ord.
No. 2014-6; Ord.
No. 2014-43]
South From a point of the prolongated
curblines of Raven Lane and
continuing 150 feet in easterly
direction and 200 feet in a westerly
direction.
Pine Park Avenue Both From the southerly curbline of C.R. #9
(County Line Road) to a point 100 feet
south thereof.
Princeton Avenue
[Ord. No. 2003-17
§ 1]
Both From a point 50 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Kennedy
Boulevard to a point 50 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Kennedy
Boulevard.
Prospect Street North From a point commencing 212 feet
west of Route U.S. 9 to a point 379
feet thereof.
Prospect Street South From the prolongation line of Route
U.S. 9 to a point 591 feet thereof.
Ridge Avenue [Ord.
No. 2010-81]
North a. From the prolongation of the
westerly curbline of Shemen Street
and Ridge Avenue and continuing 150
feet west at all times as shown on the
diagram attached to Schedule A.
(Schedule A may be found on file in
the Traffic and Safety Division office.)
b. From the prolongation of the
easterly curbline of Shemen Street
and Ridge Avenue and continuing 150
feet east at all times as shown on the
diagram attached as Schedule A.
(Schedule A may be found on file in
the traffic and Safety Division office.)
Ridge Avenue [Ord.
No. 2012-45]
South Beginning at the prolongation lines of
Vintage Circle and extending in a
westerly direction for a distance of
118 feet thereof.
§ 11-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-10.1
AO:439
Name of Street Sides Location
Route U.S. 9*
(Madison Avenue)
Both From Kennedy Boulevard until State
Highway 88 (Main Street).
Saint Nicholas
Avenue (North Side
of Central Avenue)
[Ord. No.
2013-27]
East From the extension of the prolongated
curblines of the northern most part of
the cul-de-sac extending into the
driveway of house #33 of Saint
Nicholas Avenue and extending for a
distance of 40 feet north. (Prohibited
at all times)
Seventh Street North From the prolongation line on the
northeast corner of Seventh Street
and Lexington Avenue to a point 150
feet east thereof.
Shorrock Street Both From the southerly curbline of Route
70 to a point 100 feet southerly
therefrom.
Sienna Way [Ord.
No. 2010-88]
North From the prolongation of the curblines
of Milano Drive and Sienna Way and
continuing around the inner most
curblines to its terminus at Milano
Drive. See Schedule A prepared by the
Traffic and Safety Division. (Schedule
A may be found on file in the Traffic
and Safety Division office.)
Somerset Avenue West Beginning 260 feet from the
prolongation line of the southwest
corner of Ridge Avenue and Somerset
Avenue to a point 380 feet therefrom.
Somerset Avenue East Beginning 580 feet from the
prolongation line of the southeast
corner of Ridge Avenue and Somerset
Avenue to a point 100 feet therefrom.
South Clifton
Avenue
East From the east side of South Clifton
Avenue and from the prolongation line
of the northerly curbline of Hurley
Avenue to a point 500 feet north
thereof.
Squankum Road* West From the southerly line of County Line
Road to the easterly line of Monmouth
Avenue.
§ 11-10.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-10.1
AO:440
Name of Street Sides Location
Summer Avenue
[Ord. No.
2013-44]
West From the northwest prolongated
curblines of Prospect Street and
Summer Avenue starting at a point
630 feet and extending 500 feet in a
northerly direction.
Tenth Street South Between Madison Avenue and Clifton
Avenue.
Third Street* South Starting 125 feet west of Lexington
Avenue for a distance of 21 feet.
Twin Oaks Drive
[Ord. No. 2004-70
§ 2]
Both In all areas except the existing
recessed curb areas designed for
parking.
West Kennedy
Boulevard*
North a. From the northeasterly curbline of
Forest Avenue to a point 103 feet
easterly therefrom.
b. From the northwesterly curbline of
Forest Avenue to a point 150 feet
westerly therefrom.
c. Beginning 438 feet from the
prolongation line of the northwest
corner of Forest Avenue and West
Kennedy Boulevard to a point 200 feet
therefrom.
d. From the northerly curbline of
Route U.S. 9 for a distance of 176 feet.
West Kennedy
Boulevard*
South a. From the southeasterly curbline of
Forest Avenue to a point 103 feet
easterly therefrom.
b. From the southwesterly curbline of
Forest Avenue to a point 150 feet
westerly therefrom.
c. From the southerly curbline of
Route U.S. 9 for a distance of 142 feet.
Whispering Pines
Lane [Ord. No.
2004-61 § 2]
North Starting at a point from the
prolongation of the curblines of
Squankum Road and Whispering Pines
Lane starting at a point 827 feet and
extending to a point of 847 feet at all
times.
§ 11-10.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-10.1
AO:441
Name of Street Sides Location
Whispering Pines
Lane
West Starting at a point from the
prolongation of the curblines of
Whispering Pines Lane and Whisper
Court and extending 100 feet in a
northerly direction at all times.
Williams Street* East From the prolongation point of the
northeast corner of Prospect Street
and Williams Street to a point 150 feet
north thereof.
§ 11-10.2. Stopping or Standing Prohibited During Certain Hours or
Certain Days on Certain Streets. [1971 Code § 11-12A; Ord. No.
97-46; Ord. No. 99-16; Ord. No. 2000-38]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified on the
days specified upon any of the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Center Street South 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
From the
prolongation of
Martin Luther King
Drive extending in
an easterly direction
100 feet.
East Eighth
Street
North 7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
School days
Beginning at a point
starting 165 feet
from the
northeasterly
curbline of
Princeton Avenue to
its easterly
terminus.
Eighth Street 6:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
All days
Beginning at a point
200 feet east of
Monmouth Avenue
for a distance of 165
feet.
Martin Luther
King Drive
East 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
From the
prolongation of
Center Street
extending 115 feet
south.
§ 11-10.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-10.2
AO:442
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
Sixth Street South 9:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
School days
At a point starting
40 feet west of
Route U.S. 9
(Madison Avenue)
for a distance of 220
feet.
§ 11-11. PARKING TIME LIMITED ON CERTAIN STREETS. [1971
Code § 11-3.6]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown at
any time between the hours listed on any day (except Sundays and public
holidays) upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets.
Name of
Street
Sides Time Limit Hours Location
Clifton
Avenue
East 15 min. Commencing 35
feet north of the
northerly line of
Main Street and
extending in a
northerly direction
for 132 feet.
Clifton
Avenue
Both 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From the northerly
side of Main Street
northerly to the
southerly side of
Fifth Street.
Clifton
Avenue
West 1 hour 7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
(School Days)
Commencing 38
feet from the
southerly curbline
of Seventh Street
to a point 80 feet
south therefrom.
Clifton
Avenue [Ord.
No. 2002-32
§ 2]
East 15 min. Commencing 78
feet from the
southeast corner of
Clifton Avenue and
State Highway 88
for 90 feet.
§ 11-10.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-11
AO:443
Name of
Street
Sides Time Limit Hours Location
Clifton
Avenue South
[Ord. No.
98-58]
West 30 min. 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Beginning at a
point 33 feet from
the southwest
corner of Clifton
Avenue and State
Highway 88,
extending 177 feet
southerly on the
westerly curbline
of South Clifton
Avenue.
Courtney
Road [Ord.
No. 2006-4
§ 1]
Both 5 hours 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Mondays
through
Thursdays
during school
days only
Between Clifton
and Madison
Avenues
East Fourth
Street
South 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From the easterly
side of South Park
Avenue easterly to
westerly side of
Cottage Place.
East Fourth
Street
North 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From the easterly
side of South Park
Avenue easterly to
the westerly side
of Ridge-Fourth
Street.
Fifth Street South 15 min. Beginning at a
point 114 feet
westerly from the
southwest corner
of Clifton Avenue
and Fifth Street
and extending
westerly along the
southerly curb for
40 feet.
§ 11-11 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-11
AO:444
Name of
Street
Sides Time Limit Hours Location
First Street North 4 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From the easterly
side of Madison
Avenue easterly to
the westerly side
of Monmouth
Avenue.
First Street South 4 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From the easterly
side of Madison
Avenue easterly 50
feet from the
nearest rail of
Central Railroad of
N.J.
Fourth Street Both 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From the easterly
side of Madison
Avenue easterly 50
feet from the
nearest rail of
Central Railroad of
N.J.
Lexington
Avenue
West 4 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From the northerly
side of Fourth
Street northerly to
the southerly side
of Fifth Street.
Lexington
Avenue
West 4 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From the northerly
side of Main Street
northerly to the
southerly side of
Fourth Street.
Main Street Both 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From the easterly
side of Madison
Avenue easterly to
50 feet from the
nearest rail of the
Central Railroad of
N.J.
Monmouth
Avenue
West 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From the northerly
side of First Street
northerly to the
southerly side of
Fifth Street.
§ 11-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-11
AO:445
Name of
Street
Sides Time Limit Hours Location
Monmouth
Avenue
East 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From a point
opposite the
northerly side of
First Street
northerly to the
southerly side of
Fifth Street.
Ninth Street South 15 min. Beginning 40 feet
easterly from the
southeast corner of
Ninth Street and
Madison Avenue
and extending
easterly along the
southerly curb of
Ninth Street for 40
feet.
Park Avenue East 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Commencing 150
feet north of
Woehr Avenue to
Ocean Avenue.
Park Place
[Ord. No.
2013-67;
Ord. No.
2013-81]
Both 2 hours 7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
Monday thru
Friday
Entire length.
Princeton
Avenue
Both 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From the northerly
side of Fourth
Street to the
southerly side of
Fifth Street.
Ridge-Fourth
Street
Both 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From East Fourth
Street to the
southerly side of
East Fifth Street.
Second
Street
North 30 min. Beginning at a
point 202 feet east
of the northeast
corner of
Lexington Avenue,
extending 249 feet
easterly along the
northerly side of
Second Street.
§ 11-11 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-11
AO:446
Name of
Street
Sides Time Limit Hours Location
Second
Street
South 30 min. 9:00 a.m. to
11:00 p.m.
Commencing 45
feet east of
Madison Avenue
(Route U.S. 9) and
extending easterly
along the southerly
curbline of Second
Street for a
distance of 40 feet.
Second
Street
South 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Commencing 85
feet east of
Madison Avenue
(Route U.S. 9) in
an easterly
direction to a point
50 feet from the
nearest rail of the
Consolidated Rail
Corporation.
Spruce Street
[Added
1-16-2020
by Ord. No.
2020-01]
North Sunday
through
Friday, 7:00
a.m. to 9:45
a.m.
Between Marc
Drive and Howard
Drive
Spruce Street
[Added
12-5-2019
by Ord. No.
2019-54
South Sunday
through
Friday, 7:00
a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Starting at the
prolongation of the
southeast
curblines of
Spruce Street and
Carol Street in an
easterly direction
for a distance of
630 feet
Spruce Street
[Added
12-5-2019
by Ord. No.
2019-54
South Sunday
through
Friday, 7:00
a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Starting at the
prolongation of the
southwest
curblines of
Spruce Street and
Carol Street in an
westerly direction
for a distance of 37
feet
§ 11-11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-11
AO:447
Name of
Street
Sides Time Limit Hours Location
Third Street Both 4 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From the easterly
side of Madison
Avenue easterly to
the westerly side
of Monmouth
Avenue.
West Spruce
Street [Ord.
No. 2001-9]
South 6:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Entire length.
Woehr
Avenue
South 2 hours 9:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
For a distance of
190 feet extending
from the corner of
Park Avenue
easterly.
§ 11-11.1. Violations. [Ord. No. 2014-67]
Every person convicted of a violation of this § 11-11 or any supplement
thereto shall be liable for a penalty of not more than $20 plus costs of court.
§ 11-12. PARKING PROHIBITED FOR STREET CLEANING. [1971
Code § 11-5; Ord. No. 2006-80 § 1]
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor vehicle upon any
street between the specified hours and days described.
Name of
Street
Side Hours Days Location
East Fourth
Street
North 3:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.
Monday
Wednesday
Friday
Between Park
Avenue and
Ridge-Fourth
Street.
East Fourth
Street
South 3:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.
Tuesday
Thursday
Saturday
Between Park
Avenue and
Ridge-Fourth
Street.
Fifth Street North 3:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.
Monday
Wednesday
Friday
Between Route
U.S. 9 (Madison
Avenue) and
Princeton
Avenue.
§ 11-11 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-12
AO:448
Name of
Street
Side Hours Days Location
Fifth Street South 3:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.
Tuesday
Thursday
Saturday
Between Route
U.S. 9 (Madison
Avenue) and
Princeton
Avenue.
Fourth
Street
North 3:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.
Monday
Thursday
Saturday
Between Route
U.S. 9 (Madison
Avenue) and
Princeton
Avenue.
Kennedy
Boulevard
North 3:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Monday
Wednesday
Friday
Entire length.
Kennedy
Boulevard
South 3:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Tuesday
Thursday
Saturday
Entire length.
Ridge-
Fourth
Street
East 3:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Monday
Wednesday
Friday
Between East
Fourth Street
and East Fifth
Street.
Ridge-
Fourth
Street
West 3:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.
Tuesday
Thursday
Saturday
Between East
Fourth Street
and East Fifth
Street.
Second
Street
North 3:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.
Monday
Wednesday
Friday
Between Route
U.S. 9 (Madison
Avenue) and
Private Way.
Second
Street
South 3:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.
Tuesday
Thursday
Saturday
Between Route
U.S. 9 (Madison
Avenue) and
Private Way.
Second
Street
Both 3:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.
Every Day Between Route
U.S. 9 (Madison
Avenue) and
Monmouth
Avenue.
§ 11-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-12
AO:449
Name of
Street
Side Hours Days Location
Third Street North 3:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.
Monday
Wednesday
Friday
Between Route
U.S. 9 (Madison
Avenue) and
Monmouth
Avenue.
Third Street South 3:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.
Tuesday
Thursday
Saturday
Between Route
U.S. 9 (Madison
Avenue) and
Monmouth
Avenue.
Third Street North 3:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.
Monday
Wednesday
Friday
Between Route
U.S. 9 (Madison
Avenue) and
Forest Avenue.
Third Street South 3:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.
Tuesday
Thursday
Saturday
Between Route
U.S. 9 (Madison
Avenue) and
Forest Avenue.
§ 11-13. PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES ON CERTAIN
STREETS. [1971 Code § 11-3.4; Ord. No. 97-14; Ord. No. 97-15; Ord.
No. 2000-10 § 1; Ord. No. 2010-50 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-22; Ord. No.
2014-48; Ord. No. 2014-54; Ord. No. 2016-29; Ord. No. 2017-12;
Ord. No. 2018-33; Ord. No. 2018-58; Ord. No. 2019-21]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts thereof
described.
Name of Street Side Location
Albert Avenue [Ord.
No. 2016-29]
West In front of 708 and 712 Albert
Avenue, starting at the point where
the northeast corner of Lot 77 meets
Lot 78 in Block 1159 and continuing
south along Albert Avenue the entire
length of the frontage of Lots 76 and
77 on Albert Avenue, approximately
220 feet to the Southeast corner of
Lot 76 where it meets the northeast
corner of Lot 75.
America Avenue [Ord.
No. 2017-12]
Both From the prolonged curblines of
New Hampshire and America Way
extending 75 feet on both sides of
America Avenue in a westerly
direction.
§ 11-12 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-13
AO:450
Name of Street Side Location
America Avenue [Ord.
No. 2017-12]
Both From the prolonged curblines of
New Hampshire Avenue and America
Way starting at a point 425 feet and
extending to its terminus of
Cedarbridge Avenue.
Carasaljo Drive [Ord.
No. 2008-46 § 1]
South Starting at a point of the
prolongation of the south east
curbline of Shady Lane and
extending in an easterly direction to
the terminus of Carasaljo Drive at
South Lake Drive.
Cedar Street [Ord. No.
2018-58]
East Beginning at the northerly curb line
of Cedar Street and continuing South
for the entire length
Chestnut Street (C.R.
40) [Ord. No.
2012-10]
South From a point 1490 feet east of the
easterly curbline of Vermont Avenue
to a point 630 feet thereof.
Clifton Avenue West From the northerly line of 5th Street
for a distance of 200 feet.
Clifton Avenue West Beginning at a point 107 feet south
of the southwest curbline of Clifton
Avenue and Seventh Street, and
continuing for a distance of 30 feet
southerly to a point 137 feet south.
Clifton Avenue [Ord.
No. 2002-32 § 1]
East Beginning at a point of the southeast
curblines of Clifton Avenue and
Route #88 and extending to a point
78 feet north.
Clifton Avenue [Ord.
No. 2002-41 § 1]
West Starting at a point 215 feet north of
the curblines of Clifton Avenue and
Route #88 and extending 35 feet
north.
Cornelius Street [Ord.
No. 2011-41 § 1]
Easterly Starting from the intersection of East
Seventh Street, and continuing
approximately 150 feet. (As shown
on the map attached as Schedule A
on file in the Township offices.)
Coughlan Street [Ord.
No. 2006-45 § 1]
East Entire length.
Country Club Road East Beginning at a point 860 feet south
of the southeast curbline of West
County Line Road and extending to a
point 140 feet southerly therefrom.
§ 11-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-13
AO:451
Name of Street Side Location
Dove Lane [Ord. No.
2006-9 § 1]
West Entire length.
Eagle Lane [Ord. No.
2006-9 § 1]
West Goldcrest Drive to Alley 12.
Eagle Lane [Ord. No.
2006-9 § 1]
East Alley 12 to Pine Street.
East Eighth Street North From Princeton Avenue to the
nearest rail of the Central Railroad
of New Jersey.
East Fifth Street South From Ridge Avenue to South Street.
East Fifth Street South From Manetta Avenue to a point 350
feet east of School Street.
East Fifth Street North From South Street to Manetta
Avenue.
East Fourth Street South From west curbline of Dewey Avenue
for a distance of 90 feet.
East Fourth Street North From the easterly line of Park
Avenue extending easterly to the
westerly line of School Street.
East Fourth Street
[Ord. No. 2009-63
§ 1; Ord. No. 2010-1
§ 1]
North From the westerly line of Ridge-
Fourth Street extending easterly to
the westerly side of School Street.
East Kennedy
Boulevard East [Ord.
No. 2014-54]
South Beginning at a point located 20 feet
west from the boundary line between
Block 174.11, Lot 43.15 and running
easterly for 407 feet.
East Second Street
[Ord. No. 2002-18
§ 1]
North From the railroad right-of-way to
Park Avenue.
East Seventh Street Both From 50 feet from the nearest rail of
the Central Railroad of N.J. to Park
Avenue.
East Seventh Street
[Ord. No. 2019-21]
South East Seventh Street starting at the
prolongation of the curb lines of East
Seventh Street and New York Avenue
on the south west corner and
extending 60 feet in a westerly
direction.
§ 11-13 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-13
AO:452
Name of Street Side Location
East Seventh Street
[Ord. No. 2019-21]
South East Seventh Street starting at the
prolongation of the curb lines of East
Seventh Street and New York Avenue
on the south east corner and
extending 40 feet in a easterly
direction.
East Tenth Street North 108 feet from the northeast
prolongation line of East Tenth
Street and Squankum Road on the
north side.
Eighth Street North From Forest Avenue to Private Way.
Eighth Street South Monmouth Avenue to Route U.S. 9
(Madison Avenue).
Eighth Street [Ord.
No. 2005-69]
All West end of street (cul-de-sac)
Eleventh Street [Ord.
No. 2011-13 § 1]
South From the southerly prolongation
curblines of Madison Avenue and
Eleventh Street and extending 220
feet west. (As shown on the map
attached as Schedule A on file in the
Township offices.)
Elmhurst Boulevard
[Ord. No. 2014-48]
South From the intersection of Tova Drive
to River Avenue.
Fifth Street South From the Central Railroad of N.J.
right-of-way to Route U.S. 9
(Madison Avenue) and Fifth Street.
Fifth Street North From Route U.S. 9 (Madison Avenue)
to Lakewood Avenue.
Fifth Street North From Route U.S. 9 (Madison Avenue)
to Private Way.
First Street North From Madison Avenue to Forest
Avenue.
First Street South Beginning at the intersection of the
southerly curbline of First Street
with the easterly curbline of Clifton
Avenue and running 75 feet easterly
along the southerly curbline of First
Street.
First Street South From the west curb of Lexington
Avenue for a distance of 135 feet in a
westerly direction.
§ 11-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-13
AO:453
Name of Street Side Location
First Street [Ord. No.
2005-69 § 1]
North Entire length from Route U.S. 9 East
to Clifton Avenue.
First Street [Ord. No.
2005-68 § 1]
South Starting at Route U.S. 9 East towards
Clifton Avenue a distance of 145 feet.
Forest Avenue West From North Lake Drive to School
Street.
Forest Park Circle
[Ord. No. 2002-32
§ 1]
Circular On the right side of the circular loop
of Forest Park Circle.
Fourth Street South From Route U.S. 9 (Madison Avenue)
to Private Way.
Fourth Street North From Route U.S. 9 to Clifton Avenue.
Fourth Street South From Clifton Avenue to Lexington
Avenue.
Fourth Street North From Lexington Avenue to
Monmouth Avenue.
Fourth Street South From Monmouth Avenue to
Princeton Avenue.
Fourth Street [Ord.
No. 2002-43 § 1]
South Beginning at a point at the curblines
of Fourth Street and Lexington
Avenue and continuing 85 feet east.
Fourth Street [Ord.
No. 2002-43 § 1]
South Last two parking spaces where
Fourth Street intersects with Clifton
Avenue.
Fourth Street [Ord.
No. 2002-43 § 1]
North Last two parking spaces where
Fourth Street intersects with Clifton
Avenue.
Goldcrest Drive [Ord.
No. 2006-9 § 1]
South Entire length.
Hawk Way [Ord. No.
2006-9 § 1]
South Entire length.
Henry Street [Ord. No.
2018-58]
North Beginning at the easterly side of
Route 9 and continuing east the
entire length of Henry Street to
Cedar Street.
Heathwood Avenue
[Ord. No. 2005-102
§ 2]
West From the prolongation of the
southwest curbline of Heathwood
Avenue and West County Line Road
and continuing 232 feet in a
southerly direction at all times.
§ 11-13 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-13
AO:454
Name of Street Side Location
Joe Parker Road [Ord.
No. 2018-33]
South Starting at a point of the
prolongation of southerly curblines
of Joe Parker Road and Tamarind
Road and extending 125' in each
direction east and west.
Kennedy Boulevard West Beginning at a point 121 feet west of
the southwest curbline of Route U.S.
9 and West Kennedy Boulevard and
continuing for a distance of 50 feet
westerly to a point 171 feet west.
Lexington Avenue Both Between Fourth Street and Sixth
Street.
Lexington Avenue East From State Highway 88 (Main
Street) to Eighth Street.
Lexington Avenue West Beginning at a point 100 feet south
of the southwest curbline of Ninth
Street and Lexington Avenue and
continuing for a distance of 115 feet
south thereof.
Livingston Avenue Both Beginning at West Spruce Street and
running northerly to the southerly
side of Prospect Street.
Manetta Avenue West From the north curbline of East Fifth
Street for a distance of 140 feet in a
northerly direction.
Manetta Avenue East From the north curbline of East Fifth
Street for a distance of 118 feet in a
northerly direction.
Martin Luther King
Drive [Ord. No.
2003-34 § 1]
West Between Cedarbridge Road and Pine
Street.
Monmouth Avenue West For a distance of 75 feet from the
northerly curb of Second Avenue.
Myrtle Place West Beginning at Lakeview Drive and
continuing to Valley Drive.
Ninth Street South From Clifton Avenue to Forest
Avenue.
§ 11-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-13
AO:455
Name of Street Side Location
Ninth Street South Between the easterly side of
Lexington Avenue and the westerly
side of Monmouth Avenue a distance
of 500 feet.
Also being that portion of Ninth
Street as shown on the official Tax
Map of the Township of Lakewood.
Ninth Street [Ord. No.
2005-10 § 1]
North From the westerly curbline of Forest
Avenue for a distance of 55 feet and
beginning at a point 360 feet west of
the northwest corner of Forest
Avenue and Ninth Street continuing
for a distance of 1470 feet.
Ninth Street [Ord. No.
2001-65 § 1]
North Between Forest Avenue and
Lakewood Avenue
North Lake Drive South From Private Way to Lakewood
Avenue.
North Lake Drive South From Lakewood Avenue to Case
Road.
North Lake Drive South From Forest Avenue to Second
Street.
Park Avenue [Ord. No.
2001-65 § 1]
West Between 4th Street and Woehr in the
Township of Lakewood.
Park Place [Ord. No.
2008-28 § 1]
Both 100 feet south of the intersection
with East County Line Road.
Pine Street [Ord. No.
2007-26 § 1]
South Beginning at the prolongation of the
curblines of Pine Street and Martin
Luther King Drive 100 feet west of
the intersection and 80 feet east of
the intersection on the south side of
the roadway at all times.
Pine Street [Ord. No.
2007-26 § 1]
South Beginning at the prolongation of the
curblines of Forest Park Circle 65
feet in each direction (east/west) on
the south side of Martin Luther King
Drive.
Private Way West From North Lake Drive to Sixth
Street.
Private Way East From Sixth Street to Ninth Street.
Raven Lane [Ord. No.
2006-9 § 1]
Both Entire length.
§ 11-13 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-13
AO:456
Name of Street Side Location
Ridge Avenue South From the east curbline of Hackett
Street for a distance of 88 feet
easterly.
Ridge Avenue North From Park Avenue to Somerset
Avenue.
Ridge Avenue [Ord.
No. 98-34]
South Between Manetta Avenue and
Somerset Avenue.
School Garden Street
[Ord. No. 2014-15]
Both Entire length.
Second Street South From Forest Avenue to North Lake
Drive.
Second Street North Beginning at the northwest corner of
Second Street and Lexington Avenue
and continuing for a distance of 55
feet west.
Second Street North Beginning at a point 190 feet west of
the northwest curbline of Second
Street and Forest Avenue and
continuing for a distance of 65 feet
westerly to a point of 255 feet west.
Second Street [Ord.
No. 2002-41 § 1]
South Starting at a point at the curblines of
Route U.S. 9 and Second Street and
beginning 168 feet east and
continuing 185 feet east.
Second Street [Ord.
No. 2005-68 § 1]
South Last two parking spaces where
Second Street intersects with Clifton
Avenue.
Seventh Street North From Clifton Avenue to Lexington
Avenue.
Seventh Street South From the west curbline of Park
Avenue to Lexington Avenue.
Seventh Street South From Clifton Avenue to Private Way.
Seventh Street South From the southwest corner of Private
Way and Seventh Street to the
southeast corner of Lakewood
Avenue and Seventh Street.
Sixth Street North From Princeton Avenue to Route U.S.
9 except Sundays from 9:00 a.m. till
2:00 p.m. on the portion thereof
between Princeton and Monmouth
Avenues.
§ 11-13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-13
AO:457
Name of Street Side Location
Sixth Street North From Princeton Avenue to Private
Way.
Sixth Street [Ord. No.
2003-66 § 1]
South Starting at the prolongation of the
southeast curblines of Route U.S. 9
and Sixth Street and extending in an
easterly direction for a distance of
100 feet thereof.
Somerset Avenue East From Ridge Avenue to East Seventh
Street.
Somerset Avenue West Beginning at the prolongation line of
the southwest corner of East Seventh
Street and Somerset Avenue, to a
point 115 feet south thereof.
Steckler Street West Entire length.
Swan Lane [Ord. No.
2006-9 § 1]
West Entire length.
Third Street [Ord. No.
2007-45 § 1]
In front of 418-420 Third Street
starting at a point of the
prolongation lines of the curbs on
the southwest corner of Route U.S. 9
and Third Street starting at a point
west on Third Street 249 feet and
continuing (15 feet) westerly to 264
feet.
West Kennedy
Boulevard
Beginning at a point 209 feet
westerly from the northwest corner
of Route U.S. 9 and Kennedy
Boulevard and extending westerly
along the northerly curb for 40 feet.
West Spruce Street North Entire length.
Woehr Avenue North From Park Avenue to Congress
Street.
§ 11-14. PARKING PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS ON
CERTAIN STREETS. [1971 Code § 11-3.5; Ord. No. 97-18; Ord. No.
2007-27 § 1; Ord. No. 2009-64 § 1; Ord. No. 2009-71 § 1; Ord. No.
2011-39 § 1; Ord. No. 2016-14; Ord. No. 2018-20; Ord. No. 2018-32]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified on any day upon
any of the streets or parts of streets described.
§ 11-13 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-14
AO:458
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Canary Drive
[Ord. No.
2018-20]
North Thursdays 6:00
a.m. to 12:00
p.m.
North side of Canary
Drive entire length
Carey Street North 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. (School
Days)
Starting at a point 175
feet west of the
northwest curbline of
Monmouth Avenue and
Carey Street,
continuing for a
distance of 90 feet
westerly to a point 265
feet west.
Clifton Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. (School
Days)
From Sixth Street to
Seventh Street.
East Eleventh
Street [Ord. No.
2012-22 § 2]
North 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Between Lawrence
Avenue and Squankum
Road
East End Avenue East 9:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. (School
Days)
Starting at 125 feet
north of the
northeasterly curbline
of Park Terrace and
continuing to a point
145 feet north thereof.
East Fourth
Street
West 9:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m. Monday -
Friday
Beginning at the
northerly curbline of
Manetta Avenue to a
point 105 feet northerly
therefrom.
East Seventh
Street
Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. (School
Days)
Somerset Avenue to
Ramsey Street.
Eleventh Street
[Ord. No.
98-10]
North 1:00 p.m. to 9:00
p.m. Fridays
Between Route U.S. 9
and Clifton Avenue
starting at a point of 64
feet and extending 40
feet from the
prolongation of Route
U.S. 9 and Eleventh
Street.
§ 11-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-14
AO:459
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Eleventh Street
[Ord. No.
98-10]
North 1:00 p.m. to 9:00
p.m. Fridays
Between Route U.S. 9
and Clifton Avenue
starting at a point of 64
feet and extending 40
feet from the
prolongation of Route
U.S. 9 and Eleventh
Street.
Eleventh Street North 2:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m. (School
Days)
From the prolongation
line on the northeast
corner of Forest
Avenue and Eleventh
Street east to a point
325 feet thereof.
Fifth Street and
North Lake
Drive
Both 7:30 a.m. to 3:00
p.m. (School
Days)
Starting at a point 332
feet east of the
southerly curbline of
Fifth Street and North
Lake Drive to a point
168 feet thereof.
Forest Avenue East 2:00 p.m. to 3:00
p.m. (School
Days)
From the prolongation
line on the northeast
corner of Forest
Avenue and Eleventh
Street north to a point
145 feet thereof.
High Street
[Ord. No.
2010-73 § 1]
South 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. (School
Days only)
From the southerly
prolongation of the
curblines of High
Street and Route U.S. 9
and extending 200 feet
east.
Manetta Avenue
[Ord. No.
2018-32]
East 7 a.m. to 2 p.m.
Every Tuesday
Beginning at a point of
the curblines of
Manetta Avenue and
Carriage Court and
extending for a
distance of 75" south
Martin Luther
King Drive
East 7:00 a.m. to
10:00 p.m.
(School Days)
Starting 265 feet from
the southeast curbline
of Center Street and
Martin Luther King
Drive to a point 305
feet south thereof.
§ 11-14 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-14
AO:460
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
299 Monmouth
Avenue (in front
of Bais Shaindel
School) [Ord.
No. 98-59]
8:00 a.m. to 5:30
p.m. (School
Days) School
Buses Excepted*
From the prolongation
of Second Street and
Monmouth Avenue on
the northeast corner
beginning at 277 feet
and extending to 365
feet.
100 Park Avenue
(in front of Bais
Faiga School)
[Ord. No.
99-28]
8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. (School
Days) School
Buses Excepted*
From 336 feet from the
southwest curbline of
Park Avenue and
Second Street to a
point 514 feet south.
Princeton
Avenue
West 8:00 a.m. to 6:00
p.m. (School
Days)
From the westerly side
of Princeton Avenue
beginning from the
prolongation line of the
northerly side of Eighth
Street for a distance of
160 feet in a northerly
direction.
Princeton
Avenue [Ord.
No. 97-47]
East 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. (School
Days)
Between Sixth Street
and Seventh Street.
Ramsey Street Both 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. (School
Days)
From the northerly
curbline of east
Seventh Street to a
point 600 feet north
thereof.
Second Street South 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m. (School
Days)
From the southeasterly
curbline of Forest
Avenue and Second
Street starting 230 feet
to a point 360 feet
easterly therefrom on
south side.
Sixth Street Both 7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m. (School
Days)
From the northeast
corner of Princeton and
Sixth Streets in an
easterly direction 254
feet therefrom.
Somerset
Avenue
East 8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m. (School
Days)
From Ridge Avenue to
East Seventh Street.
§ 11-14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-14
AO:461
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Spruce Street North 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Spruce Street between
Sharon Court and
Route #9
*School buses only may load and unload children from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m. and from 4:00 p.m. to 5:30 p.m. in the No Parking Zone.
§ 11-15. PARKING OF VEHICLES WEIGHING IN EXCESS OF FOUR
TONS PROHIBITED.
No person shall park a truck, tractor, trailer, semi-trailer or omnibus having
registered gross weights in excess of four tons upon any street between the
hours specified.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 11-16. TRUCK ROUTES.
§ 11-16.1. Route for Trucks Over _____ Tons.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described
are hereby designated as route for vehicles over ______ tons. All trucks
having a total combined registered gross weight of vehicle plus load in
excess of ______ tons shall be excluded from all streets, except for those
streets listed which form a part of the system of truck routes. Vehicles will
be permitted on all streets for the purpose of the pick up and delivery of
materials.
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 11-16.2. Twin Trailer Routes. [1971 Code § 11-23]
The following locations are hereby designated as Twin Trailer Routes.
Twin Trailers Destined for Industrial Park:
1. Twin trailers entering Lakewood shall travel to State Highway 88 via
Route U.S. 9, making a left turn onto State Highway 88 to New
Hampshire Avenue. Thereafter, a right onto New Hampshire Avenue
(south on New Hampshire Avenue) to the appropriate terminal.
2. Twin trailers exiting the Lakewood Industrial Park shall access State
Highway 88 via New Hampshire Avenue.
§ 11-14 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-17
AO:462
§ 11-17. VEHICLES OVER DESIGNATED WEIGHT EXCLUDED FROM
CERTAIN STREETS. [Ord. No. 97-21]
Vehicles over the registered gross weight are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described except for the pick up and delivery of
materials on such street, or the use of emergency vehicles on such street.
Name of Street Weight Location
Marc Drive 4 Tons Between Pine Street and Spruce
Street.
Oak Street 4 Tons Between Route U.S. 9 and Vine
Avenue.
Spruce Street 4 Tons Entire length.
Washington Avenue 4 Tons Between Pine Street and Spruce
Street.
§ 11-18. ONE-WAY STREETS. [1971 Code § 11-6; Ord. No. 2011-29
§ 1; Ord. No. 2012-21 § 1; Ord. No. 2015-4 § 1; Ord. No. 2017-22;
Ord. No. 2018-29]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
One-Way Streets in the direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be
permitted on the sides indicated below.
Name of Street Direction Limits Parking
Permitted
Brisk Lane
[Ord. No.
2010-46 § 1;
See Schedule A
on file in the
office of the
Township
Clerk]
Northbound From Hillside
Boulevard
Country Club
Drive
As indicated on
site plan (copy
on file in office
of Township
Clerk.)
Entire length within
Pine Park.
East End Street
[Ord. No.
98-48; Ord. No.
2006-79 § 1]
Southbound From East County
Line Road and East
Harvard Street.
East Fourth
Street
Easterly Between Park Avenue
and Ridge-Fourth
Street.
§ 11-17 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-18
AO:463
Name of Street Direction Limits Parking
Permitted
East Harvard
Street [Ord. No.
2007-17 § 1]
Westerly From East End Street
and East End Avenue.
First Street [Ord. No. 2009-57 § 1; repealed by Ord. No. 2011-44]
Goldcrest Drive
[Ord. No.
2012-41]
Westbound From Alley 1 to
Washington Street
On both sides of
the roadway
facing
westbound from
Alley 1 to
Washington
Street.
Hawk Way [Ord.
No. 2012-41]
Westbound From Alley 1 to
Washington Street
On both sides of
the roadway
facing
westbound from
Alley 1 to
Washington
Street.
Hurley Avenue Northerly Between Route U.S. 9
(River Avenue) and
South Clifton Avenue.
Kelm Woods
Avenue [Ord.
No. 2010-46
§ 1; See
Schedule A on
file in the
office of the
Township
Clerk]
Eastbound From Hillside Avenue
Kletsk Hill Road
[Ord. No.
2018-29]
Southerly Entire Length Both Sides
Lexington
Avenue [Ord.
No. 2010-7 § 1]
Southerly Between First Street
and State Highway 88
(Main Street).
§ 11-18 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-18
AO:464
Name of Street Direction Limits Parking
Permitted
North Crest
Place [Ord. No.
2017-22]
Southerly Starting at the most
northerly entrance of
North Crest Place
(Closest to New
Central Avenue off
Hillside Boulevard)
and continuing one
way in a southerly
direction to Hillside
Boulevard.
Ridge-Fourth
Street
Northerly Between East Fourth
Street and East Fifth
Street.
Second Street Easterly Between Clifton
Avenue and
Monmouth Avenue.
Shelly Court Southerly From West Spruce
Street to Cedar Court
for a distance of 215
feet.
Shelley Lane
[Ord. 6/22/89]
Southerly Between West Spruce
Street and Cedar
Court for southbound
traffic only, as
referenced on the
Township of
Lakewood Tax Map
attached hereto and
made a part hereof.38
South Lake
Drive
Westerly Between Central
Avenue and Freeman
Road.
Third Street [Ord. No. 2015-4 rescinded the one-way portion
between Route U.S. 9 (Madison Avenue) and Clifton Avenue]
Twin Oaks Drive
[Ord. No.
2004-70 § 1]
CounterclockwiseFrom Kennedy
Boulevard east
intersect, to Kennedy
Boulevard west
intersect.
Recessed curb
areas only.
38.Editor's Note: The Tax Map referred to herein can be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 11-18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-19
AO:465
§ 11-19. THROUGH STREETS. [1971 Code § 11-7; Ord. No. 96-56]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described are hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs
shall be installed on the near-right side of each street intersecting the
Through Street except where Yield signs are provided for in the
designation.
Name of Street Limits
Albert Avenue Between Pine Street and Salem Street.
Autumn Road Between North Lake Drive and Case Road.
Case Road Between North Lake Drive and Fourteenth
Street.
Clifton Avenue Between State Highway 88 (Main Street)
and County Road 526 (County Line Road).
Cypress Avenue Between East Spruce Street and Oak Street.
Dr. Martin L. King Drive Between Pine Street and Cedar Bridge
Avenue.
East Fourth Street - Clover
Street
Between Park Avenue and State Highway 88
(Ocean Avenue).
East Fifth Street - Holly
Street
Between Ridge Avenue and State Highway
88 (Ocean Avenue).
East Seventh Street Between Park Avenue and Brook Road.
East Spruce Street Entire length.
Erica Road New Hampshire Avenue and MacArthur
Street.
Fernwood Avenue Between Fourteenth Street and County Road
526 (County Line Road).
Finchley Boulevard Between Route U.S. 9 and Hearthstone
Boulevard North Drive.
Forest Avenue Between North Lake Drive and County Road
526 (County Line Road).
Hearthstone Boulevard-
North Drive
a. Between Cross Street and Hearthstone
Circle.
b. Between Hearthstone Circle and
Massachusetts Avenue.
Jennifer Drive Entire length.
Lakewood Avenue Between North Lake Drive and Ninth Street.
§ 11-19 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-19
AO:466
Name of Street Limits
Lexington Avenue Between State Highway 88 (Main Street)
and Second Street and between Second
Street and Fourth Street and between
Fourth Street and County Road 526 (County
Line Road).
Linden Street Between State Highway 88 (Ocean Avenue)
and Somerset Avenue.
Marc Drive Between Pine Street and East Spruce Street.
Monmouth Avenue Between First Street and County Road 526
(County Line Road).
Mountain View Drive Entire length.
North Lake Drive - Second
Street
Between County Road 3 (Hope Chapel Road)
and Forest Avenue.
Oak Street Between Vine Street and Airport Road.
Oberlin Avenue South Between New Hampshire Avenue and Cedar
Bridge Avenue.
Park Avenue Between State Highway 88 (Ocean Avenue)
and East Fourth Street and between Ridge
Avenue and East Harvard Street.
Pearl Street-Cottage Place Between State Highway 88 (Ocean Avenue)
and East Fourth Street.
Pine Street Between Route U.S. 9 (River Avenue) and
New Hampshire Avenue.
Princeton Avenue Between Fourth Street and Squankum Road
and between Squankum Road and County
Road 526 (County Line Road).
Princeton Avenue Beginning and ending at the north side of
East Kennedy Boulevard within the confines
of Coventry Square Condominium complex.
Princewood Avenue Between Finchley Boulevard and northerly
terminus.
Ronald Road Between New Hampshire Avenue and Pine
Acre Boulevard.
South Lake Drive Between Hope Chapel Road and County
Road 528 (Central Avenue).
Squankum Road From the southerly line of County Line Road
to the easterly line of Monmouth Avenue.
Swarthmore Avenue Between Cedar Bridge Avenue (Route 528)
and New Hampshire Avenue.
§ 11-19 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-19
AO:467
Name of Street Limits
Tanglewood Lane Between Fourteenth Street and County Road
526 (County Line Road).
Van Buren Avenue North Between Hope Chapel Road and Adams
Street.
Vine Avenue Between East Spruce Street and its
southerly terminus.
West Kennedy- East
Kennedy
Between Laurelwood Avenue and Route U.S.
9 and Squankum Road.
§ 11-20. STOP INTERSECTIONS. [1971 Code § 11-14; Ord. No.
96-48; Ord. No. 96-54; Ord. No. 97-1; Ord. No. 98-12; Ord. No.
99-44; Ord. No. 2005-45§ 1]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as
provided therein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Adams Street and Van Buren North Van Buren North Avenue
Airport Road and Gusmer Drive Gusmer Drive
Airport Road and Oak Street Oak Street
Arlington Avenue and Elm Street Elm Street
Arlington Avenue and Lincoln Street Lincoln Street
Arlington Avenue and Lois Lane Lois Lane
Carlton Avenue South and Cedar
Court [Ord. No. 2005-108 § 1]
Cedar Court
Carol Street and Cathy Lane Cathy Lane
Carol Street and Oak Street School
Road
Oak Street School Road
Cedar Row and Martin Street Martin Street
Center Street and Ashley Avenue Center Street
Center Street and Arlington Avenue Center Street
Columbus Avenue South and Elliot
Street [Ord. No. 2005-108 § 1]
Elliot Street
Coral Avenue and Salem Street Coral Avenue
Corporate Road West and Paco Way Corporate Road West
Corporate Road West and Towbin
Avenue
Corporate Road West
Country Club Drive southerly
approach and Country Club Drive
Country Club Drive southerly
approach facing northbound traffic
§ 11-19 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-20
AO:468
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Country Club Drive and Pine Park
Avenue
Country Club Drive
Daniel Drive and Green Street Green Street
Delaware Trail and Lenape Trail
[Added 12-5-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-51]
Lenape Trail northbound
Drake Road and White Street White Street
East Fourth Street northbound and
southbound and Park Avenue
Park Avenue
Eighth Street and Private Way Private Way
Eleventh Street and Lawrence
Avenue
Eleventh Street
First Street and Clifton Avenue
[Ord. No. 2011-30 § 1]
First Street (eastbound only)
Fourth Street and Mary's Lane
[Ord. No. 99-44]
Mary's Lane
Fourth Street and Lexington Avenue Lexington Avenue
Fourth Street and Princeton Avenue Princeton Avenue
Glen Avenue South and Elliot Street
[Ord. No. 2005-108 § 1]
Elliot Street
Glen Avenue South and Cedar Court Cedar Court (Ord. No. 2005-108 § 1
Hillside Boulevard and Kelm Woods
Avenue/Radin Village Place [Ord.
No. 2013-56]
A stop sign shall be installed on
each corner of the intersection.
Iris Road and Magnolia Drive Magnolia Drive
Kennedy Boulevard and Laurelwood
Avenue
Laurelwood Avenue
Kings Court and Van Buren Avenue
[Ord. No. 2005-97 § 1]
Kings Court
Lake Drive Terrace and Iris Road Iris Road
Lakewood Avenue and Ninth Street Ninth Street
Lakewood Pines Boulevard and
Morris Avenue
Morris Avenue
Lawrence Avenue and Tenth Street Tenth Street
Lexington Avenue and First Street
[Ord. No. 2013-68]
Lexington Avenue southbound and
on First Street eastbound and
westbound
Long Beach Avenue and Laguna
Lane
Laguna Lane
§ 11-20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-20
AO:469
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Manor Drive and Jennifer Drive Jennifer Drive
Martin Street and Willow Court Willow Court
Mary's Lane and Fifth Street [Ord.
No. 99-41]
Fifth Street
Mary's Lane and Sixth Street [Ord.
No. 99-41]
Sixth Street
Melville Avenue and Elm Street Elm Street
Midwood Street and Vine Street
[Ord. No. 2004-18 § 1]
Midwood Street
Midwood Street and Washington
Street [Ord. No. 2004-18 § 1]
Midwood Street
Myrtle Place and Lakeview Drive Lakeview Drive
Myrtle Place and Valley Drive Valley Drive
Ninth Street and Private Way Private Way
Oak Street and Cypress Avenue Cypress Avenue
Oak Knoll Road and Iris Avenue Iris Avenue
Park Avenue and East Harvard
Street [Ord. No. 2011-28 § 1]
East Harvard Street and Park
Avenue (right turn ramp)
Pine Street and Martin Luther King
Drive [Ord. No. 2013-61]
A stop sign shall be installed on
each corner of the intersection
Private Way and Fourth Street Fourth Street
Private Way and Fifth Street Private Way
Regent Drive and Regent Place Regent Place
Ridge Avenue and Park Avenue Park Avenue
Salem Street and Marlin Avenue Marlin Avenue
Seminole Drive and Iroquois Place Iroquois Place
Seventh Street and Mary's Lane
[Ord. No. 99-41]
Mary's Lane
Seventh Street and Private Way Private Way
Sixth Street and Private Way Private Way
St. Nicholas Avenue and Elliot
Street [Ord. No. 2005-108 § 1]
Elliot Street
Teaberry Court and West Kennedy
Boulevard
West Kennedy Boulevard
Tiffany Lane and Jennifer Drive Jennifer Drive
Towbin Avenue and Salem Street Salem Street
§ 11-20 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-20
AO:470
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Vine Street and Green Street Green Street
Washington Place and Courtney
Road
Washington Place
Wynatt Street and Ashley Avenue Northwest corner of Ashley Avenue
§ 11-21. MULTIPLE STOP INTERSECTIONS.39
§ 11-21.1. Four-Way Stops. [Ord. No. 2009-55 § 2; Ord. No. 2010-94;
Ord. No. 2013-56; Ord. No. 2014-64; Ord. No. 2015-4 § 2; Ord. No.
2015-39; Ord. No. 2015-77; Ord. No. 2018-6; Ord. No. 2018-26]
The following intersections are hereby designated as Four-Way Stops:
Intersection Stop Sign Locations
Caranetta Drive and Kimball
Road [Ord. No. 2018-26]
A 4-way stop sign shall be installed on each
corner of the intersection.
Caranetta Drive and Davis
Road [Ord. No. 2018-26]
A 4-way stop sign shall be installed on each
corner of the intersection.
Caranetta Drive and Freeman
Road [Ord. No. 2018-26]
A 4-way stop sign shall be installed on each
corner of the intersection.
Clifton Avenue and Tenth
Street [Added 1-16-2020 by
Ord. No. 2020-02]
A 4-way stop sign shall be installed on each
corner of the intersection.
Lexington Avenue and Fourth
Street [Ord. No. 2014-64]
A 4-way stop sign shall be installed on each
corner of the intersection.
Monmouth Avenue and Ninth
Street [Ord. No. 2015-77]
A 4-way stop sign shall be installed on each
corner of the intersection.
Monmouth Avenue and
Second Street [Ord. No.
2015-39]
A 4-way stop sign shall be installed on each
corner of the intersection.
Monmouth Avenue and
Seventh Street [Ord. No.
2013-43; Ord. No.
2014-64]
A 4-way stop sign shall be installed on each
corner of the intersection.
Ninth Street and Lexington
Avenue [Ord. No. 2018-6]
A 4-way stop sign shall be installed on each
corner of the intersection.
Oak Street and Albert Avenue
[Ord. No. 2013-2; Ord. No.
2014-64]
A 4-way stop sign shall be installed on each
corner of the intersection.
39.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance Nos. 2009-55, 2010-94, 2013-56.
§ 11-20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-21.1
AO:471
Intersection Stop Sign Locations
Park Avenue and Seventh
Street [Ord. No. 2014-64]
A 4-way stop sign shall be installed on each
corner of the intersection.
Princeton Avenue and
Seventh Street [Ord. No.
2013-43; Ord. No.
2014-64]
A 4-way stop sign shall be installed on each
corner of the intersection.
Princeton Avenue and
Squankum Road [Ord. No.
2015-4 § 2]
A 4-way stop shall be established on each
corner of the intersection.
Seventh Street and Nowlan
Place [Ord. No. 2013-75;
Ord. No. 2014-64]
A 4-way stop sign shall be installed on each
corner of the intersection.
§ 11-21.2. Three-Way Stops. [Ord. No. 2014-64; Ord. No. 2018-26;
Ord. No. 2018-34]
The following intersections are hereby designated as Three-Way Stops:
Intersection Stop Sign Locations
Broadway Street and Argyle Avenue
[Added 1-16-2020 by Ord. No.
2020-03]
A 3-way stop sign shall be installed
on each corner of the intersection
Caranetta Drive and Bradshaw Road
[Ord. No. 2018-26]
A 3-way stop shall be established at
each intersection.
Granite Drive and Marble Way
[Added 10-3-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-36]
A 3-way stop shall be established at
each intersection.
Granite Drive and Pebble Way
[Added 10-3-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-36]
A 3-way stop shall be established at
each intersection.
Granite Drive and Walnut Avenue
[Added 10-3-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-36]
A 3-way stop shall be established at
each intersection.
Hillside Boulevard and Kelm Woods
Avenue/Radin Village Place [Ord.
No. 2014-64]
A stop sign shall be installed on
each corner of the intersection.
Lexington Avenue and First Street
[Ord. No. 2014-64]
A stop sign shall be installed on
Lexington Avenue southbound and
on First Street eastbound and
westbound.
Pine Street and Martin Luther King
Drive [Ord. No. 2014-64]
A stop sign shall be installed on
each corner of the intersection.
§ 11-21.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-21.2
AO:472
Intersection Stop Sign Locations
Ridge Avenue and East Fifth Street
[Ord. No. 2018-34]
A 3-way stop shall be established at
each intersection.
Second Street and Lexington
Avenue [Ord. No. 2014-64]
Second Street Eastbound and
Lexington Avenue north and
southbound.
§ 11-22. YIELD INTERSECTIONS. [1971 Code § 11-16; Ord. No.
2010-93; Ord. No. 2013-2]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as Yield Intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
Intersection Yield Sign Locations
(Reserved)
§ 11-23. TURN PROHIBITIONS. [1971 Code § 11-8.1; § 11-8.2;
§ 11-8.3; Ord. No. 2009-56 § 1; Ord. No. 2009-67 § 1; Ord. No.
2016-1]
No person shall make a turn at any location listed and only in the manner
described.
Location Turn
Prohibited
Movement Prohibited
Airport Road and Oak
Street
Right Eastbound traffic from Oak Street
into Airport Road.
Clifton Avenue U-turn Between the north side of State
Highway 88 (Main Street) and Fifth
Street.
Forest Avenue U-turn Between Fifth Street and Seventh
Street.
Massachusetts Avenue
at 1536 [Ord. No.
2012-9]
Left "School Buses Only" from the
private driveway located on the
west side of Massachusetts Avenue
at 1536 Massachusetts Avenue
exiting to travel northbound is
prohibited.
New exit driveway of
the Ocean County
Recycling Center and
Oberlin Avenue
Right From the new exit driveway of the
Ocean County Recycling Center
eastbound onto Oberlin Avenue
south.
Princeton Avenue and
Squankum Road
Left Northbound traffic from Princeton
Avenue onto Squankum Road.
§ 11-21.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-23
AO:473
Location Turn
Prohibited
Movement Prohibited
Seagull Square Mall
and Route U.S. 9
Left East on Seagull Square Mall
northerly driveway to north on
Route U.S. 9.
Seagull Square Mall
and Route U.S. 9
Left East on Seagull Square Mall
southerly driveway to north on
Route U.S. 9.
Stadium Way [Ord.
No. 2001-14]
Left Eastbound on Stadium Way to
northbound on New Hampshire
Avenue.
The Shoppes at
Washington Square (CR
#5)
Cedarbridge Avenue
[Ord. No. 2016-1]
Left From the Easterly exit driveway
eastbound onto Cedarbridge
Avenue (CR #5)
§ 11-23.1. Right Turn Only. [Ord. No. 2009-58 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No.
2009-72 § 2]
Persons shall make a right turn only at any of the locations described.
Location Limits
Carey Street at Route U.S.
9
Right turn only weekdays 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Eighth Street at Route
U.S. 9
Right turn only weekdays 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Eleventh Street at Route
U.S. 9
Right turn only weekdays 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Fifth Street at Route U.S.
9
Right turn only weekdays 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
First Street at Route U.S.
9
Right turn only weekdays 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
North Lake Drive [Ord.
No. 2012-21 § 2]
Eastbound to Route U.S. 9 Southbound at all
times
Seventh Street at Route
U.S. 9
Right turn only weekdays 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Tenth Street at Route U.S.
9
Right turn only weekdays 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Third Street at Route U.S.
9
Right turn only weekdays 7:00 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
§ 11-23 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-24
AO:474
§ 11-24. NO TURN ON RED. [1971 Code § 11-15]
No person shall make a right turn on the red signal at any location listed:
Intersection Right Turn Prohibition
Fourth Street and Clifton Avenue All right turns
Fourth Street and Monmouth Avenue All right turns
Second Street and Clifton Avenue All right turns
§ 11-25. LOADING ZONES/UNLOADING ZONES. [1971 Code
§ 11-20; Ord. No. 2002-39 § 1; Ord. No. 2003-12 § 1; Ord. No.
2003-64 § 1; Ord. No. 2003-75 § 1; Ord. No. 2008-30 § 1]
The locations described in Schedule XVII attached to and made a part of
this chapter are hereby designated as Loading Zones/Unloading Zones. No
person shall park a vehicle in these locations during the times indicated
other than for the loading or unloading of goods and materials.
Note: Minimum length for all Loading Zones is 50 feet. No Loading Zone
may be established in any area where it is prohibited to stop, stand or park
by N.J.S.A. 39:4-136.
Name of Street Time Side Location
Clifton Avenue
[Ord. No.
2008-32 § 1]
3:00 p.m. to 5:00
p.m. Sunday
through Thursday
West Starting 50 feet from the
southwest curbline of
Clifton Avenue and Tenth
Street and extending 125
feet southerly
Clifton Avenue Friday 9:00 a.m.
to 1:00 p.m.
School days only
excluding
holidays
Fifth Street
[Ord. No.
2003-75 § 2]
South Starting at a point from
the prolongation of the
curblines of North Lake
Drive and Fifth Street on
the south side of Fifth
Street, starting at a point
317 feet and continuing
40 feet in an easterly
direction. The loading/
unloading zone shall
have a 15 minute time
limit.
§ 11-24 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-25
AO:475
Name of Street Time Side Location
First Street North Beginning at a point 163
feet west of the
northwest corner of
Lexington Avenue and
First Street for a
distance of 50 feet in a
westerly direction.
Forest Avenue
[Ord. No.
2009-62 § 1]
Sunday through
Friday
East Starting at a point 110
feet from prolongated
curblines of northeast
corner of Forest Avenue
and Eleventh Street and
continuing in a northerly
direction 120 feet north.
Lakewood Plaza
Building "A"
[Ord. No.
2003-64 § 2]
South Starting 115 feet from
southeast curbline of
Building "A" to a point
157 feet west thereof.
The time limit for the use
of said loading/unloading
zone shall not exceed 15
minutes.
Lexington
Avenue [Ord.
No. 2003-12
§ 2]
East Beginning 150 feet from
the northeast curbline of
Lexington Avenue and
Eighth Street to a point
180 feet north thereof.
The time limit for the use
of said loading/unloading
zone shall not exceed 15
minutes.
Park Avenue
[Ord. No.
2008-15 § 1]
Monday through
Friday 7:30 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m.
West Starting 250 feet from
the southwest curbline of
Park Avenue and Second
Street to a point 514 feet
south.
Park Avenue Friday 7:30 a.m.
to 1:00 p.m.
School days only,
excluding
holidays
§ 11-25 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-25
AO:476
Name of Street Time Side Location
Second Street
[Ord. No. 97-27;
Ord. No. 97-44;
Ord. No.
2002-39 § 2]
Sunday through
Thursday 8:30
a.m. to 10:00
a.m. 1:30 p.m. to
5:30 p.m.
Fridays 8:30 a.m.
to 10:00 a.m.
12:00 p.m. to
1:00 p.m.
South Beginning at a point 180
feet east of the southeast
curbline of Lexington
Avenue and Second
Street and extending 170
feet east.
Twelfth Street Monday through
Thursday 8:00
a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
Friday 8:00 a.m.
to 12:00 p.m.
School days only
excluding
holidays
South Starting 170 feet from
the southeast curbline of
Monmouth Avenue and
Twelfth Street and
extending 100 feet
westerly.
§ 11-25.1. Loading Zone—Construction Vehicles Only. [Ord. No.
2009-62 § 1]
Name of Street Time Side Location
Tenth Street Sunday through
Friday 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m.
South Starting at a point 60 feet
from the prolongated
curblines of southwest
corner of Clifton Avenue
and Tenth Street and
continuing in a westerly
direction 310 feet west.
§ 11-26. BUS STOP. [1971 Code § 11-17; Ord. No. 97-23; Ord. No.
98-40; Ord. No. 2015-29]
The locations described are hereby designated as Bus Stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus which is picking up or discharging passengers shall
be permitted to occupy said location between the hours indicated.
a. Along Clifton Avenue southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
1. Between Sixth Street and Fifth Street (mid-block)
Beginning 90 feet south of the southerly curbline of Sixth Street
and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
b. Along County Line Road eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
§ 11-25 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-26
AO:477
1. Squankum Road (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Squankum Road and
extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
2. Brook Road (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Brook Road and extending
100 feet easterly therefrom.
3. Ridge Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Ridge Avenue and extending
100 feet easterly therefrom.
c. Along County Line Road westbound on the northerly side thereof at:
1. Ridge Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Ridge Avenue and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom.
2. Brook Road (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Brook Road and extending
100 feet westerly therefrom.
d. Along Fifth Street/North Side, beginning 114 feet west of the westerly
curbline of Clifton Avenue and extending 135 feet therefrom.
e. Along Fourth Street, beginning at a point in the northerly line of Fourth
Street, said point being distant 287 feet from the intersection of the
northerly line of Fourth Street with the westerly line of Lexington
Avenue; thence continuing along the northerly line of Fourth Street in a
westerly direction, a distance of 64.5 feet to its terminus.
Said distance encompassing three parking stalls and delineated by the
placement of "No Parking" signs shall be reserved for a "Bus Stop Use
Only" area.
f. Along Kennedy Boulevard, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
1. Lexington Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Lexington Avenue and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
2. Monmouth Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Monmouth Avenue and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
3. Princeton Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Princeton Avenue and
extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
§ 11-26 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-26
AO:478
4. Squankum Road (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Squankum Road and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
g. Along Lanes Mill Road eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
1. Cedarwood Drive (far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Cedarwood Drive and
extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
2. Barrymore Drive (near side) (prolongation)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Barrymore Drive and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
3. Alamitos Drive (near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Alamitos Drive and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom.
h. Along Lanes Mill Road eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
1. Barrymore Drive (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Barrymore Drive and
extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
2. Newport Drive (far side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Newport Drive and extending
100 feet westerly therefrom.
i. Along Route U.S. 9, southbound, on the westerly side thereof at:
1. Fourth Street (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Fourth Street and extending
100 feet southerly therefrom.
2. Finchley Boulevard (near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Finchley Boulevard and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
j. Along Seventh Street, westbound, beginning 218 feet west of the
westerly curbline of Clifton Avenue and extending 135 feet westerly
therefrom.
k. Along Lanes Mill Road, westbound, on the northerly side thereof at:
1. Alvardo Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Alvardo Avenue and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom. [Ord. No. 2011-4 § 1]
§ 11-26 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-26
AO:479
l. Along Route 9, northbound, on the easterly side thereof at:
1. Buttell Avenue (near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Buttell Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom. [Ord. No. 2-11-16 § 1]
m. Along Route 9, southbound, on the westerly side thereof at:
1. Buttell Avenue (far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Buttell Avenue and
extending 100 feet southerly therefrom. [Ord. No. 2011-16 § 1]
n. Forest Avenue and Second Street — Located on Second Street at the
midpoint between Forest Avenue and Madison Avenue, approximately
90 feet east of Forest Avenue on the north and south sides of Second
Street. [Ord. No. 2015-29]
o. Forest Avenue and Fourth Street — Located on Forest Avenue
approximately 20 feet south of the southwest and southeast corners of
Fourth Street. [Ord. No. 2015-29]
p. Fourteenth Street and Forest Avenue — Located on Forest Avenue
approximately 25 feet south of Fourteenth Street on the east and west
sides of Forest Avenue. [Ord. No. 2015-29]
q. Fourteenth Street and Case Road — Located on Fourteenth Street
approximately 25 feet east of the northeast and southeast corners of
Case Road and Tanglewood Lane. [Ord. No. 2015-29]
r. Central Avenue and Freeman Road:
1. Westbound — Freeman Road (near side) Beginning at the easterly
curbline of Freeman Road and extending 110' easterly therefrom.
2. Eastbound — Freeman Road (near side) Beginning at the westerly
curbline of Freeman Road and extending 115' westerly therefrom.
[Ord. No. 2015-29]
Note: Below are minimum standards for bus stop length which are based on recommendations
of the Institute of Transportation Engineers and studies conducted by the Bureau of Traffic
Engineering and Safety programs. These standards include minimum lengths required for Bus
Stops in order that buses may leave moving traffic lanes safely. Keep in mind that buses must
stop alongside the curb within six (6") inches thereof as provided by State Law pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 39:4-135. These minimums are as follows:
NEAR SIDE - 90' plus the distance from the curbline to the end of the curb return, property line
or crosswalk approximately 105' to 120'. Minimum acceptable length is 105'
FAR SIDE - 85' plus the distance from the curbline to the end of the curb return, property line
or crosswalk approximately 105' to 120'. Minimum acceptable length is 105'
MID-BLOCK - No intersection on either side of roadway, minimum acceptable length is 135'
§ 11-26 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-26
AO:480
§ 11-26A. BUS LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONE.
Name of
Street
Side Days Time Location
Ninth Street
[Ord. No.
2009-62
§ 1]
North Sunday
through
Friday
8:30 a.m. to
9:15 a.m.
Starting at a
point 30 feet
from the
prolongated
curblines of
northwest corner
of Clifton Avenue
and Ninth Street
and continuing in
a westerly
direction 393 feet
west.
Ninth Street North Sunday
through
Thursday
3:30 p.m. to
5:15 p.m.
Ninth Street North Friday 11:30 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.
FAR-SIDE (AFTER BUS MAKES RIGHT TURN) - Minimum acceptable length is 150'. An
additional 45' of length should be provided for each additional bus expected to stop
simultaneously.
§ 11-26 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-26B
AO:481
§ 11-26B. SCHOOL BUS LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONE. [Ord.
No. 2004-61 § 1; Ord. No. 2019-13]
Name of
Street
Side Days Time Location
Clifton
Avenue
[Ord. No.
2009-62
§ 1]
West Sunday
through Friday
8:30 a.m. to
9:15 a.m.
Starting at a
point 35 feet
from the
prolongated
curblines of
northwest
corner of
Clifton Avenue
and Ninth
Street and
continuing in a
northerly
direction 230
feet north.
Clifton
Avenue
West Sunday
through
Thursday
1:30 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Clifton
Avenue
West Sunday
through
Thursday
3:30 p.m. to
5:15 p.m.
Clifton
Avenue
West Friday 11:30 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.
High Street
[Ord. No.
2010-72
§ 1]
North 8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
(School Days
only)
From the
northerly
prolongation of
the curblines
of High Street
and U.S. Route
No. 9 and
extending 200
feet east
§ 11-26B LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-26B
AO:482
Name of
Street
Side Days Time Location
Linden
Avenue
[Ord. No.
2012-58]
North School days
only
8:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From the
southwest
prolongated
curblines of
Ridge Avenue
and Somerset
Avenue
starting at a
point 310 feet
south and
continuing in a
southerly
direction for
660 feet.
Sixth Street
[Ord. No.
2019-13]
South Sunday 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From the
South Westerly
prolongated
curb lines of
Route U.S. 9
(Madison
Avenue) and
starting at a
point 163 feet
westerly and
extending to a
point ending at
366 feet.
Sixth Street
[Ord. No.
2019-13]
South Monday
through
Thursday
8:00 a.m. to
5:30 p.m.
From the
South Westerly
prolongated
curb lines of
Route U.S. 9
(Madison
Avenue) and
starting at a
point 163 feet
westerly and
extending to a
point ending at
366 feet.
§ 11-26B ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-26B
AO:483
Name of
Street
Side Days Time Location
Sixth Street
[Ord. No.
2019-13]
South Friday 8:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.
From the
South Westerly
prolongated
curb lines of
Route U.S. 9
(Madison
Avenue) and
starting at a
point 163 feet
westerly and
extending to a
point ending at
366 feet.
Whispering
Pines Lane
[Ord. No.
2004-61
§ 1]
South Monday
through
Thursday
7:00 a.m. to
5:30 p.m.
Beginning from
the
prolongation of
the curblines
of Squankum
Road and
Whispering
Pines Lane and
beginning at a
point 775 feet
and extending
to a point 890
feet.
Whispering
Pines Lane
Friday School
days only
7:00 a.m. to
1:30 p.m.
§ 11-27. TAXI STANDS. [New]
The locations described are hereby designated as Taxi Stands. No vehicle
other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy these locations during the
times indicated.
Street Location Hours
(Reserved)
§ 11-26B LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-27
AO:484
Note: Minimum length of taxi stand near intersection is twenty-five (25')
feet. Adding the sidewalk area of about ten (10') feet to the area where
parking is prohibited by State Law would make the starting point
approximately thirty-five (35') feet from the curbline. Other locations
should be at least thirty (30') feet for one taxi and an additional twenty-five
(25') feet for each additional taxi.
No taxi stand may be established in any area where it is prohibited to stand
or park pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-138.
§ 11-28. LANE USE RESERVATIONS. [New]
The lane locations described are designated as lane use reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection Movement
(Reserved)
§ 11-29. SPEED LIMITS. [1971 Code § 11-18; Ord. No. 96-52; Ord.
No. 98-33]
Speed limits shall be established as follows. Regulatory and warning signs,
conforming to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways, shall be erected and maintained to effect the
designated speed limit(s), as required by the Commissioner of
Transportation of the State of New Jersey and as specified and authorized
in writing from the Bureau of Traffic Engineering of the Department of
Transportation.
Name of Street Speed Limit Traffic
Direction
Location
Airport Road
Zone 1
35 m.p.h. Both Between Route 70 and
2100 feet north of Oak
Street.
Airport Road
Zone 2
50 m.p.h. Both Between 2100 feet
north of Oak Street and
Cedarbridge Avenue.
Albert Avenue 35 m.p.h. Both Entire length.
Center Street 25 m.p.h. Both Entire length.
Chestnut Street
[Ord. No.
2000-29 § 1]
25 m.p.h. Both From Vermont Avenue
west to Route U.S. 9.
Chestnut Street
[Ord. No.
2000-29 § 1]
35 m.p.h. Both From Vermont Avenue
east to New Hampshire
Avenue.
Clearstream
Road
30 m.p.h. Both Entire length.
§ 11-27 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-29
AO:485
Name of Street Speed Limit Traffic
Direction
Location
Clifton Avenue 25 m.p.h. Both State Highway 88 and
6th Street.
Clifton Avenue 35 m.p.h. Both Between 6th Street and
E. County Line, except
25 m.p.h. school zone
when passing through
Clifton Avenue Grade
School and Lakewood
Cheder School during
recess, or while
children are going to or
leaving school, during
opening or closing
hours.
Clifton Avenue 25 m.p.h. Both East County Line Road
and the northerly
terminus of Clifton
Avenue.
Country Club
Drive
25 m.p.h. Both Entire area between
Pine Park Avenue and
Hope Chapel Road.
Also 426 feet west of
Hope Chapel Road.
Country Club
Road
25 m.p.h. Both From West County Line
Road southbound for
1,013 feet
encompassing the
entrance to Pine Park.
Drake Road-
Ridgeway Place
35 m.p.h. Both Entire length.
East Seventh
Street
35 m.p.h. Both Between Park Avenue
and Brook Road, except
25 m.p.h. school zone
for the Lakewood
Middle-High Schools
during recess or while
children are going to or
leaving school during
opening or closing
hours.
§ 11-29 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-29
AO:486
Name of Street Speed Limit Traffic
Direction
Location
Forest Avenue 35 m.p.h. Both Between Kennedy
Boulevard and North
Lake Drive, except 25
m.p.h. school zone for
St. Mary's Academy
School during recess or
while children are
going to or leaving
school during opening
or closing hours.
Gudz Road 25 m.p.h. Both Between Miller Road
and County Road #528.
John Street 25 m.p.h. Both Entire length.
Lakewood
Avenue
25 m.p.h. Both Entire length between
Ninth Street and North
Lake Drive.
Martin Luther
King Drive
30 m.p.h. Both Entire length.
Oak Street 40 m.p.h. Both From New Hampshire
Avenue to Airport
Road.
Oak Street 40 m.p.h. Both Between Route U.S. 9
and Vine Street.
Oberlin Avenue 35 m.p.h. Both Entire length.
Pine Park
Avenue
25 m.p.h. Both Entire length.
Pine Street
Zone 1
35 m.p.h. Both Between River Avenue
(Route U.S. 9) and 550
feet east of Washington
Avenue.
Pine Street
Zone 2
45 m.p.h. Both Between 550 feet east
of Washington Avenue
and New Hampshire
Avenue.
Princeton
Avenue
20 m.p.h. Both Entire length.
§ 11-29 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-29
AO:487
Name of Street Speed Limit Traffic
Direction
Location
Somerset
Avenue
Zone 1
35 m.p.h. Both Between Linden Street
and East Seventh
Street, except 25
m.p.h. school zone for
the Lakewood Middle
School during recess or
while children are
going to or leaving
school during opening
or closing hours.
Somerset
Avenue
Zone 2
40 m.p.h. Both Between East Seventh
Street and East County
Line Road except 25
m.p.h. school zone for
the Lakewood High
School during recess or
while children are
going to or leaving
school during opening
or closing hours.
South Lake
Drive
35 m.p.h. Both Between Hope Road
and Freeman Road.
South Lake
Drive
25 m.p.h. West Between Freeman
Road and Central
Avenue (Co. Rt. 528).
Spruce Street 25 m.p.h. Both Entire length.
Squankum Road
(municipal
section)
35 m.p.h. Both Monmouth Avenue to
East County Line Road.
Syracuse Avenue 25 m.p.h. Both Entire length.
Towbin Avenue 40 m.p.h. Both Between Route U.S. 9
to and Oak Street.
Vassar Avenue 25 m.p.h. Both Entire length.
Washington
Avenue
35 m.p.h. Both Entire length between
Pine Street and Spruce
Street.
§ 11-30. MID-BLOCK CROSSWALKS. [New]
A Mid-Block Crosswalk shall be established and maintained at the following
location.
§ 11-29 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-30
AO:488
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 11-31. NO PASSING ZONES. [1971 Code § 11-25]
No Passing Zones are hereby established and shall be maintained upon the
following described streets or parts thereof.
a. Case Road. Along Case Road from North Lake Drive to Fourteenth
Street, a distance of approximately 2,960 feet, is hereby designated as a
No Passing Zone.
b. East Seventh Street. The entire length of East Seventh Street in both
direction from Park Avenue to Brook Road-Ridge Avenue, a distance of
approximately 4,580 feet, is hereby designated as a No Passing Zone.
c. Forest Avenue. The full expanse of Forest Avenue from North Lake
Drive to West Kennedy Boulevard, including First Street, Second
Street, Third Street, Fourth Street, Fifth Street, Sixth Street, Seventh
Street, Eighth Street, Ninth Street, Tenth Street, Eleventh Street,
Carey Street, Twelfth Street, Thirteenth Street, Fourteenth Street,
Fifteenth Street, County Road 526 (County Line Road), is hereby
designated s a No Passing Zone.
d. Laurelwood Avenue. On Laurelwood Avenue from Fourteenth Street,
120 feet north of the center of Fourteenth Street, a distance of
approximately 120 feet and 120 feet south of the Center of West County
Line Road to Kennedy Boulevard, a distance of approximately 370 feet.
e. Lehigh Avenue. The entire length of Lehigh Avenue in both directions
from the southerly intersection of Swarthmore Avenue to the northerly
intersection of Swarthmore Avenue, a distance of approximately 2,430
feet.
f. Lexington Avenue. No passing at all times on Lexington Avenue as per
sketch bearing drawing number NPZ-3552, dated November 24, 1998,
annexed hereto and made a part thereof.
g. Park Avenue. On Park Avenue as per sketch bearing drawing number
NPZ-3565, dated February 14, 1994, annexed hereto and made a part
hereof.40
h. Oberlin Avenue South-Oberlin Avenue North. The entire length of
Oberlin Avenue South - Oberlin Avenue North in both directions from:
1. New Hampshire Avenue (County Road 93) to the southerly
channelizing island at the approach to Cedar Bridge Road (County
Road 528), a distance of approximately 3,350 feet; and
40.Editor's Note: The sketch referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 11-30 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-31
AO:489
§ 11-32. TRAFFIC CONTROL CHANNELIZATION.
2. The northerly channelizing island at the approach of Cedar Bridge
Road (County Road 528) to Swarthmore Avenue, a distance of
approximately 1,730 feet.
i. Princeton Avenue. The following portions of Princeton Avenue:
1. On the east side of Princeton Avenue, from the northeasterly corner
of Eighth Street to the southeasterly corner of Squankum Road, a
distance of 470 feet.
2. On the east side of Princeton Avenue, from the northeasterly corner
of Squankum Road to the southeasterly corner of East Kennedy
Boulevard, a distance of 4,240 feet.
3. On the west side of Princeton Avenue, from the southeasterly
corner of East Kennedy Boulevard to the northwesterly corner of
Squankum Road, a distance of 4,240 feet.
4. On the west side of Princeton Avenue, from the southwesterly
corner of Squankum Road to a point 170 feet south thereof.
5. On the west side of Princeton Avenue, from the southwesterly
corner of Fifth Avenue to the northwesterly corner of Fourth Street,
a distance of 310 feet.
j. Princeton Avenue. On Princeton Avenue as per sketch bearing drawing
number NPZ-3555, dated December 15, 1993, annexed hereto and
made a part thereof.
k. Rutgers University Boulevard. The entire length of Rutgers University
Boulevard from the southerly intersection of Swarthmore Avenue to the
northerly intersection of Swarthmore Avenue, a distance of
approximately 4,860 feet.
l. Squankum Road. On Squankum Road as per sketch bearing drawing
number NPZ-1089A, dated January 5, 1994, annexed hereto and made a
part thereof.
m. Swarthmore Avenue. On Swarthmore Avenue from New Hampshire
Avenue to the easterly intersection of Lehigh Avenue, a distance of
approximately 9,240 feet.
n. Vassar Avenue. The entire length of Vassar Avenue in both directions
from the southerly intersection of Oberlin Avenue South to the
northerly intersection of Oberlin Avenue South, a distance of
approximately 4,080 feet.
o. Yale Drive. Along Yale Drive from Route U.S. 9 to Amherst Street, a
distance of approximately 620 feet, is hereby designated as a No
Passing Zone.
§ 11-31 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-32.1
AO:490
§ 11-32.1. Installation; Intersection Specified. [1971 Code
§ 11-13.1]
Traffic control channelization shall be installed and maintained and
enforced at the intersection of proposed Park Avenue and Railroad Street
improvement as shown on Sheet 6 of 6 of plans entitled "Traffic Marking
Details Park Avenue and Railroad Street," dated December 4, 1974,
prepared by Stanley B. Peters, P.E. & L.S.
§ 11-32.2. Public Record. [1971 Code § 11-13.2]
A copy of the aforementioned plans shall be on file in the Office of the
Township Clerk and in the Office of the Township Engineer.
§ 11-32.3. Statutory Authority. [1971 Code § 11-13.3]
The traffic channelization installation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of an act concerning motor vehicles and traffic regulations,
N.J.S.A. 39:1, shall conform to the design, and shall be maintained and in
operation, as authorized by the Department of Transportation.
§ 11-33. STUDENT DISCHARGE AND PICKUP. [Ord. No. 2012-8]
The locations described are hereby designated for the discharge and pickup
of students by private vehicle only. No vehicle other than passenger vehicles
which are picking up or discharging students shall be permitted to occupy
said location between the hours indicated.
Name of Street Side Days and Times Location
Thirteenth Street North Monday through
Thursday 7:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m.
Friday 7:00 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.
School days only,
Excluding holidays
Starting from the
northwest curbline
prolongation lines of
Thirteenth Street
and Squankum Road
to a point extending
117 feet west.
§ 11-34. (RESERVED)
§ 11-35. HANDICAPPED PARKING.
§ 11-35.1. Handicapped Parking on Streets. [1971 Code § 11-19;
New; Ord. No. 97-45; Ord. No. 97-51; Ord. No. 2009-61 § 1; Ord. No.
2015-72]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following onstreet
locations are designated as handicapped parking places. Such spaces
are for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or
plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard
§ 11-32.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-35.1
AO:491
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in
these places.
Street No. of Spaces Location
Carey Street [Ord.
No. 2013-69]
1 Parking shall on the north side of
Carey Street starting at a point 70
feet east from the prolongation lines
of Clifton Avenue and Carey Street
continuing for 20 feet easterly
thereof.
Clifton Avenue 1 In front of 102 Clifton Avenue.
Clifton Avenue 1 In front of 203 Clifton Avenue.
Clifton Avenue 1 In front of 406 Clifton Avenue.
Clifton Avenue 1 In front of 435 Clifton Avenue.
Clifton Avenue
[Added
10-3-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-37]
1 In front of 804 Clifton Avenue
Clifton Avenue
[Ord. No.
2002-32 § 3]
1 Space located 148 feet north of the
southeast corner of Clifton Avenue
and State Highway 88 for a distance
of 20 feet.
Dewey Avenue
[Ord. No.
2015-72]
1 In front of 300 Dewey Avenue
Eleventh Street
[Ord. No. 2010-2
§ 1]
On the south side of Eleventh Street
starting to a point 267 feet from the
most southerly crosswalk line of the
southeast corner of Eleventh Street
and Forest Avenue and continuing
for a distance of 20 feet easterly as
shown on the plan which is part of
this subsection.
Fifth Street [Ord.
No. 97-45]
On the southerly side of Fifth Street,
beginning at a point 295 feet east of
the southerly curbline of Fifth
Street and North Lake Drive
extending to a point 22 feet thereof.
First Presbyterian
Church
In front of the First Presbyterian
Church.
§ 11-35.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-35.1
AO:492
Street No. of Spaces Location
Forest Avenue On the easterly side of Forest
Avenue, beginning at a distance of
125 feet north of the intersection of
the northerly curbline of North Lake
Drive and the easterly curbline of
Forest Avenue, and continuing in a
northerly direction along the
easterly curbline of Forest Avenue
for a distance of 22 feet and
terminating at this point.
Forest Avenue
[Ord. No.
2005-109 § 1]
On the easterly side of Forest
Avenue, beginning at a point 55 feet
and extending in a southerly
direction for 20 feet from the
prolongation of the curblines of the
southeast corner.
Forest Park Circle
and Branchwood
Lane [Ord. No.
2012-25]
1 Parking stall on the southwest side
of the intersection of Forest Park
Circle and Branchwood Lane
starting at a point 25 feet from the
most southerly crosswalk line of the
southwest corner of Forest Park
Circle and Branchwood Lane and
continuing for a distance of 20 feet
southerly thereof.
Forest Park Circle
and Hazelwood
Lane [Ord. No.
2012-7]
1 Parking stall on the southwest side
of the intersection of Forest Park
Circle and Hazelwood Lane starting
at a point 25 feet from the most
southerly crosswalk line of the
southwest corner of Forest Park
Circle and Hazelwood Lane and
continuing for a distance of 20 feet
southerly thereof.
Long Beach
Avenue [Added
12-5-2019 by
Ord. No.
2019-53]
2 Northeast side of the intersection of
Long Beach Avenue and Joe Parker
Road starting at a point 103 feet
from the prolongation line of the
intersection of Long Beach Avenue
and Joe Parker Road continuing a
distance of 44 feet easterly thereof
§ 11-35.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-35.1
AO:493
Street No. of Spaces Location
Monmouth Avenue Westerly side of Monmouth Avenue
beginning at a point 115 feet north
of the northerly curbline of Seventh
Street extending to a point 50 feet
north thereof.
Private Way [Ord.
No. 2005-109
§ 1]
On the easterly side of Private Way,
beginning at a point of the
prolongation lines of the northeast
corner of Private Way and Fifth
Street starting a distance of 154
feet north on Private Way and
continuing for 20 feet.
Ridge Avenue
[Ord. No.
2009-12 § 1]
One on-street space located on the
south side of Ridge Avenue starting
at a point 50 feet from the most
southerly crosswalk line of the
southeast corner of Park Avenue
and Ridge Avenue. (See attached
plan)
State Highway 88 South side of State Highway 88
(Main Street) beginning 35 feet
from the easterly curbline of
Lexington Avenue to a point 22 feet
easterly therefrom.
Willow Court
[Ord. No.
2010-27 § 1]
One parking stall on the west side of
Willow Court starting at a point 50
feet from the most northerly
crosswalk of the southwest corner
of Willow Court and Pine Park
Avenue and continuing southerly for
20 feet. See Schedule A attached.
§ 11-35.2. Handicapped Parking in Municipal Parking Lots and
Board of Education Property. [1971 Code § 11-9, 11-19]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 the following offstreet
parking yards and Board of Education property are designated as
Handicapped Parking Areas. Such spaces are for use by persons who have
been issued special identification cards, plates or placards issued by the
Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of
Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
§ 11-35.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-35.2
AO:494
Property No. of Spaces Location
Lakewood High School
Parking Lot A
4 Four handicapped spaces are
herewith designated as shown on
the color coded map as revised
on April 20, 1993.
Lakewood Middle
School Parking Lot B
2 Two handicapped parking spaces
reserved in aisle #5 where
indicated on the site plan.
Municipal Building off
Third Street
5 First Row: beginning at the
southerly end of the west side of
the Municipal Building off Third
Street, and continuing northerly
for a distance of 68 feet shall be
designated for handicapped
parking and shall consist of five
ten (10') foot wide stalls
separated by three (3') foot wide
access areas on each side
thereof, and to be designated as
Handicapped Stalls 1 through 5
inclusive.
Second Street
Municipal Lot
1 The first parking space on the
easterly side of the lot.
Second Street Parking
Facility
2 Two spaces, Number 21 and
Number 27 at the Second Street
Parking Facility, as shown on the
site plan which is attached
hereto and made a part hereof by
reference. Each space shall be a
minimum of 12 feet wide.
West of Library
Building on Second
Street
1 Stall Number 14.
Westerly end of
Municipal Building
2 Westerly end of the Municipal
Building.
§ 11-35.3. Handicapped Parking on Private Property Open to the
Public and to Which the Public is Invited (Retail Business). [1971
Code § 11-19]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following offstreet
parking spaces are designated as handicapped parking areas. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the \Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
§ 11-35.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-35.3
AO:495
Property No. of Spaces Location*
Clifton Avenue
Shopping Center
3 As shown on the site plan which
is made part of this chapter by
reference.
Cross River Mill 4 As shown on the site plan which
is made part of this chapter by
reference.
Jamesway Plaza 4 As shown on the site plan which
is made part of this chapter by
reference.
Lakewood Plaza
Shopping Center
6 As shown on the site plan which
is made part of this chapter by
reference.
Lakewood Plaza II As shown on the site plan which
is made part of this chapter by
reference.
Leisure Square Mall 2 As shown on the site plan which
is made part of this chapter by
reference.
Seagull Square Mall 14 As shown on the site plan map
prepared by H. Thomas Carr,
Civil Engineer, dated July 16,
1986, and which is made a part
of this chapter by reference.
Shop Rite Foodarama 7 As shown on the site plan which
is made part of this chapter by
reference.
Editor's Note: Site plans are on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
Handicapped parking spaces shall be a minimum of twelve (12') feet wide.
In any space on public or private property appropriately marked for vehicles
for the physically handicapped pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5, N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119 et seq., or any other applicable law unless the vehicle is
authorized by law to be parked therein and a handicapped person is either
the driver or a passenger in that vehicle, State, county, municipal law
enforcement officers or parking enforcement officers shall enforce the
parking restrictions on spaces appropriately marked for vehicles for the
physically handicapped on both public and private property.
No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any such
prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
§ 11-35.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-35.4
AO:496
§ 11-35.4. Handicapped Parking on All Other Private Property. [Ord.
No. 2003-67 § 1]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1; the following offstreet
parking locations are designated as handicapped parking. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
a. John F. Kennedy Apartment Complex. All stalls shall be twelve (12') feet
wide as shown on the site plan and signed with R7-8 and R7-8(P)
(Reserved Parking sign and penalty plate), in the designated parking
areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped parking
permits by the Motor Vehicle Commission as shown on the site plan on
file in the Township Clerk's office.
b. Peter Ward Development. All stalls shall be twelve (12') feet wide as
shown on the site plan and signed with R7-8 and R7-8(P) (Reserved
Parking sign and penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for
persons who have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the
Motor Vehicle Commission as shown on the site plan on file in the
Township Clerk's office.
c. John Curry Apartments. All stalls shall be twelve (12') feet wide as
shown on the site plan and signed with R7-8 and R7-8(P) (Reserved
Parking sign and penalty plate), in the designated areas for persons
who have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the Motor
Vehicle Commission as shown on the site plan on file in the Township
Clerk's office.
d. Lulu Duffy Apartments. All stalls shall be twelve (12') feet wide as
shown on the site plan and signed with R7-8 and R7-8(P) (Reserved
Parking sign and penalty plate), in the designated areas for persons
who have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the Motor
Vehicle Commission as shown on the site plan on file in the Township
Clerk's office.
e. Four Seasons Development.
1. Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be twelve (12') feet wide as
shown on the site plan entitled "Amended Composite Development
Plan Section Thirteen" on file in the Traffic and Safety Division of
the Lakewood Police Department, and signed with R7-8 and
R7-8(P) (Reserved Parking sign and penalty plate), in the
designated parking areas for persons who have been issued the
handicapped parking permits by the Motor Vehicle Commission.
2. Club House Parking Lot. Stalls 1 and 2 south end, west side, shall
be designated as "handicapped," as per the site plan referenced
above.
§ 11-35.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-35.4
AO:497
§ 11-35.5. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and
Maintenance. [New]
The owners of the premises referred to in Subsections 7-35.3 and 7-35.4
shall provide and install signs and pavement markings for each parking
space reserved for the use of handicapped persons, which signs and
markings shall be in accordance with the manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement
markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of said property. The
owner shall subsequent to initial procurement and installation, maintain
such signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense
to the Township of Lakewood. The owner shall be responsible for the repair
and restoration or replacement of same.
§ 11-35.6. Restricted Parking Zones in Front of Residences
Occupied by Handicapped Persons. [Ord. No. 97-39; Ord. No.
2016-41; Ord. No. 2016-41; Ord. No. 2014-80]
The following locations are hereby established as restricted parking zones
for handicapped individuals in front of their residence pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-197.6. No person shall be permitted to use the restricted parking area
who does not possess a windshield placard or wheelchair symbol license
plate with the permit number issued by the Motor Vehicle Commission for
the vehicle owned by the handicapped person residing in the residence,
or owned by another occupant of the residence who is a member of the
immediate family of the handicapped person.
Name of Street Side Location
Arlington Avenue [Ord. No. 2016-41]
Brisk Lane (Permit
#P1313753) [Ord. No.
2014-83]
West Provide an on street handicapped
parking stall on the west side of
Brisk Lane starting at point 140
feet from the most southerly
prorogated curb lines of Kelm Wood
Avenue/Brisk Lane and continuing
for 20 feet northerly.
f. Highpoint Condo Complex. On the southerly side of High Point Condo
Complex, beginning at a point 423 feet east of the prolongation of the
easterly curbline of Massachusetts Avenue on the south side of the
parking lot and extending nine feet thereof for handicapped placard
permit #442083 labeled spot #29.
§ 11-35.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-35.6
AO:498
Name of Street Side Location
Fifth Street [Ord. No.
2008-13 § 1]
North In front of 617 Fifth Street,
beginning on the north side of Fifth
Street starting at a point of the
prolongation lines of the northwest
corner of Private Way and Fifth
Street starting at a distance of 237
feet west on Fifth Street and
continuing for 20 feet westerly.
Fifth Street [Ord. No.
2011-18 § 1]
North On the north side of Fifth Street
starting at a point 605 feet west
from the prolongation lines of Fifth
Street and Private Way continuing
for 20 feet westerly, and specifically
designated for Permit #P655121.
(As shown on the map attached as
Schedule A on file in the Township
offices.)
Princeton Avenue
[Ord. No. 2004-89
§ 1]
In front of 900 Princeton Avenue,
beginning at a point 140 feet from
Squankum Road and extending 20
feet thereof.
Sixth Street [Ord. No.
2008-13 § 1]
West In front of 498 Sixth Street on the
west side, beginning at a point 100
feet south of the prolongation lines
of the southwest corner of Forest
Avenue and Sixth Street and
continuing 20 feet in a southerly
direction from the point.
Sixth Street (Permit
#T1041972)
South Provide an on street handicapped
parking stall on the south side of
Sixth Street starting at point 50
feet from the prorogated curb lines
of Forest Avenue and Sixth Street
and continuing 20 feet in a westerly
direction (in front of 498 Sixth
Street).
§ 11-35.7. Penalty for Violations. [Ord. No. 2004-5 § 1]
Any person parking a motor vehicle in a restricted parking space without
a special vehicle identification card shall be liable to a fine of $250 for the
first offense and for subsequent offenses a fine of at least $250 and up to 90
days community service on such terms and in such form as the court shall
deem appropriate, or any combination thereof.
§ 11-36. (RESERVED)
§ 11-35.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-37
AO:499
§ 11-37. CONTROL FOR MOVEMENT AND THE PARKING OF
TRAFFIC ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
§ 11-37.1. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic
on Municipal Property and Board of Education Property. [1971 Code
§§ 11-9, 11-26; Ord. No. 97-25; Ord. No. 98-44; Ord. No. 2004-42
§§ 1-5; Ord. No. 2012-59]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
Municipal and Board of Education property shall have the movement of
traffic controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall
operate, or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated.
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked on the Township-owned
property that is designated as a no parking zone.
Any person who parks a motor vehicle or permits a motor vehicle to be
parked in such a designated area is in violation of the provisions of this
subsection.
Each designated area will be marked by a sign that indicates that it is a tow
away zone.
Any vehicle found in violation of this subsection shall be towed at the vehicle
owner's expense.
All violators of this subsection shall be subject to a penalty of $20 for each
violation.
Part 1. Municipal Parking Lots
a. Regulation of Municipal Parking Lots.
1. General Regulations.
(a) It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in any position or
area in a public parking lot except within the painted lines
or pavement markings.
(b) It shall be unlawful to enter or exit from public parking lots
except by using proper roadway designated by sign and as
defined for each lot in this section.
(c) No person shall park any truck having a gross weight of
over two and a half (2 1/2) tons in weight load on any
public parking lot.
(d) It shall be unlawful to use municipal parking lots and
municipal planted areas in designated parking lots for play
or recreation purposes, except in the event of a specifically
approved activity by the Township Committee of the
Township of Lakewood.
§ 11-37 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-37.1
AO:500
2. Clifton Avenue and Fourth Street. Entrances and exits to
Clifton Avenue and Fourth Street parking lots are as follows:
(a) Third Street side entrance is so designated and curb
opening for entrance only is situated on the Third Street
side of the municipal parking lot.
(b) Two entrances/exits on the Fourth Street side are so
designated and the curb openings are situated at the
westernmost and the easternmost portions of the parking
lot on Fourth Street.
(c) (Reserved)
(d) Parking for Police Department Vehicles, Inspection
Department and Municipal Manager's office.
(1) The numbered parking stalls located at the
easternmost portion of the municipal parking lot, and
the numbered parking stalls abutting the Inspection
Building, as shown on the map prepared by French &
Parrello Associates, P.A., dated June 14, 1990, and
updated on June 1, 1995, annexed hereto and made a
part hereof by reference, shall be utilized for the
parking of police vehicles only.
(2) The parking stalls located at the northwest corner,
northernmost portion and northeast corner of,
respectively, the sections of the municipal parking lot
abutting the Inspection Building, facing Fourth Street
and facing Lexington Avenue, and numbered R1
through R13, inclusive thereof, as shown on the map
prepared by French & Parrello Associates, P.A., dated
June 14, 1990, and updated on June 1, 1995, annexed
hereto and made a part hereof by reference, shall be
designated as "Reserved Parking" for employees of the
Inspection Department and Municipal Manager's
Office only.
(3) The 10 parking stalls located between the areas
described pursuant to Subsections (1) and (2)
hereinabove, and numbered PD1 through PD10,
inclusive hereof, and the remaining parking stalls
located at the northeast corner of the municipal
parking lot facing Lexington Avenue, and numbered
PD11 through PD18, inclusive thereof, as shown on
the map prepared by French & Parrello Associates,
P.A., dated June 14, 1990, and updated on June 1,
1995, annexed hereto and made a part hereof by
reference, shall be utilized for the parking of vehicles
belonging to civilian employees of the Police
Department, Police vehicles and vehicles confiscated
§ 11-37.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-37.1
AO:501
by the Police Department or other law enforcement
agencies only.
(e) Parking for Inspection Department. Four parking stalls on
the westernmost portion of the parking lot on Fourth
Street are designated as, and reserved for, public use for
Inspection Services with an accompanying 30 minute time
limit, as designated on the map prepared by French &
Parrello Associates, P.A., dated June 14, 1990, which is
annexed hereto and made a part hereof by reference.
3. Second Street Parking Facility.
(a) Attached hereto and made a part hereof is a map entitled
"Reference Area G and Reference Area J" pursuant to the
Lakewood Downtown Public Improvement Project,
prepared by Beyer, Blinder, & Belle, dated August 31, 1984
and amended September 6, 1984, revised September 12,
1985; and more specifically a map entitled "Second Street
Parking Facility" dated April 21, 1986 prepared by Lt.
Bernard Gindoff, copies of which are on file with the
Township Clerk's office.
(b) It shall be unlawful to enter or exit from the parking lot
except as follows:
(1) The driveway into said parking lot from Second Street
lot be an entrance and exit.
(2) The easterly driveway on Third Street, aka Parking Lot
No. 1 (as set forth on referenced maps) is hereby
designated as an entrance and exit.
(3) The westerly driveway on Third Street, aka Parking
Lot No. 2 (as set forth on referenced maps), about to
be constructed, is hereby designated as an entrance
and an exit from the parking lot onto Third Street.
(c) Exits and entrances as above set forth shall have standard
signs placed appropriately indicating same. The direction
of travel within the parking lots shall be two-way in all
areas, which shall be indicated by directional arrows
painted on the pavement. No person shall drive a motor
vehicle in the roadway portion of the parking lot except in
the directions indicated by the arrows.
(d) No motor vehicle shall park in the parking lot except
within the area between the white lines for parking areas
and the motor vehicle shall not be parked so as to extend
over any rear of the parking area and if no line designates
the rear of said parking area, no motor vehicle shall be
§ 11-37.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-37.1
AO:502
parked so as to extend past the rear end of the parallel line
between which said motor vehicle is parked.
(e) The time limit for parking motor vehicles within the
confines of the parking lot shall be as follows:
(1) The designated parking stalls hereinafter set forth
shall be used for the designated hours of parking
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., except
for taxicab stalls.
(2) The stalls shall be those shown on the map prepared
by Sgt. Richard G. Smith, Badge No. 027, Traffic and
Safety Officer, in accordance with a report dated May
1, 1990 regarding the Second Street Parking Facility,
made part of said map by reference herein.
(i) Parking Lot No. 1:
Stalls: 1 through 7 1 hour parking
8 through 19 Rescinding Taxicab
Parking
37 through 40 Taxicab Parking
(ONLY)
20 through 40 1 hour parking
41 through 56 1 hour parking
59 through 70 2 hour parking
57, 71, 72 Handicapped Parking
73 1 hour parking
(ii) Parking Lot No. 2:
Stalls: 1 through 29 4 hour parking
30 through 38 2 hour parking
(f) There shall be no automobile repair on any motor vehicle
while situated in any parking lot stall or within the parking
lot proper, except as in emergency situations.
(g) Any motor vehicle parked in the parking lot for a period in
excess of the designated time limit for parking or parked in
an unlawful manner shall be in violation of this section.
Any vehicle unlawfully parked may be towed from the
parking lot at the reasonable expense of the owner of the
motor vehicle, and placed in a garage or place for storage
of motor vehicles at the direction of the Chief of Police or
any police officer in charge of the duty shift at the time the
violations are brought to the attention of the Police
Department.
§ 11-37.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-37.1
AO:503
(h) No motor vehicle shall be parked in the parking lot when
the parking lot is covered with snow. Any motor vehicle left
parked in the parking lot when the parking lot is covered
with snow may be towed from the parking lot at the
reasonable expense of the owner of the motor vehicle or
placed in a garage or place for storage of motor vehicles as
otherwise provided above. In addition, a summons shall be
issued to any person found to be the operator or owner of a
motor vehicle parked or operated in violation of any of the
provisions of this section.
4. Second Street and Lexington Avenue. Entrance and exit to
Second Street and Lexington Avenue parking lot are as follows:
(a) Entrance to Second Street and Lexington Avenue parking
lot is so designated and curb opening is situated on Second
Street.
(b) Exit to Second Street and Lexington Avenue parking lot is
so designated and curb opening is situated on Lexington
Avenue.
5. Main Street. Entrance and exit to Main Street parking lot are
at opening on Main Street. Both entrance and exit are so
designated which shall be separated by a concrete island.
6. Steckler Street. Entrance and exit to Steckler Street parking
lot is through common driveway which is designated.
7. East Fourth Street and East Fifth Street. Entrance and exit to
East Fourth Street and East Fifth Street are as follows:
(a) Entrance to East Fourth Street and East Fifth Street
parking lot is so designated and curb opening is situated
on East Fifth Street.
8. Fifth Street. Entrance and exit to the Fifth Street parking lot is
as follows:
(a) Entrance to Fifth Street parking lot is so designated and
curb opening is situated at the most westerly part of the
lot on Fifth Street.
(b) Exit to Fifth Street parking lot is so designated and curb
opening is so situated at the most easterly part of the lot
and Fifth Street.
9. First Street and Lexington Avenue Parking Lot. Parking lot
entrances and exits are as follows:
(a) There shall be two driveway openings onto First Street
from the parking lot which shall be used for both
entrances and exits to and from the parking lot.
§ 11-37.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-37.1
AO:504
(b) The driveway openings onto Lexington Avenue of the
parking lot which opening is also known as Division Street
shall be used for both entrance and exit to and from the
parking lot, and the Division Street opening into the
parking lot on the easterly side of the parking lot to
Railroad Plaza shall also be used as an entrance and exit to
and from the parking lot.
(c) The following parking spaces are intended on having a one
hour time limit for parking:
(1) The nine regular 90 degree parking spaces located on
Lot 16 adjacent to Lots 1, 2, 3 and 4.
(2) The remaining parking spaces on this lot are intended
to have no time limit. [Ord. No. 2012-59]
10. Second Street Parking Lot on the South Side Approximately
200 feet East of Clifton Avenue. Entrance and exit to this
Second Street parking lot are at driveway east of Hurlburt's
Stationery Store property so designated.
(a) The municipal parking lot between Third Street and
Second Street (west of Clifton Avenue) shall have 2 hour
parking in the 23 spaces closest to Second Street
(including 13 parking spaces on the east side of the
parking lot and the first 10 parking spaces after the 2
existing handicap spaces on the west side of the parking
lot). [Ord. No. 2015-4 § 3]
11. Parking Lot West of Library Building on Second Street.
(a) There is hereby created in the Township an additional new
parking lot to be known as the Parking Lot West of Library
Building on Second Street, which parking lot shall be
situated immediately adjacent to the west side wall of the
Lakewood Public Library on Second Street and have
provisions for parking of 18 automobiles as laid out on
plans on file in the Township Clerk's office entitled "Plan of
Parking Lot West of Library Building on Second Street"
dated April 27, 1978, prepared by Daniel A. DeSessa,
Township Engineer. The entrance and exit for the parking
lot shall be from Second Street and the exit area onto
Second Street is designated as a stop intersection and a
stop sign shall be erected north of the sidewalk at the exit
onto Second Street.
(b) Parking Time Limits. It is further ordained that parking
stalls 1 through and including number 13 be designated as
one-hour parking and parking stalls number 15 through
and including number 18 be designated as two-hour
parking.
§ 11-37.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-37.1
AO:505
During the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. parking stalls
number 1 through 18 shall be designated as parking stalls
for employees of Kimball Neighborhood Health Center.
Parking stall 14 shall remain as a handicapped parking
stall for the use of employees during the hours of 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00 p.m. [Ord. No. 2002-39 § 3]
12. Inspection and Welfare Department Parking Lot on Fourth
Street. There is hereby created in the Township a parking lot to
be known as the Inspection and Welfare Department Parking
Lot on Fourth Street, which parking lot shall be situated
immediately adjacent to the west wall of the Inspection and
Welfare Department Building, on Fourth Street, (also known as
Annex Building) and have provisions for the parking of 13
automobiles as laid out on plans on file in the Township Clerk's
office entitled "Site Plan Municipal Building Lots 2-4, 6-7,
10-15, Block 119, Scale 1" = 20', dated August 1977, prepared
by Robert B. Powers, PE & LS 9463.
(a) Restricted Parking. Parking of automobiles in said stalls,
number 1 through and including number 13 shall be
restricted to "personnel or visitors of the Inspection and
Welfare Departments" from 8:00 a.m. until 4:30 p.m. daily
except Saturday, Sunday and holidays. All vehicles must
park in designated areas. Vehicles permitted to park must
be properly identified.
13. Lakewood Library.
(a) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between
the lines provided.
(b) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described below:
Name of
Street
Sides Hours Location
Front of
driveway
East All Beginning 150 feet north
of the northerly curbline
of Third Street and
extending 160 feet north
therefrom.
(c) Tow Away Zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to
obstruct or impede a normal flow of traffic, block
entrances or exit ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy
area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a safety or
traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at the
owner's expense.
§ 11-37.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-37.1
AO:506
(d) Loading Zone(s). The locations described are hereby
designated as Loading Zones. No person shall park a
vehicle in said location at all times other than for the
loading and unloading of goods and materials.
As shown on the attached plan.41
(e) All signs, posts or other necessary materials be installed
and paid for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to
the current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
14. Parking Regulations - Engine Company No. 1. The following
parking regulations shall apply to the parking lot located at
Engine Company No. 1, Monmouth Avenue and First Street:
(a) All vehicles must park only in designated areas and
between the lines provided.
(b) (Reserved)
(c) All signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be
installed and paid for by the applicant. Work shall be
checked by the Police Department to insure that
installations meet State and Federal specifications, and all
signs shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices.
15. First Street Municipal Parking Lot.
(a) Attached hereto and made a part hereof is a color coded
map prepared by William T. Birdsall, P.E., dated February
8, 2001, a copy of which is on file in the Township Clerk's
Office.
(b) No vehicles shall stop or stand in the areas (outlined in
red) as indicated on the attached site plan above
referenced in Subsection (a) above.
(c) The roadways and driveways shall be designated one-way
as indicated on the site plan referenced in Subsection (a)
above.
(1) Entrance opening shall be one-way in from First
Street.
(2) Exit opening shall be one-way out onto Clifton Avenue.
(d) All vehicles must park within the painted lines for
designated parking stalls only.
41.Editor's Note: Plan on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 11-37.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-37.1
AO:507
(e) There shall be two handicapped spaces herewith
designated (as shown in blue) which are numbered 1 and
2, as indicated on the site plan referenced in Subsection
(a) above. The handicapped spaces shall be located in the
northeast corner and marked for handicapped persons
with proper identification, only in the Municipal Lot.
(f) Parking stalls numbered 3 through and including number
27 are designated as two-hour parking. [Ord. No. 2015-4
§ 4]
(g) No left turns shall be permitted when exiting the parking
lot onto Clifton Avenue.
(h) There shall be no motor vehicle repairs on any vehicle
while situated in any parking stall or within the parking
lot.
(i) No person shall park any truck having a gross weight of
over two and one-half (2 1/2) tons in weight on any portion
of the parking lot, unless it is unloading with a maximum
time limit of 30 minutes.
(j) The following parking spaces are intended on having a two
hour time limit for parking: [Ord. No. 2012-59]
(1) The seven regular 90 degree parking spaces located
on Lot 7 just south of Lot 6.
(2) The nine regular 90 degree parking spaces located on
Lot 8 at the eastern portion of the lot just north of Lot
9.
(3) The remaining parking spaces on this lot are intended
to have no time limit.
16. Block 93 Lots 5 and 6.02 with access to 5th Street. The
following parking spaces are intended on having a two hour
time limit for parking:
(a) The seven regular parking spaces located along the
eastern property line adjacent to Lots 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11.
(b) The remaining parking spaces on this lot are intended to
have no time limit. [Ord. No. 2012-59]
17. Block 92 Lot 5 with access to 4th Street. The following parking
spaces are intended on having a two hour time limit for
parking: [Ord. No. 2002-42 § 1; Ord. No. 2014-2]
(a) The nine regular 90 degree parking spaces located along
the northern property line adjacent to 4th Street.
§ 11-37.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-37.1
AO:508
(b) The six regular 90 degree parking spaces located along
the eastern property line near Lot 3.
(c) The remaining parking spaces on this lot are intended to
have no time limit. [Ord. No. 2012-59]
18. Fifth Street Municipal Parking Lot.
(a) West side of lot, there shall be 12 parking stalls designated
as long term permit parking for tenants of 418 Clinton
Ave., LLC. Permits may be obtained from the office of the
Lakewood Development Corp. Violators will be subject to
towing at the owner's expense.
(b) West side of lot shall have one parking stall designated,
which is free with no limit.
(c) Center aisle of lot, there shall be 21 parking stalls
designated, which are free with no limit.
(d) East side of lot there shall be eight parking stalls
designated for two hour parking. Violators shall be subject
to towing at the owner's expense.
(e) On the east side of the lot, two parking stalls shall be
designated for handicap parking stalls. [Ord. No.
2015-12; Ord. No. 2015-34]
b. Parking Time Limited.
1. Main Street Parking Lot. Two hours from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
except legal holidays and Sundays.
2. Clifton Avenue and Fourth Street Parking Lot. Two hours from
9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. except legal holidays and Sundays.
3. Second Street and Lexington Avenue Parking Lot. Two hours
from 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. except legal holidays and Sundays.
4. Fifth Street Parking Lot. 12 hours.
5. East Fourth Street and East Fifth Street Parking Lot. 12 hours.
6. Steckler Street Parking Lot. 12 hours.
7. First Street and Lexington Avenue Parking Lot.
(a) Attached hereto and made a part hereof is a map entitled
"Plan Showing Proposed Overlay and New Parking
Alignment for Existing Parking Lot Corner of First Street
and Lexington Avenue" prepared by Stanley B. Peters,
dated April 15, 1983, a copy of which is on file in the
Township Clerk's office.
§ 11-37.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-37.1
AO:509
(b) 24 hour parking shall be allowed, except as is hereinafter
designated, but continuous parking in excess of 24 hours
at any one time in the parking lot is prohibited. Those
parking spaces referenced by the aforementioned map and
designated as northerly angular parking stalls, during the
hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. except legal holidays and
Sundays, be limited to two hours.
Those parking spaces referenced by the aforementioned
map and designated as easterly right angular parking
stalls, during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. except
legal holidays, Saturday and Sunday be reserved for
Lakewood Township municipal employees.
8. Second Street Parking Lot Situated on the South Side
Approximately 200 Feet East of Clifton Avenue. 15 minutes
from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. weekdays except legal holidays
and Sundays.
9. Parking Lot West of Library Building on Second Street. Parking
stalls number 1 through and including number 13) be
designated as one hour parking and parking stalls number 15
through and including number 18 be designated as two hour
parking.
c. No Stopping or Standing.
1. Parking Lot West of Library Building on Second Street. The
rectangular area at the southwest corner of the library
building measuring approximately 26.5 feet to the north and
approximately ten (10') feet west of the building be designated
a "No Stopping or Standing Area" and striped with yellow
paint, as indicated in the aforementioned plan on file in the
Township Clerk's office. [1971 Code § 11-9; § 11-26]
Part 2. School Parking Lots.
a. Lakewood High School Parking Lot A.
1. Attached hereto and made a part hereof is a color coded map
entitled "Lakewood High School Front Lot Parking Lot A"
prepared by Richard Rizzuto, dated January 31, 1983, latest
revision April 30, 1993, a copy of which is on file in the
Township Clerk's office.
2. No vehicles shall stop or stand in areas (outlined in red) as
indicated on the attached site plan above referenced in
Subsection a1.
3. All reserved student, visitor and staff parking areas are
herewith designated as shown on the color coded map
referenced above as revised on April 20, 1993.
§ 11-37.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-37.1
AO:510
4. All vehicles must park within painted lines on the roadways in
the parking areas.
b. Lakewood High School Parking Lot B.
1. Attached hereto and made a part hereof is a map entitled
"Lakewood High School Parking Lot B," prepared by Samuel B.
Wittin, dated January 31, 1982; a copy of which is on file in the
Township Clerk's office.
2. No vehicles shall stop or stand in areas outlined in red as
indicated on the attached site plan above referenced in
Subsection b1.
3. The roadways indicated on the attached site plan shall be
designated as one-way in the direction shown therein.
4. All vehicles shall park within the painted lines on the roadway
and in the designated parking areas.
5. All vehicles parked in aisle #5 must display properly a current
valid decal or other identification issued by the school
authorities.
c. Lakewood Middle School Parking Lot A.
1. Attached hereto and made a part hereof is a map prepared by
Richard O'Brien, dated February 2, 1983, entitled "Middle
School - East Seventh Parking Lot"; a copy of which is on file in
the Township Clerk's office.
2. No vehicles shall stop or stand in the areas outlined in red as
indicted on the attached site plan referred to in Subsection c1
above.
3. The driveways of Parking Lot A as shown on the attached site
plan are hereby designated as entrances and exits only as
indicated thereon.
4. All vehicles must park within the painted lines on the roadway
and in the designated parking area.
d. Lakewood Middle School Parking Lot B.
1. Attached hereto and made a part hereof is a map entitled
"Lakewood Middle School - Parking Lot" prepared by Mike
Deus, approved by Ptl. Richard G. Smith; a copy of which is on
file in the Township Clerk's office.
2. No vehicles shall stop or stand in the areas outlined in red as
indicated on the attached site plan above referenced in
Subsection d1.
§ 11-37.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-37.1
AO:511
3. All vehicles must park within the painted lines on the roadway
and in the designated parking areas.
e. Clifton Avenue School Parking Lot.
1. Attached hereto and made a part hereof is a map entitled
"Clifton Avenue School - Parking Lot" prepared by Samuel B.
Wittin, dated February 2, 1983, a copy of which is on file in the
Township Clerk's office.
2. No vehicles shall stop or stand in the areas outlined in red as
indicated on the attached site plan above referenced in
Subsection e1.
3. The roadways and driveways shall be designated one-way as
indicated on the attached site plan in the directions shown.
4. All vehicles must park within the painted lines on the roadways
and in the designated parking areas.
5. All vehicles parked on the property of the Clifton Avenue
School must display properly a current valid decal or other
identification issued by the school authorities.
f. Ella G. Clarke School Parking Lot.
1. Attached hereto and made a part hereof is a map entitled
"Clarke School - Parking Lot" drawn by Mike Rotunno, dated
January 31, 1983, a copy of which is on file in the Township
Clerk's office.
2. No vehicles shall stop or stand in the areas outlined in red as
indicated on the attached site plan above referenced.
3. All vehicles must park within the painted lines on the roadway
and in the designated parking areas.
g. Spruce Street School - Parking Lot.
1. Attached hereto and made a part hereof is a map entitled
"Spruce Street School - Parking Lot" drawn by Richard Rizzuto,
dated February 3, 1983, a copy of which is on file in the
Township Clerk's office.
2. No vehicles shall stop or stand in the areas outlined in red as
indicated on the attached site plan above referenced.
3. The roadways and driveways shall be designated one-way as
indicated on the attached site plan in the direction shown.
4. All vehicles must park within the painted lines on the roadways
and in the designated parking areas.
§ 11-37.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-37.1
AO:512
§ 11-37.2. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic
on Private Property Open to the Public and to Which the Public is
Invited (Retail Business). [1971 Code § 11-12B]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, on the following
private property that is open to the public and to which the public is invited,
the movement of traffic shall be controlled by the types of regulations
indicated. No person shall operate or park a vehicle in violation of the
following regulations.
Property Regulations
(Reserved)
5. Parking Lot B is hereby designated for school officials only as
indicated on the attached site plan. All vehicles shall bear
proper identification.
a. Seagull Square Plaza.
1. No Stopping or Standing. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at
any time in any of the described areas.
(a) Those areas as shown on the current site plan map prepared by
H. Thomas Carr, Civil Engineer, dated July 16, 1986, and filed
in the Township Clerk's office, which is made a part of this
schedule by reference.
b. Lakewood Plaza.
1. No Stopping or Standing. No person shall stop or stand any vehicle
at any time in the described areas.
(a) Building No. 1.
(1) A rectangular area, 189 feet long by 30 feet in width,
located between the easterly sidewalk, a distance of 189
feet (off the easterly wall of the building) and the curbing
opposite, a distance of 30 feet at right angles thereto.
(2) A rectangular area, 558 feet long by 30 feet in width,
located between the southerly sidewalk, a distance of 558
feet, (off the southerly wall of the building) and the curbing
for the parking area opposite, a distance of 30 feet at right
angles thereto.
(3) A rectangular area, 104 feet long and 25 feet in width,
located between the southerly sidewalk, a distance of 104
feet (off the southerly wall of the building) and a line in the
driveway more southerly, a distance of 25 feet at right
angles thereto.
(b) Building No. 2.
§ 11-37.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-37.2
AO:513
§ 11-37.3. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic
on All Other Private Property. [1971 Code §§ 11-9.8; 11-9.9; 11-22;
11-26; Ord. No. 97-50; Ord. No. 2012-56]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 the regulations of
Subtitle 1 of the Title 39 are hereby made applicable to the properties listed
below.
(1) A rectangular area, 499 feet long and 25 feet in width
located between the easterly sidewalk, a distance of 499
feet, (off the easterly wall of the building) and the parking
pavement opposite a distance of 25 feet at right angles
thereto.
(2) A rectangular area, 126 feet long and 30 feet in width,
located between the southerly wall of the building, a
distance of 126 feet, and the driveway pavement opposite,
a distance of 30 feet at right angles thereto.
(c) Building No. 3.
(1) A rectangular area, 130 feet long and 25 feet in width
located between the northerly sidewalk, a distance of 130
feet (off the northerly wall of the building) and the parking
pavement opposite a distance of 25 feet at right angles
thereto.
(2) A rectangular area, 91 feet long and 25 feet in width,
located between the easterly sidewalk, a distance of 91
feet (off the easterly wall of the building) and the driveway
pavement opposite, a distance of 25 feet at right angles
thereto.
(d) Bus Stop.
(1) Beginning at a point distant 50 feet northerly, marking the
northerly prolongation of the northeast corner of Building
No. 2, and extending westerly and parallel with the
northerly line of Building No. 2, a distance of 105 feet as
shown on a map entitled "Proposed Bus Stop, Lakewood
Plaza Shopping Center" prepared by Daniel A. DeSessa,
Township Engineer, Township of Lakewood, Ocean County,
New Jersey, Scale 1" = 50'", dated March 31, 1982, and
filed in the Township Clerk's office.
(2) There is hereby established a bus stop at the location
known as Lakewood Plaza, also known as Lak-How
Shopping Plaza, parallel with the northerly line of Building
No. 2 beginning at the northerly prolongation of the
northeast corner thereof and extending westerly to a
distance of 105 feet.
§ 11-37.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-37.3
AO:514
Property Regulation
(Reserved)
a. Eleanor Levovitz Apartment Complex.42
1. The provisions of Subtitle I Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes are
hereby made applicable to the semi-public and private roads,
streets or driveways within and leading to and from the Eleanor
Levovitz Apartment Complex located at 500 Clifton Avenue,
Lakewood, New Jersey.
2. The handicapped parking spaces located on the site plan, attached
hereto and made part hereof, are hereby designated as restricted
parking spaces for use by persons who have been issued special
vehicle identification cards by the Motor Vehicle Commission or
temporary cards issued by the Chief of Police of the Township of
Lakewood. No other persons shall be permitted to park in said
spaces.
3. Those driveways designated as one-way shall be in conformance
with the site plan attached hereto and made part hereof.
4. The entrances and exits shall be established in accordance with the
site plan.
5. No person shall park at any time in the front driveway which is
located between 6th Street and Clifton Avenue.
b. Meadowinds Condominium Complex.43
1. The provisions of Subtitle 1 Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes are
hereby made applicable to the semi-public and private roads,
streets or driveways within and leading to and from the
Meadowinds Condominium Complex located at Delaware Trail,
Lakewood, New Jersey, as indicated on the Lakewood Township Tax
Map attached hereto and made a part hereof.
2. The highlighted areas located on the tax map attached hereto and
made a part hereof are hereby designated as "No Parking" areas,
and no persons shall be permitted to park in said areas.
c. John F. Kennedy Apartment Complex. The following parking regulations
shall apply to the parking lot located at John F. Kennedy Apartment
Complex, Cedarbridge Avenue and South Clover Street.
1. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
42.Editor's Note: A complete copy of Ordinance No. 8/10/89 with attached tax map can be
found on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
43.Editor's Note: A complete copy of Ordinance No. 8/10/89 with attached tax map can be
found on file in the office of the Township Clerk.
§ 11-37.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-37.3
AO:515
2. Restricted Parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle at any
time at the following locations, as shown on the attached site
plan.44
3. Speed Limits.
(a) The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
and roadways shall be 15 m.p.h.
(b) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
4. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede
a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones,
oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a
safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at
the owner's or operator's expense.
5. All signs, posts, or other necessary materials shall be installed and
paid for by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the Police
Department to insure installations meet State and Federal
specification, and all signing shall conform to the current Manual
on Uniform Control Devices.
d. Peter Ward Development.
1. All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
2. One-Way Streets. The following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as One-Way streets in the direction
indicated:
Name of Street Direction Limits
Front driveway Counterclockwise Entire length
3. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede
a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones,
oil fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way
a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at
the owner's or operator's expense.
e. John Curry Apartments.
1. All vehicles shall park only in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
2. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede
a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones,
44.Editor's Note: The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of the
Township Clerk.
§ 11-37.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-37.3
AO:516
oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way
a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at
the owner's or operator's expense.
f. Lulu Duffy Apartments.
1. All vehicles shall park only in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
2. Tow-Away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede
a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones,
oil fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way
a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at
the owner's or operator's expense.
g. Woodlake Manor Townhouses. [Ord. No. 96-21]
1. General Parking.
(a) All vehicles shall park only in designated areas and between
the lines provided.
(b) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described below:
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
Woodlake Manor
Drive
Both 24 Entire length.
2. Through Streets.
(a) Through Streets: The following streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the
Through Street except where Yield signs are provided for in
the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Woodlake Manor Drive Entire length.
3. Speed Limits.
(a) The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking
lot(s) shall be 15 m.p.h.
(b) The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of Roadway M.P.H. Limits
Woodlake Manor
Drive
25 Entire length.
§ 11-37.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-37.3
AO:517
h. Four Seasons Development. [Ord. No. 96-23]
1. General Parking.
(a) All vehicles shall park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
2. Through Streets.
(a) The following streets or parts of streets are hereby designated
as "Through Streets." Stop signs shall be installed on the near
right side of each street intersecting the Through Street except
where Yield signs are provided for in the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Evergreen Springs
Drive
Entire length.
Jade Lawns Drive From Spring Meadow Drive to Green
Lawns Drive.
Spring Lawns Drive Entire length.
Spring Meadow
Drive
The intersection with Four Seasons
Drive to its most westerly intersection
with Four Seasons Drive.
Summer Winds
Drive
Entire length.
Summerfield Drive Entire length.
3. Stop Intersections.
(a) The following described intersections are hereby designated as
Stop Intersections. Stop signs shall be installed as provided
therein:
Intersections Stop Signs Installed
Green Lawns Drive and Jade
Lawns Drive
Jade Lawns Drive
Green Lawns Drive and Silver
Lawns Drive
Silver Lawns Drive
Silver Lawns Drive and Shadow
Lawns Drive
Shadow Lawns Drive
4. Speed Limits.
(a) The speed limit for both directions of traffic in the parking
lot(s) shall be 15 m.p.h.
(b) The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
§ 11-37.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-37.3
AO:518
Name of Roadway M.P.H. Limits
All roadways 25 Entire length.
(c) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above-designated speed limits as authorized by
the Department of Transportation.
i. Conventry Square Condominiums. [Ord. No. 78-117]
1. No Stopping or Standing. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle, at
any time, upon any roads or parking areas within the Coventry
Square Condominium Grounds, except where stalls are provided. A
violation of this subsection shall result in the imposition of a ten
($10.00) dollar fine for each violation.
2. Through Streets. The following described streets or portions of
streets are hereby designated as "Through Streets." STOP signs
shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting
the Through Street except where YIELD signs are provided for in
the designation.
Name of
Street
Location
Princeton
Avenue
Entire length of Princeton Avenue within the
confines of Coventry Square.
3. Yield Intersections. The following described intersections are
hereby designated as Yield Intersections.
Intersection Yield On
Coventry Drive Circle Drive and
Entrance Road
Entrance Road
Downing Street Circle Drive and
Entrance Road
Entrance Road
Governors Road Circle Drive and
Entrance Road
Entrance Road
Stratford Place Circle Drive and
Entrance Road
Entrance Road
Tudor Court Circle Drive and
Entrance Road
Entrance Road
Williamsburg Lane Circle Drive and
Entrance Road
Entrance Road
4. One-Way Streets. The following described streets or portions of
streets are hereby designated as One-Way Streets in the direction
indicated:
§ 11-37.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-37.3
AO:519
Street Name Direction Location
Colony Circle Drive Counterclockwise Entire length
Coventry Drive Circle
Drive
Counterclockwise Entire length
Downing Street Circle
Drive
Counterclockwise Entire length
Governors Road Circle
Drive
Counterclockwise Entire length
Parking lot off
Coventry Drive where
units 116 and 117 are
located
Westbound Entire length
Tudor Court Circle
Drive
Counterclockwise Entire length
Stratford Place Circle
Drive
Counterclockwise Entire length
Williamsburg Lane
Circle Drive
Counterclockwise Entire length
5. Speed Limits. The speed limits for both directions of traffic along
all roads within Coventry Square shall be 10 m.p.h. with the
following exceptions:
20 m.p.h. in both directions along Princeton Avenue
Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above designated speed limits as authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
6. No Passing Zones. The following roadways are hereby designated
as "No Passing Zones":
Name of
Street
Location
Princeton
Avenue
Entire length within the confines of Coventry
Square.
7. Signs. All entrances to the Condominiums shall be posted with the
appropriate signs.
j. Saint Mary's Parking Lot. [Ord. No. 2005-25]
1. One exit and one entrance on the State Highway 88 side are so
designated by curb openings in the upper lot adjacent to State
Highway 88.
2. The parking lot entrance and exit is located on the South Clifton
Avenue side and is designated by curb openings.
§ 11-37.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-37.3
AO:520
3. Four handicapped parking stalls are located in the parking lot, two
in the northernmost portion of Saint Mary's parking lot adjacent to
State Highway 88 and two are adjacent to the rectory and signed
according to New Jersey State guidelines.
4. Parking of vehicles is only allowed within the designated parking
spaces, which are designated by painted lines on the ground.
5. No vehicles are allowed to park overnight in the Saint Mary's
parking lot (municipal parking lot) except for those vehicles
associated with the church between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. This is directly behind the rectory as signed.
6. Commercial vehicles in excess of 5,000 G.V.W. pounds are not
permitted to enter or park in the parking lot.
7. No use of the parking lot by business owners or employees shall
interfere with church activities.
8. The Township will continue to provide cleanup, maintenance and
snowplowing as required.
9. These regulations and prohibitions do not apply to the property
owner.
10. The property owner is permitted to restrict parking at its discretion
for church services and post appropriate signage.
k. Shenandoah Village. [Ord. No. 2001-77]
1. General Parking.
(a) All vehicles must park in designated areas and between the
lines provided.
(b) No person shall stop or stand a vehicle upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described below, except in areas covered by
other parking restrictions.
Name of
Street
Sides Hours Location
All courts and
drives
Both All As indicated on Site
Plan.
Dr. Szold Way Both All Entire length.
(c) Handicapped Parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown
on the attached site plan and signed with a R7-8 and R7-8P
(Reserved Parking Sign and Penalty Plate), in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the
Handicapped Parking Permits by the Motor Vehicle
Commission.
§ 11-37.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-37.3
AO:521
2. Through Street, Stop Intersections.
(a) Through Streets. The following streets or parts of streets are
hereby designated as Through Streets. Stop signs shall be
installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the
Through Street except where Yield signs are provided for in
the designation.
Name of
Street
Limits
Dr. Szold Way From State Highway 88 (Ocean Avenue) to a
point 50 feet south of the prolongation of the
southerly curbline of Dee Court.
3. Speed Limits.
(a) The speed limit for both directions of travel on the following
roadways are:
Name of
Roadway
M.P.H. Limits
Courts and
drives
15 Entire length.
Dr. Szold Way 25 From State Highway 88, (Ocean
Avenue) to its terminus at
unimproved Crest Road as
indicated on site plan.
(b) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to affect the above-designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
4. Tow-Away Zones. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic or that blocks entrances or exit
ways, loading zones, oil fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway,
or presents in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
5. Loading Zone(s). The locations described are hereby designated as
Loading Zones. No person shall park a vehicle in said location
during the times indicated other than for the loading or unloading
of goods and materials.
Name of
Roadway
Time Location
Dee Court All As indicated on site plan.
Susan Drive All As indicated on site plan.
§ 11-37.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 11-37.3
AO:522
§ 11-37.4. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and
Maintenance. [New]
The owners of the premises referred to in this section shall provide and
install signs and pavement markings as required, which signage and
markings shall be in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
All signs, posts, or other necessary materials to be installed and
paid for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the current
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
l. Lakewood Nursing Home. [Ord. No. 96-50]
1. Prohibited Parking.
(a) Parking prohibited at all times on the following streets:
Name of Roadway Sides Location
Private roadway in
the rear of the
nursing home
Both From Pine Street to its
westerly terminus.
(b) Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading
zones, oil fills, any grassy area, pedestrian walkway, or present
in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing
the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
(c) All signs, posts or other necessary materials shall be installed
and paid for by the applicant. All signing shall conform to the
current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 39:4-1198 and N.J.S.A. 39:4-183.27.
m. Leisure Village East.
1. N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 permits written requests to a municipality for the
provisions of subtitle 1, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes be
applicable to the semipublic or private roads, streets, driveways,
trails, terraces, bridle paths, parkways, parking areas, or other
roadway open to or used by the public, tenants, employees, and the
members of such institutions for purposed of vehicular travel by
permission of such persons, corporations or institutions and not as
matter of public right.
2. Leisure Village East Community Association has filed written
consent with the Township of Lakewood that the provisions of Title
39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to
Leisure Village East pursuant to the written request made.
3. The provisions of Title 39 shall be enforceable in their entirety at
Leisure Village East pursuant to the written request made.
§ 11-37.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 11-37.4
AO:523
Devices. The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement
markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property. The owner
shall, subsequent to the initial procurement and installation, maintain such
signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense to the
Township. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and restoration or
replacement of same.
§ 11-37.5. Violations of Provisions of Section 11-37. [New]
For a violation of the provision of this § 11-37 or any supplement thereto
for which no specific penalty is provided, the offender shall be liable to a
penalty of not more than $50 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15
days, or both; except that for a violation of a section of N.J.S.A. 39:4-80 et
seq., N.J.S.A. 39:4-105 et seq., N.J.S.A. 39:123 et seq. or N.J.S.A. 39:4-140 et
seq., or any supplement thereto for which no specific penalty is provided,
the offender shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $50 or more than
$200 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days, or both.
Chapter 12
BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION
§ 12-1. UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCING AGENCY.
§ 12-1.1. Division of Construction Code Enforcement;
Establishment and Composition. [Ord. No. 97-20 § 12-1.1; Ord. No.
2003-20 § 1]
There is hereby established within the Township a Division of Construction
Code Enforcement consisting of the various subcodes under the Uniform
Construction Code as well as any necessary inspectors and other personnel
appointed by the Township. The Construction Official shall be the Chief
Administrator of the Division of Construction Code Enforcement.
§ 12-1.2. On-Site Office Location. [Ord. No. 97-20 § 12-1.2; Ord. No.
2003-20 § 2]
The public shall have the right to do business with the Enforcing Agency at
one office location except for emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstances. The address of the Enforcing Agency shall be Township
of Lakewood, Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning, 212 Fourth
Street, Lakewood, New Jersey.
§ 12-2. BASE FEES.
§ 11-37.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 12-2.1
AO:524
§ 12-2.1. Construction Permit Fee. [Ord. No. 97-20 § 12-2.1; Ord.
No. 2000-68 § 1; Ord. No. 2004-20 § 1; Ord. No. 2006-21 § 1; Ord.
No. 2009-8 § 1; Ord. No. 2010-6 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-12; Ord. No.
2013-45]
The fee for construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees listed in
paragraph a through b, hereof, and shall be paid before the permit is issued.
The fee for the reinstatement of lapsed permit shall be 50% of the original
permit fee and shall be paid before the permit is reinstated. However, the
minimum fee shall be $60.
a. Building Subcode Fee. The Building Subcode Fee shall be:
1. For new construction, $0.030 per cubic foot of building or structure
volume, for industrial use, $0.016 per cubic foot, with a minimum
fee of $85.00.
2. For renovations, alterations and repairs: $24.00 per $1,000.00 of
estimated work cost provided the minimum fee shall be $85.00. For
renovations, alteration or repairs which are classified as minor and
for which the Building Subcode Official determines that building
plans are not required, $12.00 per $1,000.00 of estimated costs of
work with a minimum of $75.00.
3. For additions, $0.030 per cubic foot of building or structure,
volume for the added portion, provided that the minimum fee shall
be $85.00.
4. For combinations or renovations and additions, the sum of the fees
shall be computed separately as renovations and additions.
5. Utility sheds shall be a minimum of $85.00.
6. For public or commercial swimming pools, $12.00 per $1,000.00 of
estimated cost. The minimum fee shall be $150.00. For residential,
above-ground pools the fee will be $60.00 and residential, inground
pools will be $85.00.
7. The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 shall be $100.00.
b. Plumbing Subcode Fee. The Plumbing Subcode Fee shall be $65.00 for
a plumbing permit to install or relocate from one to three fixtures with
$12.00 fee per each fixture over three.
1. Other Fees:
(a) The fee for installation of grease traps, and any type of
interceptors shall be $60.00 for each interceptor.
(b) $65.00 for a permit to install or replace a building sewer.
(c) $65.00 for a permit to install or replace a water service pipe
and $65.00 for testing of backflow prevention.
§ 12-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.1
AO:525
(d) $55.00 for a permit to install a lawn sprinkler system when
connected to a potable water system.
c. Electrical Subcode Fee. The Electrical Subcode Fee shall be as set forth
in the following schedule:
Minimum Electrical Subcode Fee shall be $65.00
1. Fixtures or receptacles (receptacles and fixtures
shall include lighting outlets, wall switches, electrical
discharge fixtures, convenience receptacles or similar
fixtures, and motors or devices of less than one
horsepower or one kilowatt, burglar, fire, and
communication devise, etc.):
1—25 $65.00
Each additional $10.00
2. Motors or electrical devices (each):
1 horsepower to 10 horsepower $15.00
Greater than 10 horsepower — 50 horsepower $40.00
Greater than 50 horsepower — 100 horsepower $100.00
Greater than 100 horsepower — 1,000 horsepower $200.00
Greater than 1,000 horsepower $450.00
3. Transformers and generators (each):
1 kilowatt to 10 kilowatts $15.00
Greater than 10 kilowatts — 45 kilowatts $40.00
Greater than 45 kilowatts to 112.5 kilowatts $100.00
Greater than 112.5 kilowatts $200.00
4. Service panels, service entrance of subpanel
(each):
1—225 amperes $50.00
Greater than 225 amperes to 600 amperes $100.00
Greater than 600 amperes to 1,000 amperes $200.00
Greater than 1,000 amperes $450.00
5. For the purpose of computing these fees, all
motors except those in plug-in appliances shall be
counted, including control equipment, generators,
transformers and all heating, cooking or other
devices consuming or generating electrical current.
6. Reinstatement of lapsed permit $50.00
7. Meter reset will be based on service size.
8. Real estate inspection (resales) $20.00
§ 12-2.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 12-2.2
AO:526
§ 12-2.2. Plan Review Fee. [Ord. No. 97-20 § 12-2.2; Ord. No.
2012-12; Ord. No. 2013-45]
The fee for a plan review shall be a minimum $40 or 20% of the amount
to be charged for the construction permit for new construction, whichever
is greater. The fee for plan review for accessory type use shall not be
refunded.
§ 12-2.3. Demolition Permit Fee. [Ord. No. 97-20 § 12-2.3; Ord. No.
2000-68; Ord. No. 2012-12; Ord. No. 2013-45]
The fee for a permit for demolition of principal building or structure shall
be $85. For accessory-type buildings and structures the minimum fee shall
be $45.
§ 12-2.4. Relocation of Building Fee. [Ord. No. 97-20 § 12-2.4; Ord.
No. 2013-45]
The fee for a permit for the removal of a building on a lot will be $85.00. The
cost for new footings and foundations on a new lot shall be $24 per $1,000
of the cost of the new footings and foundations.
§ 12-2.5. Sign Construction Fee. [Ord. No. 97-20 § 12-2.5; Ord. No.
2000-68 § 3; Ord. No. 2013-45]
The fee for a permit to construct a new permanent sign shall be $4 per
square foot of the surface area of the sign provided that the minimum fee
shall be $30. The area of surface of only one side of the sign shall be used
for purposes of the fee computation.
§ 12-2.6. Certificate of Occupancy.45 [Ord. No. 97-20 § 12-2.6; Ord.
No. 2004-20 § 2; Ord. No. 2004-69 §§ 1, 2; Ord. No. 2009-8 § 1; Ord.
No. 2012-12; Ord. No. 2013-45]
a. For new construction the fee for Certificates of Occupancy shall be as
follows:
1. One-family/two-family/multifamily dwellings/Condominium/
townhouse/apartment: $60.00
2. Commercial buildings—10% of construction permit fee with
minimum of $100.00: $150.00
3. Industrial buildings: $150.00
b. Additions/Renovations/Rehabs.
1. One-family/two-family/multifamily dwellings/Condominium/
townhouse/apartment: $60.00
45.Editor's Note: For Certificate of Occupancy for the sale, lease, rental or change of use of a
nonresidential unit or building, see Chapter 16, Property Maintenance, subsection
16-3.11.
§ 12-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.6
AO:527
§ 12-2.7. Elevator Installation Fee. [Ord. No. 97-20 § 12-2.7]
The fee for a permit for installation of an elevator shall be $150 for the
first elevator and $100 for each additional elevator in the same structure or
building.
§ 12-2.8. Reinspection Fee. [Ord. No. 97-20 § 12-2.8; Ord. No.
2013-45]
Development-wide reinspection fees shall be calculated according to
23-78D of the Uniform Construction Code of the Township of Lakewood.
§ 12-2.9. Fee Schedule. [Ord. No. 97-20 § 12-2.9; Ord. No. 2003-20
§ 3]
The Division of Construction Code Enforcement shall, with the advice of
the Subcode Officials, prepare and submit to the Township Committee
biannually, a report recommending a fee schedule based on the operating
expenses of the Agency and any other expenses of the Township fairly
attributable to the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
§ 12-2.10. Surcharge Fee. [Ord. No. 97-20 § 12-2.10]
The Enforcing Agency shall collect the fees specified above in this section
and a surcharge fee of $.016 per cubic foot of volume of new construction.
Such surcharge fee shall be remitted on a quarterly basis by the Municipal
Treasurer to the Bureau of Housing Inspection, Department of Community
Affairs, State of New Jersey. The Enforcing Agency shall report quarterly to
the Bureau, not later than the fourth day of the month, the amount of such
surcharge fee collected during the quarter.
2. Commercial buildings — 10% of construction permit fee with
minimum of $100.00: $150.00
3. Industrial buildings — 10% of construction permit fee with
minimum of $100.00: $150.00
c. The fee for a Certificate of Occupancy granted pursuant to a change of
use group shall be $250 for residential and $300 for commercial.
d. The fee for a Certificate of Continued Occupancy issued under N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.23(c) shall be $200. Reinspections shall be $75.
e. Renewal of Temporary Certificate of Occupancy. There is hereby
established a fee for the renewal of temporary certificates of occupancy
by the Township of Lakewood.
1. A thirty-five ($35.00) dollar fee per renewal document shall be paid
to the Building Department at the time the renewal is applied for in
accordance with the Uniform Construction Code 5:23-4(f)3.
§ 12-2.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 12-2.11
AO:528
§ 12-2.11. Mechanical Systems and Equipment (Heating-Cooling-
Ventilation). [Ord. No. 97-20 § 12-2.11; Ord. No. 2000-68 § 4; Ord.
No. 2002-34; Ord. No. 2004-20 § 3; Ord. No. 2010-6 § 1; Ord. No.
2010-41; Ord. No. 2012-12; Ord. No. 2012-29; Ord. No. 2013-45]
§ 12-2.12. Fire Sprinkler Fees. [Ord. No. 97-20 § 12-2.12; Ord. No.
2012-12; Ord. No. 2013-45]
The minimum fee for the Fire Protection Subcode shall be $75. The fee shall
be computed by the number of sprinkler heads to be installed.
1-20 heads $75.00
21-100 heads $120.00
101-200 heads $170.00
201-300 heads $320.00
301-400 heads $370.00
401-500 heads $420.00
Over 501 heads $510.00
The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.10 shall be $100.
a. Mechanical Subcode Requirements — $130.00 flat fee with the
following exceptions:
Water heaters $50.00
Under 40 gallons $75.00
40 to 75 gallons $100.00
Over 75 gallons
Air conditioners $50.00
Under 32,000 BTUs $75.00
32,000 to 48,000 BTUs $125.00
Over 48,000 BTUs
Use Group R-5 structures only.
b. Fees Use Groups.
1. R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-4: $105.00 for each HVAC unit;
2. Commercial and Industrial: $200.00 for each HVAC unit.
c. Storage Tanks.
Underground Storage
Tanks
Removal $75.00
Above-ground Storage
Tanks
Removal $55.00
§ 12-2.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.13
AO:529
§ 12-2.13. Fire Standpipe Fees. [Ord. No. 97-20 § 12-2.13; Ord. No.
2013-45]
The fee shall be computed by multiplying the number of standpipes to be
installed by $175.
The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.10 shall be $100.
§ 12-2.14. Smoke and Heat Detector Fees. [Ord. No. 97-20
§ 12-2.14; Ord. No. 2009-8 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-12; Ord. No. 2013-45]
The fee shall be computed by the number of smoke and/or heat detectors to
be installed. Fee will include plan review.
1-20 detectors $75.00
21-50 detectors $90.00
51-100 detectors $115.00
101-200 detectors $160.00
201-300 detectors $260.00
301-500 detectors $360.00
The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.10 shall be $100.
§ 12-2.15. Testing and Inspection Fees for Vertical Transport
Equipment. [Ord. No. 97-20 § 12-2.15]
a. The basic fees for elevator devices in structures not in Use Group R-3 or
R-4 or in an exempted R-2 structure, shall be as follows:
1. Traction and winding drum elevators:
One to 10 floors: $292.00
Over 10 floors: $486.00
2. Hydraulic elevators: $259.00
3. Roped hydraulic elevators: $292.00
4. Escalators and moving walks: $259.00
5. Dumbwaiters: $65.00
6. Stairway chair lifts, inclined and vertical wheelchair lifts and man
lifts: $65.00
b. Additional charges for devices equipped with the following features
shall be as follows:
1. Oil buffers (charge per oil buffer): $52.00
§ 12-2.13 LAKEWOOD CODE § 12-2.15
AO:530
2. Counterweight governor and safeties: $130.00
3. Auxiliary power generator: $97.00
c. The fee for elevator devices in structures in Use Group R-3 and R-4 or
otherwise exempt devices in R-2 structures shall be $194. This fee shall
be waived when signed statements and supportive inspection and
acceptance test reports are filed by an approved qualified agent or
agency in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.10 and 2.20.
d. The fee for witnessing acceptance tests of and performing inspections
of alterations shall be $65.
e. The fees for routine and periodic tests and inspections for elevator
devices in structures not in Use Group R-3 or R-4, or otherwise exempt
devices in R-2 structures, shall be as follows:
Six month routine inspection of elevator devices:
1. Traction and winding drum elevators:
One to 10 floors: $182.00
Over 10 floors: $233.00
2. Hydraulic elevators: $130.00
3. Roped hydraulic elevators: $181.00
4. Escalators, moving walks: $181.00
f. One year periodic inspection and witnessing of elevator devices, which
fee shall include a six month routine inspection:
1. Traction and winding drum elevators:
One to 10 floors: $259.00
Over 10 floors: $311.00
2. Hydraulic elevators: $194.00
3. Roped hydraulic elevators $259.00
4. Escalators, moving walks $415.00
5. Dumbwaiters $103.00
6. Man lifts, stairway chair lifts, inclined and vertical wheelchair lifts
$156.00
g. Additional yearly periodic inspection charges for elevator devices
equipped with the following features:
1. Oil buffers (charge per oil buffer): $52.00
§ 12-2.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-2.15
AO:531
§ 12-2.16. Exceptions; Miscellaneous Fees.46 [Ord. No. 97-20
§ 12-2.15; Ord. No. 97-3; Ord. No. 2013-45]
2. Counterweight governor safeties: $103.00
3. Auxiliary power generator: $65.00
h. Fee for the three year or five year inspection of elevator devices:
1. Traction and winding drum elevators:
One to 10 floors (5 year inspection): $440.00
Over 10 floors (5 year inspection): $492.00
2. Hydraulic and roped hydraulic elevators:
Three year inspection: $324.00
Five year inspection: $194.00
i. The fee for an application for a variation in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:23-2.10 shall be $100.
a. Miscellaneous Fees. Notwithstanding any provisions of Sections 12-1
and 12-2 to the contrary, the fees for the services designated below
shall be as follows:
1. Prefabricated storage sheds of 100 square feet or less will be
charged $25.
2. Above ground swimming pools will be charged a flat permit fee of
$60.
3. In-ground swimming pools will be charged a permit fee of $75.
b. Exceptions.
1. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126b et seq., the Township of
Lakewood may waive by resolution all Enforcing Agency fees for
construction contracted for or conducted by the municipality within
its boundaries including but not limited to construction permit fees
and surcharge fees.
2. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126d, the Township of Lakewood may
waive by resolution all enforcing fees for any corporation which is
(1) organized pursuant to the "New Jersey Nonprofit Corporation
Act," N.J.S.A. 15A:1-1 et seq. and (2) actively engaged in
constructing or rehabilitating housing units for occupancy by low
or moderate income households.
46.Editor's Note: For waiver of fees for improvements to provide accessibility for disabled
persons, see subsection 12-2.17 herein.
§ 12-2.15 LAKEWOOD CODE § 12-2.16
AO:532
§ 12-2.17. Waiver of Fees to Promote Accessibility for Disabled
Persons. [Ord. No. 2001-66]
§ 12-3. BUILDING CONTRACTORS-INSURANCE. [Ord. No. 97-34;
Ord. No. 2003-20 § 4; Ord. No. 2018-59]
For the purposes of this section, "low income household" means a
household in which the gross household income is equal to 50%
or less of the median gross household income for households of
the same size within the region in which the housing is located.
"Moderate income household" means a household in which the
gross household income is equal to or more than 50% but less than
80% of the median gross household income for households of the
same size within the region in which the housing is located.
a. Statutory Authority. N.J.A.C. 52:27D-125(e) enables a municipality,
which has an enforcing agency to waive construction permit surcharge
fees or enforcing agency fees for any construction, reconstruction,
alteration, or improvement which construction, reconstruction,
alteration, or improvement is solely designed to promote accessibility
by disabled persons to an existing public or private structure. The
aforementioned law further enables municipalities to provide that a
disabled person, or parent or sibling of a disabled person, need not pay
any municipal fees or charges in order to secure a construction permit
for any construction, reconstruction, alteration, or improvement which
promotes accessibility to his own living unit.
b. Request for Waiver. Any person seeking the aforementioned waiver of
fees shall, at the time of the application for any permit for the
construction, reconstruction, alteration, or improvement, present to the
Township Construction Official the request for waiver of fees as
outlined in this act.
c. Grant of Waiver.
1. Upon approval of the Construction Official there shall be no fee for
any construction, reconstruction, alteration, or improvement
designed solely to promote accessibility by disabled persons to an
existing public or private structure or any of the facilities contained
therein.
2. No fee shall be charged to any disabled person or parent or sibling
of a disabled person to secure construction permits for any
construction, reconstruction, alteration, or improvement which
promotes accessibility to that person's own living unit.
a. Proof of Insurance. Any person performing work requiring a
construction permit shall provide to the Township Division of
Construction Code Enforcement, simultaneous to the application for
the construction permit, proof of insurance by presenting a valid,
current policy or certificate demonstrating that the applicant has
§ 12-2.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-3
AO:533
§ 12-4. through § 12-5. (RESERVED)
§ 12-6. DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS.
§ 12-6.1. Permit Required. [1971 Code § 13-8.1; Ord. No. 2003-20
§ 5]
Whenever any firm or corporation shall be engaged in the business of
demolition of a building or buildings in the Township, a permit shall be
obtained from the Division of Construction Code Enforcement for each
individual building to be demolished before demolishing any building. The
following procedure and requirements shall be followed in obtaining the
permit and proceeding with the demolition.
§ 12-6.2. Application. [1971 Code § 13-8.2]
The application for a demolition permit shall state the name and address
of the applicant, the tax map lot and block on which the building to be
demolished is situated, a brief description of the building, the name and
workers' compensation insurance, if and when required by N.J.S.A.
34:15-1, et seq., and comprehensive liability insurance in an amount not
less than $100,000 per incident and $200,000 per annual aggregate.
This insurance requirement is not applicable to individuals building
or repairing a single family residence or any part thereof upon the
person's own real estate for the occupancy of the person or of the
person's family.
b. Assessing Damages to Contractors.
1. The purpose of this ordinance is to insure that property owners and
residents are made whole and reimbursed as a result of damages
caused by contractors performing work in Lakewood Township.
2. Definitions. Construction work, includes, but is not limited, to road
work, road openings, road maintenance, utility installation, utility
repair, water and sewer repair installation and maintenance and
related maintenance and improvement work done within the
Township of Lakewood.
3. Construction work that causes accidental, incidental and/or
consequential damages to homes or residents or property, both real
and personal, shall be liable for such damages.
4. Residents who suffer such damages shall be made whole or
reimbursed by the contractor performing the work or the company,
organization or agency that caused the work to be done.
5. To determine the measure of damages, the injured party must
present proof of such damages and the cost of the same to the
liable party within a reasonable period of time of the occurrence.
§ 12-3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 12-6.2
AO:534
address of the owner thereof, and the name and address of the person to be
actually in charge and supervision of the demolition.
§ 12-6.3. Liability Insurance. [1971 Code § 13-8.3; Ord. No. 2003-20
§ 6]
The demolition contractor or other person applying for a permit to engage
in the demolition of a building shall file with the Division of Construction
Code Enforcement a certificate of liability insurance showing premium paid
for at least the period of time in which the proposed demolition is to be
accomplished. A liability insurance certificate shall show property damage
coverage of not less than $25,000 and personal injury coverage of not less
than $100,000 for any one injury and a total of not less than $300,000
for more than one injury; for any property damage or personal injury
that may result from the demolition or the acts of those engaged in the
demolition. The certificate of insurance shall be filed before the demolition
permit is issued. In addition, a workmen's compensation certificate must be
furnished.
§ 12-6.4. Performance Bond. [1971 Code § 13-8.4; Ord. No. 2003-20
§ 7]
Before any demolition permit is issued, the applicant shall file with the
Division of Construction Code Enforcement a performance bond
guaranteeing the completion of the demolition within 30 days from the date
of permit. The performance bond shall have a schedule attached showing
the location of the property, the building or buildings to be demolished,
the name and address of the owner of the property, name and address
of the person, firm or corporation in charge of the demolition, the nature
and amount of fill required to restore any foundation or other excavations
to proper grade, the type of public utilities to be disconnected, the cost
of repair or replacement of shrubbery, grading, top soiling and seeding,
cost of repair of any remaining parts of the structure being demolished,
an estimated cost (or the contract price if under contract) of the proposed
demolition. The performance bond shall be of sufficient amount to cover all
of the items above listed and in no event shall be less than $1,000. The form
of the bond shall be approved by the Township Counsel and the amount
thereof by the Division of Construction Code Enforcement and the Township
Engineer.
§ 12-6.5. Stoppage of Work. [1971 Code § 13-8.5; Ord. No. 2003-20
§ 8]
The Division of Construction Code Enforcement may, at any time without
notice, stop work on the demolition if it appears that the demolition is being
accomplished in such manner as to cause immediate peril to property or
persons or such as to create a fire or health hazard. The bond shall be
released only upon completion of all work in connection with the demolition
as specified therein and shall be either a cash bond or a surety company
bond also executed by the one performing the demolition.
§ 12-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 12-6.6
AO:535
§ 12-6.6. Completion of Work by Township. [1971 Code § 13-8.6]
If demolition pursuant to the permit is not completed within 30 days from
the date of issuance of the permit, the permittee by acceptance of the
permit agrees that the Township may complete the demolition and charge
the reasonable cost thereof to the lands on which the building was situated,
or the Township may proceed on the bond for performance of the condition
of the permit.
§ 12-7. CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS: SOLID WASTE TRACKING
SYSTEM.
§ 12-7.1. Builder's Responsibility. [1971 Code § 4-21.1; Ord. No.
2003-20 § 9]
All builders undertaking construction projects in the Township of Lakewood
shall, as a prerequisite to the Division of Construction Code Enforcement's
final inspection of the building in question, supply to the Township Division
of Construction Code Enforcement verified written documentation that all
debris resulting from construction has been properly disposed of, and shall
disclose the location at which said debris has been disposed, along with the
method of disposal.
§ 12-7.2. Violations and Penalties. [1971 Code § 4-21.2]
§ 12-8. ILLUMINATED STREET ADDRESS SIGNS.
§ 12-8.1. Illuminated Street Address Signs Required on All New
Residential and Commercial Buildings. [Ord. No. 2019-24]
a. Any person convicted of violations of any of the provisions of this
section shall be subject to a mandatory penalty of $1,000 for each such
violation.
b. In addition to the penalty set forth in subsection 12-7.2a of this section,
any person convicted of violations of any of the provisions of subsection
12-7.1 hereof shall receive a mandatory sentence of a minimum of 30
days of community service cleaning public lands and roadways for a
first violation; and a mandatory sentence of a minimum of 60 days of
community service cleaning public lands and roadways for any
subsequent violation. Subsequent violations shall be punishable by
imprisonment for a period of not less than 10 days, nor more than 90
days in the Ocean County Jail.
c. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs a and b of this
subsection, the Township Attorney is authorized to take all necessary
legal action, including the filing of a lawsuit, against any person
convicted of violating any of the provisions of this section, to recoup any
costs incurred by the Township of Lakewood as a result of these
violation(s).
§ 12-6.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 12-8.1
AO:536
§ 12-8.2. Illuminated Sign Required for Certificate of Occupancy.
[Ord. No. 2019-24]
No certificate of occupancy shall be issued to any new commercial building
or residential building until and unless such illuminated sign is installed and
operational.
§ 12-8.3. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2019-24]
It shall be the duty of the construction office of the Township of Lakewood
to enforce this section.
Chapter 13
HOUSING REGULATIONS
§ 13-1. HOUSING CODE.
§ 13-1.1. Adoption by Reference. [1971 Code § 13-1.1]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5.1 the New Jersey State
Housing Code (1980 revision) as approved by the Department of Community
Affairs and filed in the Secretary of State's Office is hereby accepted,
adopted and established as a standard to be used as a guide in determining
the fitness of a building for human habitation, occupancy or use. A copy of
the code is annexed to this section and three copies have been placed on file
in the office of the Township Clerk and are available to all persons desiring
to use and examine the Code.
§ 13-1.2. Enforcing Authority. [1971 Code § 13-1.2; Ord. No.
2003-23]
The Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning
or his designee are hereby designated as the officers to exercise the powers
prescribed by this section and they shall serve in such capacity without
additional salary.
§ 13-1.3. Determination of Unfit Dwellings. [1971 Code § 13-1.3;
Ord. No. 2003-23 § 1]
For the purpose of this section the Department Head of the Department
of Code Enforcement and Zoning or his designee may determine that a
dwelling is unfit for human habitation if they find that conditions exist in
a. Each new commercial and residential building within the Township of
Lakewood must have an illuminated sign, no less than five inches high
specifying the street address of the building.
b. The illuminated sign must be clearly visible from the street and be
operational at all times.
§ 12-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-1.3
AO:537
such dwelling which are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of
the occupants of the dwelling, the occupants of neighboring dwellings or
other residents of the Township. Conditions may include, without limiting
the foregoing, defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other
calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities;
dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects or uncleanliness.
§ 13-1.4. Unfit Dwellings; Notice and Order to Repair. [1971 Code
§ 13-1.4; Ord. No. 2003-23 § 2]
Whenever a petition is filed with the Department of Code Enforcement and
Zoning by a public authority as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.4, or by at least
five residents of the Township charging that any dwelling is unfit for human
habitation as herein defined or whenever it appears to the Department
Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning or his designee,
on their own motion, that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation, they
shall, if preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue
and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in the
dwelling a complaint stating the charges and containing a notice that a
hearing will be held before the Township Committee at a place therein
fixed not less than 10 days nor more than 30 days after the serving of the
complaint. The owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to
file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise and
give testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaints. The rules of
evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in
hearings before the Township Committee.
If after notice and hearing the Township Committee determines that the
dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, it shall state in
writing its findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue
and cause to be served upon the owner and parties in interest an order
requiring:
a. The repair, alteration or improvements of the building to be made by
the owner within a reasonable time, which time shall be set forth in the
order or at the option of the owner to vacate or have the building
vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order.
b. If the building is in a condition as to make it dangerous to the health
and safety of persons on or near the premises and the owner fails to
repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in the
order, then the owner shall remove or demolish the building within a
reasonable time as specified in the order of removal.
c. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the
Township Committee may cause the building to be repaired, altered or
improved or to be vacated and closed, that the Department Head of the
Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning or his designee, may
cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building so closed the
following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or
§ 13-1.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 13-1.4
AO:538
occupancy or use; the use or occupancy of this building is prohibited
and unlawful."
d. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement
and Zoning or his designee, at the direction of the Township Committee
may cause such building to be removed or demolished or may contract
for the removal or demolition of the building after advertisement and
receipt of bids therefor.
e. The following items shall be a municipal lien against the real property
upon which the cost was incurred:
1. The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witness fees, search
fees and advertising charges incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this section upon a finding for the
Township.
2. The cost of the repairs, alterations or improvements or vacating
and closing or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the
balance remaining after deduction of the sum, if any, realized from
the sale of materials derived from the building or from any contract
for removal or demolition.
f. Upon removal or demolition of the building the materials of the building
shall be sold. There shall also be credited against the cost of the
removal or demolition thereof, the proceeds of any sale of such
materials or any sum derived from any contract for the removal or
demolition of the building. If there are no credits or if the sum total of
the costs exceeds the total of credits, a detailed statement of the costs
and the amount due shall be filed with the Municipal Tax Assessor or
other custodian of the records of tax liens and a copy thereof shall be
forwarded to the owner by certified mail. If the total of the credits
exceed the costs, the balance remaining shall be deposited in the
Superior Court by the Department Head of the Department of Code
Enforcement and Zoning or his designee, shall be secured in such
manner as may be directed by the Court and shall be disbursed
according to the order of the Court to the persons found to be entitled
thereto by final order of the Court, provided, however, that nothing in
this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of
the Township to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. Any
owner or party in interest may, within 60 days from the date of the filing
of the lien certificate proceed in a summary manner in the Superior
Court to contest the reasonableness of the amount or the accuracy of
the costs set forth in the municipal lien certificate.
§ 13-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-1.5
AO:539
§ 13-1.5. Service of Complaints or Orders on Unfit Dwellings. [1971
Code § 13-1.5]
Complaints or orders issued by the Township or the Inspectors shall be
served upon persons either personally or by certified mail, but if the
whereabouts of the persons is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained
by the Township Committee or the Inspectors in the exercise of reasonable
diligence, the Township Committee or the Inspectors shall make an affidavit
to that effect and then the service of the complaint or order upon such
persons may be made by publishing the same once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township. A
copy of the complaint or order shall be posted in a conspicuous place on
the premises affected by the complaint or order and a copy shall be duly
recorded or lodged for record with the County Recording Officer.
§ 13-1.6. Powers of the Department Head of the Department of
Code Enforcement and Zoning or His Designee. [1971 Code
§ 13-1.6; Ord. No. 2003-23 § 3]
The Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning
or his designee shall have the following powers to carry out and effectuate
the purpose and provisions of this section:
§ 13-1.7. Search Warrant. [1971 Code § 13-1.7; New; Ord. No.
2003-23 § 4]
The Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning
or his designee may, upon affidavit, apply to the Judge of the Municipal
Court for a search warrant setting forth factually the actual conditions and
circumstances that provide a reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance
or violation of this section exists on the premises. If the Municipal Judge
is satisfied as to the matter set forth in the affidavit, he shall authorize the
a. To investigate the condition of dwellings in the Township to determine
which dwellings are unfit for human habitation.
b. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses, and receive
evidence.
c. To enter upon premises in an unobtrusive manner for the purpose of
inspections provided that such entries shall be made in a manner as to
cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
d. To appoint and fix the duties of officers, agents and employees as they
deem necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.
e. To delegate any functions and powers under this section to such officers
and agents as may be lawfully designated.
f. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit the Department
Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning or his
designee's powers as provided by other rules, regulations or statutes.
§ 13-1.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 13-1.7
AO:540
issuance of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that
part of the premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist.
§ 13-1.8. Compliance with Housing Code. [1971 Code § 13-1.8]
No person shall occupy or lease for occupancy, any dwelling unit for the
purpose of living therein which does not conform to the provisions of the
New Jersey State Housing Code established herein.
§ 13-1.9. Reinspection Fee. [1971 Code § 13-1.8]
Any reinspection of the subject premises necessitated by noncompliance
with the provisions of this section or the provisions of the New Jersey State
Housing Code shall require payment of a fee of $5 prior to reinspection.
§ 13-2. REMOVAL OR DESTRUCTION OF UNSAFE AND
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS.
§ 13-2.1. Determination of Unsafe and Dangerous Buildings. [1971
Code § 13-5.1]
Buildings, walls or structures which are or may become dangerous to
property, life or health, or constitute a nuisance, or which are so old,
dilapidated or have become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use are
hereby declared to be inimical to the welfare and dangerous or injurious
to the health and safety of the people of the Township. Whenever a finding
is made pursuant to the following procedures that any building is unfit for
human habitation, occupancy or use, as defined above, power is hereby
conferred upon the office or officers hereinafter designated to exercise the
police powers of the Township to order repairs, closure, demolition of such
building, or parts thereof, in the manner herein provided.
§ 13-2.2. Enforcement. [1971 Code § 13-5.2]
The Township Committee or its lawful designee shall have the authority to
exercise the powers prescribed by this section.
§ 13-2.3. Definitions. [1971 Code § 13-5.3]
As used in this section.
BUILDING — Shall mean any building or structure, or part thereof, whether
used for human habitation or otherwise. It shall include any structures
appurtenant thereto.
OWNER — Shall mean the record owner of the title to real property as listed
on the current tax records of the Township.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — Shall mean all parties who have an interest of
record in a building and any parties who are in actual possession thereof.
§ 13-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-2.3
AO:541
PUBLIC AUTHORITY — Shall mean any housing authority or any officer
or department head overseeing health, fire, building regulations or other
activities concerning buildings in the Township.
§ 13-2.4. Procedure. [1971 Code § 13-5.4]
Whenever a petition is filed with the Township Committee or by at least
five residents of the Township charging that any building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use or whenever it appears to the Township
Committee, or on its own motion, that any building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use, the Township Committee shall, if its
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause
to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such building a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that
a hearing will be held before the Township Committee at a place therein
fixed not less than seven days nor more than 10 days after the serving of the
complaint. The owner and parties in interest shall be given the right to file
an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint; and that the rules of
evidence prevailing in the Courts shall not be controlling in hearings before
the Township Committee.
§ 13-2.5. Order for Abatement. [1971 Code § 13-5.5]
If, after such notice and hearing, the Township Committee determines
that the building under consideration is unfit for human habitation or
occupancy or use it shall state in writing its findings of fact in support of
such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner
thereof and parties in interest an order:
a. Requiring the repair, alteration or improvement of the building to be
made by the owner, within a reasonable time, which time shall be set
forth in the order or at the option of the owner to vacate or have the
building vacated and closed within the time set forth in the order; and
b. If the building is in a condition as to make it dangerous to the health
and safety of persons on or near the premises, and the owner fails to
repair, alter or improve the building within the time specified in the
order, then the owner shall be required to remove or demolish the
building within a reasonable time as specified in the order of removal.
c. If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve or,
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the
Township Committee may cause the building to be repaired, altered or
improved, or to be vacated and closed. The Township Committee may
cause to be posted on the main entrance of any building so closed, a
placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human
habitation or occupancy or use; the use or occupation of this building is
prohibited and unlawful."
§ 13-2.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 13-2.5
AO:542
d. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Township Committee may cause the building to be
removed or demolished or may contract for the removal or demolition
thereof after advertisement and receipt of bids therefor.
e. The following items shall be a municipal lien against the real property
upon which the cost was incurred.
1. The cost of the filing of legal papers, expert witness fees, search
fees and advertising charges, incurred in the course of any
proceeding taken under this section with a finding in favor of the
Township, and
2. The cost of the repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating
and closing, or removal or demolition, if any, or the amount of the
balance thereof remaining after deduction of the sum, if any,
realized from the sale of materials derived from the building or
from any contract for removal or demolition thereof, shall be a
municipal lien against the real property upon which the cost was
incurred.
Upon removal or demolition of the building the materials of the building
shall be sold. There shall be credited against the cost of the removal or
demolition thereof, the proceeds of any sale of such materials or any sum
derived from any contract for the removal or demolition of the building. If
there are no credits or if the sum total of such costs exceeds the total of
such credits, a detailed statement of the aforesaid costs and the amount
so due shall be filed with the Municipal Tax Assessor or other custodian
of the records of tax liens and a copy thereof shall be forwarded to the
owner by certified, regular mail. If the total of the credits exceed the costs,
the balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the
Township Committee, shall be secured in such manner as may be directed
by the Court, and shall be disbursed according to the order or judgment
of the Court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or
judgment of the Court; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall
be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the Township to
define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement, by
summary proceedings or otherwise. Any owner or party in interest may,
within 60 days from the date of the filing of the lien certificate, proceed
in a summary manner in the Superior Court to contest the reasonableness
of the amount or the accuracy of the costs set forth in the municipal lien
certificate.
f. The Township Committee may determine that a building is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy or if it finds that conditions exist in such
building or part thereof which are dangerous or injurious to the health
or safety of the occupants of such building or part thereof, the
occupants of neighboring buildings or other residents of the Township;
such conditions (without limiting the foregoing) therein increasing the
hazard of fire, accident or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation,
light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair; structural defects;
§ 13-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 13-2.5
AO:543
§ 13-2.6. Serving of Complaints or Orders. [1971 Code § 13-5.6]
Complaints or orders issued by the Township Committee pursuant to this
section shall be served upon persons either personally or by certified mail,
but if the whereabouts of such persons is unknown and the same cannot
be ascertained by the Township Committee in the exercise of reasonable
diligence, and the agent of the Township Committee charged with service
shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of the complaint
or order upon such persons may be made by publishing the same once
each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Township. A copy of the complaint or order shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on premises affected by the complaint or order. A copy of
the complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged for record with the
County Recording Officer. The Township Clerk is hereby designated agent
in charge of effecting such service.
§ 13-2.7. Appeal. [1971 Code § 13-5.7]
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Township Committee
may, within 60 days after the posting and service of such order, bring
an action for injunctive relief to restrain the Township Committee from
carrying out the provisions of the order and for any other appropriate relief.
The appeal shall be exclusive, and no person affected by an order of the
Township Committee shall be entitled to recover any damages for action
taken pursuant thereto, or because of noncompliance by any person with
any order of the Township Committee.
§ 13-2.8. Powers of the Township Committee. [1971 Code § 13-5.8]
The Township Committee may exercise such powers as may be necessary or
convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions of this
section, including but not limited to the following powers:
uncleanliness; or that such building or part thereof creates such an
unsightly appearance and is in such a poor state of repair as to be
detrimental to the health and welfare of the residents of the Township
or the occupants of neighboring buildings; or that the building or part
thereof contain such a number of violations of the existing ordinances
of the Township as to constitute an immediate hazard to the health or
safety of the occupants of the building, the occupants of neighboring
buildings or other residents of the Township.
a. To investigate the condition of buildings in the Township in order to
determine which buildings are unfit for human habitation, occupancy or
use.
b. To administer oaths, affirmations, examine witnesses, receive evidence
and conduct hearings.
c. To enter upon premises for the purpose of making inspections in an
unobtrusive manner, provided that such entries shall be made in a
§ 13-2.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 13-2.8
AO:544
Chapter 14
RENT CONTROL
§ 14-1. RENT CONTROL REGULATIONS.
§ 14-1.1. Purpose. [1971 Code § 13A-1]
The Township Committee finds that a serious public emergency exists due
to the critical shortage of housing space within the Township. It is in the
interest of the health, safety and general welfare of the people of Lakewood
to prevent unwarranted and abnormal increases in rent; to alleviate the
effects of the critical housing shortage; and to protect persons living in
the Township from undue impairment of their standard of living during the
housing crisis.
It is also recognized by the Township Committee that it is also in the
interest of the health, safety and general welfare of the people of Lakewood
to encourage construction, rehabilitation and operation of housing within
Lakewood and to provide owners thereof with sufficient return on their
investment in order that efficient owners will be economically able to
furnish decent housing at a reasonable cost.
§ 14-1.2. Definitions. [1971 Code § 13A-2]
As used in this section:
AVAILABLE FOR RENT TO TENANTS — Shall mean fit for habitation as
defined by the housing inspection Code and occupied or unoccupied and
offered for rent.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE OR IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any amount
paid out or to be paid out for permanent improvements made to increase the
value of property but not including expenses normally treated as ordinary
expenses or normal repairs, under the Internal Revenue Service Code and
Regulations provided, said expenditures are entitled to be depreciated
under the applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Service Code and
Regulations.
DWELLING — Shall mean any building or structure or part thereof rented
or offered for rent to one or more tenants or family units and not otherwise
exempt from the provisions of this chapter under subsection 14-1.4.
manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in
possession.
d. To appoint and fix the duties of officers, agents and employees as it
deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.
e. To delegate any of its functions and powers under this section to such
officers and agents as may be lawfully designated.
§ 13-2.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.2
AO:545
ECONOMIC LIFE — Shall mean the estimated period over which it is
anticipated that a property may be profitably used.
HOUSING SPACE — Shall mean that portion of a dwelling rented or offered
for rent for living and dwelling purposes to one individual or family unit
together with all privileges, services, furnishing, furniture, equipment,
facilities and improvements connected with the use or occupancy of such
portion of the property except as otherwise provided herein.
RENT — Shall mean any and all sums paid by a tenant for the use of a
dwelling and shall include pet fees, parking fees, and all other regularly
collected fees, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. "Rent" shall
not include sums paid into, or collected from, coin-operated machines.
"Rent" shall also not include any amounts paid pursuant to a separate
written agreement entered into voluntarily by and between a landlord and
tenant for use of furnishings and the like (exclusive of stoves, ranges,
ovens, refrigerators, and air-conditioning units). Such agreements shall be
independent of and separate from the leasehold agreement.
§ 14-1.3. Establishment of Rents. [1971 Code § 13A-3]
Establishment of rents between a landlord and tenant in the Township
which are subject to control by this Rent Control Chapter shall hereinafter
be regulated by the provisions of this chapter.
a. Permitted Rental Increases. Landlords who supply tenants with heat
are hereinafter permitted to raise rents on rental units governed by this
section once a year at a flat rate increase of six and one half (6.5%)
percent over the previous base rent permitted by this section or any
prior ordinance except as otherwise hereinafter set forth. Landlords
who do not supply tenants with heat are hereinafter permitted to raise
rents on rental units governed by this section once a year at a flat rate
increase of 5% over the previous base rent permitted by this section or
any prior ordinance except as otherwise hereinafter set forth. This
increase shall be effective at the expiration of a lease or termination of a
rental period provided at least one year has passed since the last
increase.
b. Optional two Year Rental Increase. Should the landlord and tenant
mutually agree at the inception of any rental period, the parties may
enter into a two year lease agreement with rentals to be set at nine and
three quarters (9.75%) percent over and above the prior year's rental
for those tenancies where the landlord supplies heat and seven and one
half (7.5%) percent over and above the prior year's rental in those
tenancies where the landlord does not supply the heat. The rental
during the two year term of the lease agreement shall remain at the
rates set forth hereinabove and the landlord shall not be entitled to any
hardship or unusual expense increases as would otherwise be
permitted under these ordinances. The landlord shall, however, be
entitled to add a tax surcharge (or the tenant shall be entitled to a tax
surcharge decrease as the case may be), to the amount of the rent in
§ 14-1.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 14-1.3
AO:546
§ 14-1.4. Exemptions. [1971 Code § 13A-4]
The following rental units are exempt from the provisions of this section to
the extent set forth below:
accordance with the provisions of this section. In addition, at the
termination of the two year tenancy as set forth herein, the landlord
shall not be entitled to an automatic accumulation of that portion of the
rental increase which would have otherwise been permitted pursuant
to a one year tenancy. The landlord shall, however, be entitled to the
normal rental increase in effect at the time of the expiration of the
two year lease agreement. Should an initial two year tenancy terminate
prior to the expiration of the two year term, then and in that event, the
landlord may charge a new tenant that amount of rent that is permitted
by subsection 14-1.3a and may also make application to the Lakewood
Township Rent Control Board for such other increases as are permitted
pursuant to this section.
c. Notice of Increase. Any landlord seeking an increase pursuant to
subsection 14-1.3a, "Permitted Rental Increases", subsection 14-1.3b,
"Optional two Year Rental Increase", subsection 14-1.6, "Tax
Surcharge", or under any other subsection permitting an increase
without application to the Rent Control Board, shall notify the tenant in
writing of the calculations involved in computing the increase at least
30 days prior to the effective date of the increase. The increase shall not
be effective unless and until 30 days written notice thereof is given to
the tenant.
d. Accumulative Increase. In order to encourage landlords not to raise
rents yearly, the rental increase shall be cumulative. That is, except as
set forth in subsection 14-1.3b, any landlord who does not raise a
tenant's rent at a time permitted by this chapter, or who does not raise
the rent the full permitted percentage increase, shall, at a later date,
have the right to increase the rent prospectively at an increase
percentage determined by calculating the normal percentage permitted
and pro-rating that percentage based on the number of months that
have expired since the last increase. In no event shall a cumulative
increase exceed four years for existing tenants. The initial rent of a
tenant shall be the maximum permitted by this subsection, unless the
landlord notifies the prospective tenant, in writing, prior to the onset of
the tenancy of his temporary waiver of the cumulative increase.
a. Hotels, Motels and Boarding Houses. Hotels, motels, boarding houses
and all other premises if they primarily serve transient guests.
b. Public Housing Units.
c. New Construction. Any person, firm, corporation or entity placing on
the rental market for the first time after June 25, 1987, or after such a
date as required by State law pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:42-84.1 et seq.,
any newly constructed residential housing space within the Township of
§ 14-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.4
AO:547
Lakewood, and as described pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:42-84.1 et seq.,
shall be entitled to charge any rental to any tenant that may be obtained
by an agreement between the parties, and the unit shall remain exempt
from the provisions of this section for seven years from the date of the
initial Certificate of Occupancy for the unit or for such a time period as
required by State law pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:42-84.1 et seq. However,
the landlord shall, during the exempt period, notify all prospective
tenants in writing prior to commencement of any tenancy that:
1. The unit is exempt from rent control pursuant to this section.
2. The date upon which the exemption terminates.
d. Existing Housing Space Placed on the Rental Market for the First Time.
Any person, firm, corporation or entity placing on the rental market for
the first time after the effective date of this ordinance, any existing
residential housing space within the Township of Lakewood, shall be
entitled to charge any rental to any tenant that may be obtained by an
agreement between the parties and thereafter the unit shall remain
exempt from the provisions of this section for seven years from the date
of the initial Certificate of Occupancy for the unit. However, the
landlord shall, during the exempt period, notify all prospective tenants
in writing prior to the commencement of any tenancy that:
1. The unit is exempt from rent control pursuant to this section.
2. The date upon which the exemption terminates.
e. School Dormitories.
f. Buildings Containing four Rental Units or Less. Buildings containing
four rental units or less, providing that they are:
1. Owner occupied; and
2. Not part of an overall complex such as a garden apartment
complex.
g. Rental Units Owned by Non-Profit Corporations. Rental units owned by
a non-profit corporation that is exempt from municipal taxation
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:4-3.6.
h. Government Subsidized Units.
1. Existing Units: The rent of any rental unit governed by this section
and occupied by a tenant, whose rent is subsidized by a
governmental program, such as HUD, Section 8 Housing Program,
may be increased once a year without applying to the Rent Control
Board in excess of the annual percentage increase permitted by
subsection 14-1.3 herein, provided the increase is permissible
under the rules and regulations of the government subsidy
program and the tenant's share of the rent is not increased at a
greater percentage that would be permitted by this section. Should
§ 14-1.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 14-1.4
AO:548
§ 14-1.5. Other Increases by Permission of the Rent Control Board.
[1971 Code § 13A-5]
In addition to the annual increase and tax surcharge increase, which are
permitted without making application to the Rent Control Board a landlord
may file an application before the Rent Control Board for permission to
increase the tenant's rent under the following sections:
the unit subsequently be occupied by a tenant whose rent is not
subsidized, the rent for the unit shall be immediately rolled back to
an amount than would have been permitted if this paragraph did
not govern.
2. Rehabilitated Units: The rent of any rental unit rehabilitated
pursuant to a governmental housing rehabilitation/rent
supplemental program such as the HUD Section 8 Moderate
Rehabilitation Program, may be increased once upon completion of
the rehabilitation in excess of the annual percentage increase
permitted by subsection 14-1.3 herein, for the establishment of a
new base rent, without applying to the Rent Control Board
provided that:
(a) The increase is permissible under the rules and regulations of
the governmental rehabilitation/subsidy program; and
(b) The rent is established in accordance with the rent calculation
formula prescribed by the Program regulations.
After the establishment of the new base rent for rehabilitated units,
subsequent annual increases shall be treated as in paragraph h1
above.
i. Substantially Rehabilitated Buildings. An occupied building may be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter if the landlord rehabilitates
the building as to result in a 50% increase in the assessed value thereof.
The building shall be entitled to exemption from the provisions of this
section provided the landlord makes application to the Rent Control
Board for exemption pursuant to this subsection and the Rent Control
Board determines that the building has been substantially rehabilitated
so as to increase the assessed value thereof 50% over the assessment in
effect immediately prior to the date the rehabilitation work was
commenced. The exemption shall be for five years from the date of the
Rent Control Board decision.
Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, in the event
the State-mandated exemption detailed herein is repealed by action of
the State Legislature prior to June 25, 1992, this section amendment
will be deemed null and void, and newly constructed residential
dwellings containing four or more dwelling units, other than as
specified in subsection 14-1.4c, shall be subject to the seven year
exemption permitted prior to the enactment of this subsection.
§ 14-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.5
AO:549
a. Hardship Increase. A landlord may seek a hardship increase pursuant
to subsection 14-1.12.
b. Unusual Expenses. A landlord may be entitled to an unusual expense
increase in addition to the annual increase where the unusual or
unexpected cost of providing heat or utilities, or of making major
capital expenditures or capital improvements may require a substantial
investment or expenditure by the landlord to offset such expenses.
These special items shall be allowed only on special application to the
Rent Control Board for good cause shown. Clear proof of the cost must
be furnished.
If the increase sought concerns a capital expenditure, capital
improvement or major repair requiring a substantial investment, the
landlord shall prove the normal economic life expectancy of the
expenditure, improvement or repair, and shall determine the average
cost per year of economic life. This average cost of the capital
expenditure, improvement or repair may be apportioned among the
tenants in the dwelling in accordance with the formula set forth in
subsection 14-1.6 (Tax Surcharge-ratio of square footage occupied by
each tenant to the whole).
If the increase sought is the result of an increase in the cost of
providing a utility service regulated by the Board of Public Utilities
of the State of New Jersey, the landlord shall prove that the cost of
providing such utility service has increased by more than six and one
half (6.5%) percent per annum. Upon such proof, the landlord may be
entitled to a rental increase equal to the amount by which the cost of
providing such utility service exceeds six and one half (6.5%) percent
more than the prior year's cost.
The landlord shall also present evidence in seeking an increase
pursuant to this section concerning the actual rent being charged for
each unit, a profit and loss statement for the premises for the last
two fiscal years, the condition of premises, the rate of return on the
landlord's investment, the steps taken to provide safe, healthful and
adequate housing in addition to any other evidence that will assist the
Board in making a fair decision. The Rent Control Board shall utilize
all of the above information in determining whether or not to permit
the additional rental increase sought. Any increases permitted by the
Lakewood Township Rent Control Board pursuant to this subsection,
shall be effective retroactive to the first rental pay period at the
expiration of 30 days from the date the landlord's application for an
increase is filed with the Board. Should the landlord revise his
application:
1. Based on submission of expenses not related, in whole or part, to
the premises in question; or
2. Because the original application deviates from accepted
accounting norms; or
§ 14-1.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 14-1.5
AO:550
§ 14-1.6. Tax Surcharge. [1971 Code § 13A-6]
Without making application to the Rent Control Board, a landlord may take
a tax surcharge pursuant to the following provisions.
3. Resulting in an increase in the amount of relief sought, then and in
that event, the increase permitted by the Board shall be retroactive
to the first rental pay period subsequent to 30 days from the date
the revised application is submitted to the Board. Any applications
revised by the applicant or the Board for reasons other than as set
forth hereinabove shall be deemed to have been submitted in its
revised form on the original submission date. Any retroactive
portion of the increase permitted by the Board as set forth
hereinabove, shall be payable by the tenant in three equal monthly
portions commencing with the first rental pay period subsequent to
the Board's decision. The staggered payments shall be in addition
to the prospective increased payments for which the tenant shall be
responsible as a result of the Board's decision.
a. Formula. A landlord may take a tax surcharge from a tenant because of
an increase in Township property taxes. The tax surcharge shall not
exceed that amount authorized by the following provisions. The
landlord shall divide the increase in the present property tax over the
property tax of the previous year by the number of square feet in the
entire building. The tenant shall not be liable for a tax surcharge
exceeding the tax increase per square foot multiplied by the number of
square feet occupied by the tenant; provided however, that all common
areas of the demised premises shall be included in the portion of the
premises rented by each tenant on a pro rata basis.
b. Notification. Any landlord taking a tax surcharge shall in writing notify
the tenant of the calculations involved in computing the tax surcharge
including the present property tax for the dwelling, the property tax for
the dwelling for the previous year, the number of square feet in the
dwelling, the tax increase per square foot, the number of square feet
occupied by the tenant and the maximum allowable surcharge at least
30 days prior to the effective date of the increase. The increase shall not
be effective unless and until 30 days written notice is given.
c. Payment of Surcharge. The tax surcharge each tenant is liable for shall
be paid in 12 monthly payments.
d. Tenancies of Less than one Year. The tax surcharge for tenancies of less
than one year shall be computed in the same manner as provided in
subsection 14-1.6a, but no tenant shall be liable in any month for more
than one-twelfth (1/12th) of the tax surcharge so computed.
e. Surcharge Not Considered Rent. The tax surcharge shall not be
considered rent for purposes of computing rental increases.
§ 14-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.6
AO:551
§ 14-1.7. Landlord's Obligation to Maintain Same Services. [1971
Code § 13A-7]
During a housing state of emergency, a landlord shall maintain the same
standards of service, maintenance, furniture, furnishings and equipment in
the housing unit as he provided or was required to provide by law or lease
at the date the lease was entered into.
Any individual tenant or a class of tenants who is not receiving substantially
the same standards of service, maintenance, furnishings or equipment may
have the Rent Control Board determine the reasonable rental value of the
housing space with the reduced services. The tenant or class of tenants
shall pay the reasonable rental value as full payment for rent until the
landlord demonstrates to the Rent Control Board that the deficiency has
been corrected.
A provision of a lease or other agreement whereby any provision of this
subsection is waived shall be deemed against public policy and shall be void.
§ 14-1.8. Interpretation/Application. [1971 Code § 13A-8]
No landlord shall, after the effective date of this section, charge any rents
in excess of what he was receiving immediately prior to the effective date of
the ordinance, except for increases authorized by this section.
A landlord re-renting housing space during a housing state of emergency
shall not charge a new tenant a higher rent or tax other than the maximum
he was permitted to charge the previous tenant pursuant to the provisions
contained herein.
The provisions of this section being necessary for the welfare of the
Township and its inhabitants shall be liberally construed to effectuate the
purposes thereof.
§ 14-1.9. Conflict of Law. [1971 Code § 13A-9]
The permissible rental increases pursuant to the provisions of this section
shall not apply where they exceed or conflict with the increases allowed by
any Statute or rule of the Federal government, State government, County
government, or any agencies thereof.
f. Tax Appeal. In the event of a tax appeal, the portion of the tenant's tax
surcharge not being paid by the landlord to the government will be held
in an interest bearing account. If the appeal is successful and the taxes
reduced, the tenant will receive 50% of the money held in escrow
together with the accrued interest on the total amount. Payment will be
in the form of a credit against the monthly rent or a check made payable
to the tenant. If the tax appeal is successful, the landlord may retain
50% of the escrow amount as reimbursement for all expenses
connected with the tax appeal.
§ 14-1.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 14-1.10
AO:552
§ 14-1.10. Effective Subsequent Change in Landlord's Position
Caused by Law or Economic Conditions. [1971 Code § 13A-10]
It is hereby recognized that there may be major reductions in taxation of
real property that would give a landlord an unexpected and unfair profit
especially taking into consideration that his overall rental basically includes
a sum allowable for cost of real estate taxes.
Therefore, should the landlord have a reduction in real estate taxes for a
rental premises or project in any one year, not caused by extraordinary
depreciation such as loss by fire, storm, and the like, the amount of
reduction in taxes shall be apportioned over the number of units and such
reduction then proportionately accredited to reduce the rental of each
individual unit.
A tenant shall be permitted to make application to the Rent Control Board in
the event of an extraordinary reduction in the cost of fuel, utilities or other
specific service upon which the rental is based.
§ 14-1.11. Landlord's Right to a Just and Reasonable Rate of
Return. [1971 Code § 13A-11]
It is expressly recognized that an efficient landlord is entitled to a just
and reasonable rate of return from his property. To that end, a landlord
is permitted to make application to the Rent Control Board for rental
increases on the basis that rents allowed by this section prevent the
landlord from receiving a just and reasonable rate of return.
Landlords shall have the burden of proof as established through expert
testimony or otherwise that the rate of return is unjust and not reasonable
in accordance with the formula set forth below. This formula shall be the
exclusive formula for determining a just and reasonable rate of return.
a. Definitions. As used in this subsection.
FAIR NET OPERATING INCOME — Shall mean gross maximized annual
income less reasonable and necessary operating expenses, such
expenses not to exceed fifty seven and one half (57.5%) percent of gross
maximized annual income.
GROSS MAXIMIZED ANNUAL INCOME — Shall mean all income
resulting directly or indirectly from the operation of a property or
building, including, but not limited to, all rent received or collectible,
all earnings from commissions, vending machines, deductions from
security deposits, late fees, pet fees, parking fees, and any and all
other fees or income derived from operation of the rental premises,
less a three and one half (3.5%) percent deduction for vacancies and
uncollectibles.
REASONABLE AND NECESSARY OPERATING EXPENSES — Shall
mean all valid expenses incurred and paid by a landlord for a residential
rental property during the period reflected in income computed in
accordance with the provisions and limitations of this chapter. Interest
§ 14-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.11
AO:553
and principal payments on mortgages, and depreciation, do not
constitute operating expenses but municipal taxes and reserve for
capital replacement are included.
b. Permitted Increase. Whenever a landlord shall determine that the
reasonable and necessary operating expenses computed in accordance
with the provisions of this section are greater than fifty seven and one
half (57.5%) percent of the gross maximized annual income, an
application may be made to the Rent Control Board for an increase of
rent in order to re-establish the fifty seven and one half (57.5%) percent
relationship. Any increase so granted shall be pro-rated to all of the
units within the structure or on the property, and further, provided that
where a written lease is in effect for a property, or for any portion
thereof, no increase for that property or portion thereof, shall be
permitted until the expiration of such written lease unless the following
pre-conditions have been complied with:
1. The written lease agreement contains a provision permitting the
landlord to make application for and collect from the tenant any
increase in rental permitted pursuant to this section.
2. Service upon the tenant of a notice advising the tenant of his right
to serve upon the landlord a written notice terminating the lease
agreement effective 30 days subsequent to filing by the landlord of
an application for rent increase pursuant to this section.
3. Indication in the separate notice referred to hereinabove of the
landlord's right to file an application for rent increase pursuant to
this subsection.
c. Application Requirements. In any application under this subsection, the
landlord shall, in addition to those requirements mandated by this
section, specifically certify:
1. That the owner is an efficient operator of the residential rental
property.
2. That the residential rental property is in a safe and sanitary
condition.
3. That the owner is in full compliance with all State and local laws
pertaining to the rental of premises.
§ 14-1.11 LAKEWOOD CODE § 14-1.11
AO:554
The landlord shall make application to the Rent Control Board, together
with necessary certifications and further certify that the landlord is not
earning a fair net operating income pursuant to the formula set forth
herein. The application shall include the amount of increase and
percentage of increase requested, together with all facts and figures of two
years of income and expenses, if available. At the time of application, the
landlord shall notify all tenants affected, in writing, that an application is
being made and is available to any tenant requesting the same. The owner
shall also make available to the tenants, at reasonable times, and the Rent
Control Board, all records and books supporting the application. If at any
time during the course of consideration of an increase pursuant to the
provisions of this subsection, the Rent Control Board shall determine that
the landlord is not in substantial compliance with any or all of the above
requirements, the Board may temporarily withhold further consideration of
the application for an increase until such time as the landlord has corrected
any such deficiency.
d. Computation. In computing reasonable and necessary operating
expenses under this section, the following limitations shall apply in all
cases:
1. Taxes shall be limited to those amounts actually due and owing at
the time of application.
2. Repairs and maintenance shall be limited to arms-length
transactions and shall be reasonable and necessary. Cost of service
contracts shall be pro-rated over the period covered. Painting costs
shall be pro-rated over the number of years of actual painting cycle
in the building, but in no event shall painting be pro-rated at a
period of more than three years of the interior of dwelling units or
five years for the exterior and common areas.
3. Purchase of new equipment shall be reflected and pro-rated over
the useful life of the equipment.
4. Legal and auditing expenses shall be limited to reasonable and
necessary costs of the operation of the property. A landlord may not
deduct expenses incurred in litigating any declaratory or injunctive
relief as to his rights under any State, local or Federal law, except
for actions in the nature of a Writ of Mandamus. All costs shall be
itemized on the application.
5. Management fees shall be limited to the actual services performed
including the resident manager's salary, telephone expenses,
postage, office supplies, stationery, and the value of any apartment
provided. Where the landlord performs his own management and/
or superintendent services, the amount allocated therefor shall be
limited to the actual value of services performed. In no event shall
management fees exceed 6% of the first $50,000 of gross
maximized income, four and one half (4.5%) percent of the next
$25,000 4% of the next $100,000, three and one half (3.5%)
§ 14-1.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.11
AO:555
percent of the next $100,000, and 3% of any amount over
$275,000.
6. Salaries not included in management fees shall be limited to actual
services performed, shall be reasonable and comparable to
amounts paid for similar positions in the area, including rental
value, if included, in income and expenses and wages and benefits
paid.
7. Advertising shall be limited to actual costs that are reasonable to
ensure occupancy only.
8. Utilities including, but not limited to gas, electric, water, and oil
shall derive from arms-length transactions and the landlord shall
demonstrate that all reasonable efforts to conserve energy and
fuels have been used.
9. Insurance shall derive from arms-length transactions pro-rated
over the life period of the policy and shall not include any person's
life, medical or other personal policies.
10. No penalties, fines, or interest for any reason shall be allowed.
11. The history of the income and expenses shall be consistent with the
application or fully documented as to any changes.
12. "Reserve for replacement" shall be permitted as an expense only if:
(a) The landlord produces at the hearing a savings account
passbook or similar account verifying the existence of a
reserve.
(b) The landlord submits as part of his application a detailed
explanation of how the reserve for replacement amount was
arrived at, including particularly the useful lives of each capital
item involved and the dollar amount attributable to them.
(c) The landlord submits as part of his application documentation
to show that the reserve fund has been utilized where
replacement of any of the capital items has occurred, and that
replacement of capital items has, in fact, occurred as their
useful lives have expired.
(d) The landlord submits to the Board annually thereafter a
certification from the bank, savings and loan association or
similar institution as to the amount in the reserve account and
further submits a certified and detailed explanation of any
withdrawals made from the account.
(e) Should application for rental increase be made pursuant to this
section, then and in that event, at the time of any sale of the
rental property, the landlord shall submit to the Board a
detailed accounting of the disposition or transfer of the reserve
§ 14-1.11 LAKEWOOD CODE § 14-1.11
AO:556
§ 14-1.12. Hardship Increase. [1971 Code § 13A-12]
A landlord who finds that present rentals are insufficient to cover the cost
of mortgage payments, taxes and maintenance may seek a hardship rental
increase. The Rent Control Board may grant a hardship rent increase to
meet these payments.
The Rent Control Board shall consider all relevant evidence including
conditions of the premises, the degree of hardship to the landlord and
financial records explaining the mortgage, tax or maintenance expense. Any
landlord seeking a hardship surcharge shall petition the Rent Control Board
after serving notice upon the tenants by certified mail or by personal service
account. In no case shall the annual reserve for replacement
exceed three and one half (3.5%) percent of the gross annual
income from rent.
e. Payment of Permitted Increase. Any increases permitted by the
Lakewood Township Rent Control Board pursuant to this subsection,
shall be effective retroactive to the first rental pay period at the
expiration of 30 days from the date of the landlord's application for an
increase is filed with the Board. Should the landlord revise the
application for an increase:
1. Based upon submission of expenses not related, in whole or in part,
to the premises in question; or
2. Because the original application deviates from accepted
accounting standards; or
3. Resulting in an increase in the amount of relief sought, then and in
that event the increase permitted by the Board shall be retroactive
to the first rental pay period subsequent to 30 days from the date
the revised application is submitted to the Board. Any applications
revised by the applicant or the Board for reasons other than as set
forth hereinabove shall be deemed to have been submitted in its
revised form on the original submission date. Any retroactive
portion of the increase permitted by the Board as set forth
hereinabove, shall be payable by the tenant in three equal monthly
portions commencing with the first rental pay period subsequent to
the Board's decision. The staggered payments shall be in addition
to the prospective increased payments for which the tenant shall be
responsible as a result of the Board's decision.
f. Improper Use of Reserve for Replacement. Should a landlord have been
granted an increase in rent pursuant to this subsection after having
alleged reserve for replacement as an expense item, and thereafter, a
tenant believes that the landlord has failed to make proper use of the
reserve for replacement as set forth in this subsection, then and in that
event, the tenant may make application to the Rent Control Board for
appropriate relief.
§ 14-1.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.12
AO:557
of such intent to seek a hardship surcharge and after full disclosure of all
relevant financial information to the tenants. The Rent Control Board shall
give reasonable opportunity for both the landlord and the tenant to be heard
before making a determination.
Any increases permitted by the Rent Control Board pursuant to this section
shall be effective retroactively to the first rental pay period at the expiration
of 30 days from the date of the landlord's application for an increase is filed
with the Board. Should the landlord revise the application for an increase:
§ 14-1.13. Rent Control Board Applications to be Certified. [1971
Code § 13A-13]
All applications filed with the Rent Control Board must have attached
thereto a statement signed by the applicant, officer of the applicant or
representative having personal knowledge of the information contained in
the application as follows:
"I certify that the foregoing information contained in this Rent Control
Board application is true. I am aware that if any of the information set forth
therein is willfully false, I am subject to punishment."
§ 14-1.14. Service of Rent Control Board Application; Right to
Review Prior to Hearing. [1971 Code § 13A-14]
Prior to filing an application with the Rent Control Board all parties shall
personally serve a copy of the application on each tenant or landlord
affected by the application. In addition, the applicant shall include a notice
that the information upon which the application is based is available for
inspection at a specified location within the Township during normal
business hours provided reasonable notice of a request to review is given
the applicant. The applicant shall submit proof to the Rent Control Board
a. Based upon submission of expenses not related, in whole or in part, to
the premises in question; or
b. Because the original application deviates from accepted accounting
standards; or
c. Resulting in an increase in the amount of relief sought, then and in that
event, the increase permitted by the Board shall be retroactive to the
first rental pay period subsequent to 30 days from the date the revised
application is submitted to the Board. Any applications revised by the
applicant or the Board for reasons other than as set forth hereinabove
shall be deemed to have been submitted in its revised form on the
original submission date. Any retroactive portion of the increase
permitted by the Board as set forth hereinabove shall be payable by the
tenant in three equal monthly portions commencing with the first rental
pay period subsequent to the Board's decision. The staggered payments
shall be in addition to the prospective increased payments for which the
tenant shall be responsible as a result of the Board's decision.
§ 14-1.12 LAKEWOOD CODE § 14-1.14
AO:558
that service has been made in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
Personal service of the application may be accomplished by any and/or all
of the following means:
§ 14-1.15. Notice of Hearing. [1971 Code § 13A-15]
The Rent Control Board secretary shall mail a notice to each affected party
of the date, time and place that the matter will be heard by the Board. Such
notice shall be mailed at least two weeks prior to the hearing date.
§ 14-1.16. Posting of Rents. [1971 Code § 13A-16]
Each landlord shall post with the Township Clerk on or before July 1 of each
year a list of the rentals being paid for each unit of dwelling space rented to
a tenant.
§ 14-1.17. Penalties. [1971 Code § 13A-17; New]
Any landlord or his agent, or both, who is found guilty in Lakewood
Municipal Court of willfully charging and receiving a rent in excess of the
provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty as stated in Chapter
1, Section 1-5.
a. Personally delivering a copy of the application to the tenant or tenants
and having said tenant or tenants acknowledge receipt of same in
writing.
b. Mailing a copy of the application to the tenant or tenants by certified
mail, return receipt requested.
c. Service of a copy of the application on the tenant or tenants by a
constable or other official licensed to serve process by the State of New
Jersey, or any subdivision thereof.
d. Serving a copy of the application upon the tenant or tenants by ordinary
mail.
Provided if ordinary mail is used, the applicant must bring a list of
all tenants or landlords affected by the application to the Township
Clerk's office along with a complete copy of the application and the
sealed, addressed and stamped envelopes to be mailed containing the
application. The Township Clerk or a representative thereof shall check
the envelopes against the list of tenants to verify that each tenant is
being mailed an application and if satisfied, shall deposit said envelopes
in the mail and forward the master list of tenants or landlords to the
Rent Control Board secretary with written confirmation that all tenants
shall have been mailed an application.
§ 14-1.14 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-1.18
AO:559
§ 14-1.18. Severability of Provisions. [1971 Code § 13A-18]
If any of the provisions of this section shall be judged invalid by a Court of
competent jurisdiction, such order or judgment shall not affect or invalidate
the remainder of the section, and to this end, the provisions of each
paragraph, article, section, or subsection of this section is hereby declared
to be severable.
§ 14-2. through 14-6. (RESERVED)
§ 14-7. RENT CONTROL CODE FOR SUBSTANDARD HOUSING.
§ 14-7.1. Title of Code. [1971 Code § 13-3.1]
This section shall be known and cited as the Rent Control Code for
Substandard Housing in the Township.
§ 14-7.2. Findings; Adoption of Code. [1971 Code § 13-3.2; Ord. No.
2003-26 § 1]
The Township Committee hereby finds and determines that the reports of
the Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning
and the respective Inspectors, Police Officers, the records of numerous
Court proceedings, the investigation of the Welfare Department of the
Township and an inspection of the various areas of the community clearly
shows that the health and safety of numerous residents of this municipality
are impaired or threatened by the existence of substandard multiple
dwellings. The Township Committee further finds and determines that the
conditions are such as to warrant the regulation of rents and the possession
of rental space in such substandard multiple dwellings in the Township
pursuant to the authorization procedures and regulations set forth in
Chapter 168 of the Public Laws of the State of New Jersey, approved June
18, 1966 and the adoption of the minimum standards for multiple public
housing promulgated by the Department of Conservation and Economic
Development, Bureau of Public Housing, entitled State Housing Code (Rent
Control) dated July 25, 1966.
§ 14-7.3. Enforcing Official. [1971 Code § 13-3.3; Ord. No. 2003-26]
The Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning
of the Township or his designee is hereby designated and authorized to act
as the Public Officer to exercise and enforce the powers and regulations
prescribed by this section and by the provisions of Chapter 168 of the Public
Laws of 1966.
§ 14-7.4. Definitions. [1971 Code § 13-3.4; Ord. No. 2003-26 § 2]
As used in this section:
BUREAU OF HOUSING — Shall mean the Bureau of Housing of the State
Department of Conservation and Economic Development.
§ 14-1.18 LAKEWOOD CODE § 14-7.4
AO:560
HOUSING SPACE — Shall mean that portion of a multiple dwelling rented
or offered for rent for living or dwelling purposes in which cooking
equipment is supplied, and includes all privileges, services, furnishings,
furniture, equipment, facilities and improvements connected with the use
or occupancy of such portion of the property. The term shall not be defined
to or include public housing or dwelling space in any hotel, motel or
established guest house.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Shall mean any building or structure and land
appurtenant thereto containing three or more apartments or rented or
offered for rent to three or more tenants or family units.
OWNER — Shall mean the holder of the title in fee simple.
PARTIES IN INTEREST — Shall mean all persons who have interests of
record in a multiple dwelling, and who are in actual possession thereof
and any person authorized to receive rents payable for housing space in a
multiple dwelling.
PUBLIC OFFICER — Shall mean the Department Head of the Department
of Code Enforcement and Zoning of the Township or his designee and shall
also mean the authority designated by this section to exercise the powers
prescribed herein and by Chapter 168 of the Public Laws of 1966.
SUBSTANDARD MULTIPLE DWELLING — Shall mean any multiple
dwelling determined to be substandard by the Public Officer.
§ 14-7.5. Minimum Standards. [1971 Code § 13-3.5]
The minimum standards for health and safety requirements including but
not limited to water supply, plumbing, garbage, storage, lighting,
ventilation, heating, egress, maintenance, use and occupancy in the
Township shall be those minimum standards promulgated and set forth
by the Bureau of Housing of the State of New Jersey, Department of
Conservation and Economic Development, effective July 25, 1966, filed with
the Secretary of State of the State of New Jersey, pursuant to Chapter 168 of
the Public Laws of 1966, the minimum standards are entitled State Housing
Code (Rent Control) Chapter 168, P.L. 1966, approved June 18, 1966. Three
copies of the minimum standards have been placed on file in the office of
the Township Clerk and are available to the public. The minimum standards
are hereby adopted by reference.
§ 14-7.6. Notice. [1971 Code § 13-3.6]
Whenever it appears by preliminary investigation that a multiple dwelling
is substandard, the Public Officer shall cause a complaint to be served
upon the owner of and parties in interest in such multiple dwelling, stating
the reasons why the multiple dwelling is deemed to be substandard and
setting a time and place for hearing before the Public Officer. The owners
and parties in interest shall be given the right to file an answer and to
appear and give testimony. The rules of evidence shall not be controlling in
hearings before the Public Officer.
§ 14-7.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-7.7
AO:561
§ 14-7.7. Order for Improvements. [1971 Code § 13-3.7]
If, after notice and hearing, the Public Officer determines the multiple
dwelling under consideration is substandard, he shall state his findings
in writing and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner or
other person entitled to receive the rents an order requiring that such
repairs, alterations or improvements necessary to bring such property up to
minimum standards be made within a reasonable time.
Failure to complete such repairs, alterations or improvements within a
reasonable time as fixed by the Public Officer shall be cause to impose rent
control on the substandard multiple dwelling.
§ 14-7.8. Fair Rent Established. [1971 Code § 13-3.8]
In establishing maximum rents which may be charged for housing space
in a multiple dwelling subject to rent control, the permissible rents shall
be sufficient to provide the owner or other person entitled to receive
the rents with a fair net operating income from the multiple dwelling.
The net operating income shall not be considered less than fair if it is
20% or more of the annual income in the case of a multiple dwelling
containing less than five dwelling units, or is 15% or more in the case of
a multiple dwelling containing five or more dwelling units. In determining
the fair net operating income, the Public Officer shall consider the following
expenses: heating fuel, utilities, payroll, janitorial materials, real estate
taxes, insurance, interior painting and decorating, depreciation, and repairs
and replacement and additions to furniture and furnishings which expenses
shall be deducted from the annual income derived from the multiple
dwelling. All items of expense and the amount of annual income shall be
certified by the owner or other person entitled to receive the rents on forms
provided by the Public Officer.
The imposition of rent control on any substandard multiple shall take effect
at the expiration of the term of any lease and shall remain in effect
thereafter so long as the multiple dwelling is subject to rent control.
It shall be unlawful for any person to demand or receive any rent in excess
of the maximum rent established for housing space in multiple dwelling
subject to rent control or to demand possession of the space or evict
a tenant for refusal to pay rent in excess of the established maximum
rent. The owner or other person entitled to receive the rents shall not be
prevented, however, from exercising legal rights to obtain possession of
housing space from a tenant as a result of the tenant's violation of law or
contract and the owner or other person entitled to receive the rents shall
be provided reasonable grounds to obtain possession of premises for his
own personal use and occupancy and for purposes of substantially altering,
remodeling or demolishing the multiple dwelling.
§ 14-7.7 LAKEWOOD CODE § 14-7.9
AO:562
§ 14-7.9. Removal of Rent Control. [1971 Code § 13-3.9]
Whenever the Public Officer finds that a multiple dwelling subject to rent
control is no longer substandard, he shall inform the Township Committee
and rent control for substandard housing of the multiple dwelling shall be
removed.
§ 14-7.10. Failure to Comply with Order; Appointment of Receiver.
[1971 Code § 13-3.10]
a. In the event the owner of a substandard multiple dwelling fails to
comply with an order for repair, alteration or improvement after notice
and reasonable opportunity to do so and where such failure to comply
results in the continuation of a condition or conditions harmful to the
health and safety of the occupants of the multiple dwelling or to the
general public, the Public Officer may, with the approval of the
Township Committee, bring an action in the Superior Court to be
appointed receiver ex officio of the rents and income from such
property and expend the same for the purpose of making such repairs,
alterations or improvements as are necessary to correct the harmful
condition or conditions. The rents and income so collected by the
receiver shall also be available for the payment of costs and expenses of
the receivership, as may be adjudged by the Court, and for the payment
to the Township of any fines or penalties which may have been imposed
on the owner for violations of this section and which have not been paid
by the person liable therefor. The Court may proceed in the action in a
summary manner or otherwise. The receiver shall not be required to
give bond and shall be appointed only for the above purposes.
b. Upon appointment, the receiver, by and with the approval of the
Township Committee, in all cases where the real property in question is
encumbered by a first mortgage shall appoint the first mortgagee if the
mortgagee is a proper person and is willing to accept the appointment
as the receiver's agent to collect the rents and income from the real
property and manage the same. In all other cases the receiver, by and
with the approval of the Township Committee, may designate the
person in charge or management of such real property or some other
competent person as the receiver's agent to collect the rents and
income from such real property and manage the same, which
mortgagee or other person shall account promptly to the receiver for
the rents and income so collected. If the mortgagee or other persons so
designated is derelict in collecting or accounting for such rents and
income or in the management of such real property, the receiver shall
apply to the Court for the removal of the designated mortgagee or other
person and upon written notice the Court may remove such designated
mortgagee or other person and designate another person to collect the
rents and income from such real property and manage the same and
account to the receiver for the rents and income of such real property
as aforesaid.
§ 14-7.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 14-7.10
AO:563
§ 14-7.11. Appeal. [1971 Code § 13-3.11]
Any person aggrieved by an order issued by a Public Officer under this act
may, within 60 days after the posting and service of such order, bring an
action for injunctive relief to restrain the Public Officer from carrying out
the provisions of the order and for any other appropriate relief. The Court
may proceed in the action in a summary manner or otherwise. The remedy
herein provided shall be exclusive, and no person affected by an order of
the Public Officer shall be entitled to recover any damages for action taken
pursuant thereto, or because of noncompliance by any person with any
order of the Public Officer.
§ 14-7.12. Registration of Multiple Dwellings. [1971 Code § 13-3.12;
New]
c. In any such receivership no fees shall be allowed the receiver or his
counsel for action as such receiver or counsel.
d. Except as otherwise provided, the procedure in respect to any such
receivership shall be as in the case of receiverships to secure the
payment of delinquent taxes, penalties, interest, costs and expenses
wherein a Tax Collector or other Officer of the Township is such
receiver. In any receivership proceeding under this act, the Court shall
have jurisdiction to make such orders and directions to the receiver as
may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this act and to conserve
the real property during the pendency of the receivership.
a. The owners and management of every multiple dwelling situated in the
Township shall register with the Township Clerk. The registration shall
be upon forms prescribed and furnished by the Township which forms
shall include the following items, all of which must be furnished and
completed in detail:
1. The name and residence address of any and all persons owning or
claiming to own the lands on which the multiple dwelling is
situated.
2. The names and addresses of any and all persons holding mortgages
or other liens known to the owner.
3. The number of apartments in the multiple dwelling.
4. The number of rooms for each apartment and the use including a
statement of the maximum number of persons to reside in each
apartment or room and the number of persons to be permitted to
sleep in each sleeping room.
5. The name and address of an agent designated by the owner to be in
charge of the multiple dwelling house. The agent shall be for all
purposes the agent for the owner in accepting any notice,
complaint, summons or other process or any notice of requirements
§ 14-7.10 LAKEWOOD CODE § 14-7.12
AO:564
Chapter 15
RENTAL HOUSING
[Editor's Note: Chapter 5, Section 5-11 regulates the number of dogs
permitted in multiple dwelling units.]
[See also Chapter 4, General Licensing for business licenses and
permits.]
§ 15-1. (RESERVED)47
§ 15-2. (RESERVED)48
§ 15-3. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY; CERTIFICATE OF
COMPLIANCE.
§ 15-3.1. Definitions. [1971 Code § 13-4.2]
As used in this section:
MULTIPLE DWELLINGS — Shall mean any building, structure and the land
appurtenant thereto containing two or more apartments or dwelling units
rented or offered to two or more tenants excepting motels and hotels unless
the units rented in the motels or hotels shall contain two or more units
with eating and cooking facilities. In such event the units containing such
facilities shall be considered multiple dwelling units.
SINGLE-FAMILY RENTALS — Shall mean any single-family dwelling that is
leased, subleased, rented or advertised for rent.
that may be necessary to be served upon the owner pursuant to this
chapter.
6. A precise description of the location of the multiple dwelling by
street and house number or if no street and house number of tax
map block and parcel.
b. Every multiple dwelling in the Township shall be registered as above set
forth with the Township Clerk within 30 days.
c. Failure to register a multiple dwelling as above set forth or failure to
comply with any of the terms of this section shall constitute a violation
of the Township Code and be punishable as set forth in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5. This provision, however, in no way is to limit any other
rights, proceedings or remedies, for the enforcement of this section
otherwise provided herein.
47.Editor's Note: Former Section 15-1, Rooming House and Boarding House Licenses,
previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 97-17 and 98-14, was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-11.
48.Editor's Note: Former Section 15-2, Annual Inspections and Reinspections of Rooming and
Boarding Houses, previously codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance Nos.
98-3, 2000-43 and 2003-25, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2006-11.
§ 14-7.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-3.2
AO:565
§ 15-3.2. Filing of Statement Required. [1971 Code § 13-4.2; Ord.
No. 2003-25 § 4]
Every owner of any premises containing two or more apartments or
dwelling units or any single-family rental used for residential purposes shall
file under oath with the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning, a
statement containing the address of the premises, the name and address of
the owner of the premises, the name and address of the superintendent or
the name and address of the agent in charge of the premises, the number
of apartments in the premises, the name of the tenant located within the
premises and the date the statement was prepared. If the owner of the
premises is a corporation or other entity other than an individual, the
statement shall be made under oath by the president, vice-president or
secretary of the corporation or a principal of such other entity.
§ 15-3.3. Certificate of Occupancy; Compliance with Housing Code
Required. [1971 Code § 13-4.3; Ord. No. 2003-25 § 5]
In multiple dwellings or single-family rentals no apartment or dwelling
shall be leased, subleased, rented or let or sold to any tenant, lessee
or purchaser unless the owner of the premises shall first have obtained
a Certificate of Occupancy from the Department of Code Enforcement
and Zoning indicating that such apartment or dwelling unit complies with
the provisions of the ordinances of the Township and the State Housing
Code and approval is obtained from the Department of Code Enforcement
and Zoning that the apartment or dwelling unit is safe and fit for human
habitation.
§ 15-3.4. Rental Certificate of Occupancy Applications. [1971 Code
§ 13-4.3A]
The rental Certificate of Occupancy to be completed by the owner of the
premises which is to be leased shall include the following information:
§ 15-3.5. Certificate of Compliance; Smoke-Sensitive Alarm Devices
and Carbon Monoxide Detector. [1971 Code § 13-4.3B; New; Ord.
No. 2003-25 § 6; Ord. No. 2009-9 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-13 § 1]
a. Previous rental amount;
b. Name of previous tenant;
c. Certification that rent is posted pursuant to subsection 14-1.16 of the
Rent Control Ordinance, Chapter 14 of this Code;
d. Current rental amount;
e. Date unit was first placed on the rental market;
f. Designated agent.
§ 15-3.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 15-3.5
AO:566
§ 15-3.6. Vacation of Apartments; Inspection Fee; Exemptions.
[1971 Code § 13-4.4; Ord. No. 2003-25 § 7; Ord. No. 2009-9 § 2; Ord.
No. 2012-13 § 2]
a. In multiple dwellings or single-family rentals, no apartment or dwelling
shall be leased, subleased, rented or let or sold to any tenant, lessee or
purchaser unless the owner of the premises shall first have obtained a
certificate of compliance or a Certificate of Occupancy from the
Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning, authorized by the
Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq., on a form
acceptable to and approved by the Department Head of the Department
of Code Enforcement and Zoning or his designee, indicating that a
smoke-sensitive alarm device and a carbon monoxide alarm has been
installed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-4.19(d), of the New Jersey
State Uniform Fire Code. The fee for each application shall be $65 and
the fee for each reinspection shall be $30.
b. The Township Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning shall be
responsible for enforcement of the aforesaid Act, the violation of which
shall be punishable by a fine as set forth in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
a. Within 10 days after a tenant moves out of and vacates an apartment or
dwelling unit in any residential premises containing two or more
apartments or dwelling units, the owner of the premises shall file with
the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning a statement under
oath containing the address of the premises, the number or other
specific designation of the apartment vacated. The statement shall be
as set forth in subsection 15-3.2.
b. No vacated apartment shall be rented or occupied in whole or in part by
any new tenant until an inspection has been made by the aforesaid
Department as to whether the apartment is in violation of any of the
applicable laws of the Township, State of New Jersey or the United
States of America. If no violation is found, the Department of Code
Enforcement and Zoning shall issue a Certificate of Occupancy.
Otherwise, the owner shall be notified in writing of any violations found.
c. The inspection shall be made and either a Certificate of Occupancy or
notice of violations shall be issued within five days from the date of
application. If the inspection is not accomplished in the five day period,
the apartment may be occupied but subject to the right of the Township
to cause the apartment to be inspected if a violation is found, and to
cause the premises to be vacated within 10 days from the date of notice.
d. The fee for a Certificate of Occupancy shall be $65. Any required
reinspection fee shall be $30.
e. Exemptions. The Lakewood Housing Authority shall be exempt from the
payment of any inspection fee for a Certificate of Occupancy.
§ 15-3.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-3.7
AO:567
§ 15-3.7. Statement of Number of Persons Permitted to Occupy an
Apartment. [1971 Code § 13-4.5; Ord. No. 2003-25 § 8]
At the time of inspection of each unit or single-family dwelling prior to
the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy, the Department of Code
Enforcement and Zoning shall post in a conspicuous place in the apartment
or dwelling a notice stating the number of persons who shall be permitted
to occupy the apartment as residence pursuant to regulations provided
by the Township and in no event shall residency in excess of the posted
number be exceeded by either the landlord or the tenant. For the purpose
of determining residency, any person who sleeps upon the premises or
generally dwells there for more than two successive days or nights shall be
considered to be residing on the premises.
§ 15-4. (RESERVED)
§ 15-5. REGISTRATION OF BUILDINGS WITH TWO OR MORE
FAMILIES.
§ 15-5.1. Registration; Forms. [1971 Code § 13-6]
All owners of buildings or structures or parts thereof, wherein the buildings
or structures or parts thereof are situated in the Township and which are
occupied by two or more families as tenants of an owner or as tenants of a
lessor shall register with the Township Clerk upon forms prescribed by and
furnished by the Clerk. The forms shall include the following items:
§ 15-5.2. Service of Notices. [1971 Code § 13-7]
Under any ordinance of the Township or under any State law applicable to
the Township a notice may hereinafter be served by service upon the owner,
lessor or agent of any building or structure or part thereof which is occupied
by two or more families as tenants of the owner or lessor, and if the owner or
lessor has failed to register as above provided or where an agent has been
designated, but cannot be found at the address given in the registration,
service of any such notice may be made by posting it upon the premises in
a conspicuous place.
§ 15-6. HOTELS; BOARDING AND ROOMING HOUSES.49
a. The name and address of the owner.
b. The name and address of the lessor.
c. The name and address of an agent in charge of the premises residing in
the municipality.
All persons required to register shall register within 30 days and any person
so required to register who fails to register within the required time shall be
subject to fine or penalty as provided in Chapter 1, Section 1-5.
§ 15-3.7 LAKEWOOD CODE § 15-6.1
AO:568
§ 15-6.1. Definitions. [1971 Code § 13-2.1; Ord. No. 98-31; Ord. No.
2003-25 § 9]
As used in this section:
BOARDING HOUSE — Shall mean any building, together with any related
structure, accessory building, and land appurtenant thereto and any part
thereof, which contains two or more units of dwelling space arranged or
intended for single room occupancy, for the accommodation of guests and
wherein financial or personal services are provided to the residents as
defined in N.J.S.A. 55:13B-3c and 55:13B-3g, respectively.
DEPARTMENT HEAD OF THE DEPARTMENT OF CODE ENFORCEMENT
AND ZONING — Shall mean the Department Head of the Department
of Code Enforcement and Zoning of the Township of Lakewood or his
designee whose job duties include the implementation and enforcement of
this chapter.
HOTEL — Shall be defined as set forth in N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3(j) et seq.,
provided that at least 85% of the units of dwelling space therein are offered
for limited tenure only.
LIMITED TENURE — Shall mean residence on a temporary basis, for no
more than a total of 30 days in any calendar year. Residence for more
than 30 days in a calendar year, at any facility shall create a rebuttable
presumption that said residency is not on a temporary basis i.e. that said
residence is primary and permanent. The 30 days need not be accumulated
consecutively.
ROOMING HOUSE — Shall mean a dwelling containing guest rooms in
which lodging is provided without meals for compensation and which is
let to two or more guests wherein no personal or financial services are
provided to the residents.
SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY — Shall mean an arrangement of dwelling
space which does not provide a private, secure dwelling space arranged for
independent living, which is not used for limited tenure occupancy.
UNIT OF DWELLING SPACE — Shall mean any room, rooms, suite, or
portion thereof, whether furnished or unfurnished, which is occupied or
intended, arranged or designed to be occupied for sleeping or dwelling
purposes by one or more persons.
§ 15-6.2. Certificate of Approval. [1971 Code § 13-2.2; Ord. No.
2003-25 § 10]
No person shall own, manage, conduct or carry on the business of a
boarding house, hotel or rooming house without first:
a. Obtaining a certificate of approval from the Department Head of the
Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning or his designee;
49.Editor's Note: See also Chapter 4, General Licensing for business licenses and permits.
§ 15-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-6.2
AO:569
§ 15-6.3. Application for Certificate of Approval. [1971 Code
§ 13-2.3; Ord. No. 2003-25 § 11]
The application for a certificate of approval to manage, conduct and carry
on the business of a hotel, boarding house or rooming house shall be made
by the operator in writing to the Department Head of the Department
of Code Enforcement and Zoning or his designee in accordance with the
procedure hereinafter provided and the application shall contain the
following information and data:
b. Obtaining a mercantile license from the Township Clerk in compliance
with the provisions of Chapter 4 of the Revised General Ordinances of
the Township.
a. Location of the premises and the names and addresses respectively of
the owner of the premises and the person operating or intending to
operate the premises. Where the applicant is not an individual, the
applicant shall state the names of all officers, members of the board of
directors and owners of more than 10% of the stock, or all officers,
trustees, directors or governing officials or all partners thereof as the
case may be.
b. Where applicant seeks a certificate of approval for a hotel, boarding
house or rooming house in an area which is not zoned to permit the use,
and the application is based on facts, which constitute a lawful
nonconforming use, the applicant shall state in the application the
name and address of the owner and operator of the premises as of the
date when the use, by reason of the zone change or variance, first
became a nonconforming use, indicating the number of rooms and the
number of guests as of that date.
c. If the applicant is not the owner of the premises, the owner's consent to
the use of the premises for a hotel, boarding house or rooming house
shall be affixed to the application.
d. There shall be submitted to the Department Head of the Department of
Code Enforcement and Zoning or his designee each application floor
plans showing the number of rooms on each floor of the premises,
including any basement rooms, the number of rooms on each floor of
such premises, the size, area and height of each of such rooms and the
size and location of each window in each room and the sanitary facilities
available for use by the guests including fixtures therein and their
location in the premises.
e. The application shall also state the number of guest rooms in the
building and the number of persons proposed to be accommodated and
shall indicate the capacity of each guest room.
f. By applying for a certificate of approval and/or a mercantile license
pursuant to Chapter 4 of the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Lakewood, the owner and/or operator of the premises is
§ 15-6.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 15-6.3
AO:570
§ 15-6.4. Inspection and Issuance of Certificate of Approval. [1971
Code § 13-2.4; Ord. No. 2003-25 § 12]
deemed to give his consent to the inspection of said premises by
Township and Board of Health personnel as required by subsection
15-6.4c below.
a. Upon receipt of an application, the Department Head of the Department
of Code Enforcement and Zoning or his designee shall inspect the
premises to ascertain if the building is suitable for the proposed
purpose and to determine if the building complies with all of the
provisions of this chapter as well as the provisions of all ordinances and
regulations of the Board of Health of the Township. If approved, the
Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning
or his designee shall issue a certificate of approval for the premises and
cause same to be delivered to the Township Clerk. The Department
Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning or his
designee may also issue a copy of the certificate of approval to the
applicant.
b. Applications shall be submitted between May 15 and July 1st of each
year or, in any event, within 20 days from the date that a certificate of
approval may be required by the applicant. Upon receipt of the
application for a certificate of approval the Department Head of the
Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning or his designee shall
issue or deny the issuance of the certificate of approval within 20 days
from the date of the application. In the event that the Department Head
of the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning or his designee
should deny the issuance of a certificate of approval, the denial shall be
in writing setting forth the reasons for the denial. All certificates of
approval shall automatically expire unless renewed on July 1st of each
year following the date of issuance.
c. The Police Chief, Fire Marshal, Department Head of the Department of
Code Enforcement and Zoning, or their respective authorized agents,
are hereby authorized and directed to make periodic inspections to
determine the condition of the hotels, boarding and rooming houses.
d. The refusal of any owner or operator of a hotel, boarding or rooming
house to permit an inspection by an authorized official of the Township
shall be grounds for denial of the certificate of approval and/or
mercantile license or the suspension of an active certificate of approval
or mercantile license until such time as the inspection has been
permitted.
e. The issuance of a certificate of approval shall evidence compliance with
the provisions of this section on the date of issuance, but shall not
constitute evidence that the premises comply with any other Township
ordinance or any State law or regulation, nor shall it relieve any other
official or public agency from enforcing any applicable ordinance or law
or regulation.
§ 15-6.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-6.5
AO:571
§ 15-6.5. Room Area, Operation and Facilities. [1971 Code § 13-2.6;
Ord. No. 2003-25 § 13]
a. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain
at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50
square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof. The ceiling height
of each sleeping room shall be not less than seven feet.
b. The number of beds in each room used for sleeping purposes shall not
be more than the number of persons permitted to sleep within a room,
in accordance with the square footage requirements of paragraph a.
The lawful capacity as herein provided shall be conspicuously posted in
each such room.
c. Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level, meeting the
requirements of all statutes and ordinances.
d. The operator and/or owner of every rooming house, boarding house and
hotel, shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls,
floors and ceilings and shall maintain sanitary conditions throughout
the hotel, boarding house and rooming house.
e. In every rooming house, hotel and boarding house, there shall be
maintained a register with one page for each room in the building,
indicating the name and address of each person occupying each room,
the date of arrival and departure of each occupant. This register shall
be available for inspection at all times, by the Department Head of the
Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning or his designee or any
Police Officer.
f. No room shall be rented or assigned to, or privately occupied, either
singly or jointly unless such person has registered.
g. No room in any hotel, boarding house or rooming house shall be rented
to sleeping or lodging purposes more than once between the hours of
6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day.
h. Every person conducting a hotel, boarding house or rooming house
shall cause each room of such house to be numbered in a plain and
conspicuous manner and such number shall be placed on the outside
door of the room and no two rooms shall bear the same number.
i. Between May 1st and October 1st of any calendar year, all sleeping
room windows in any hotel, boarding house or rooming house shall be
effectively screened with full, tight-fitting screens.
j. In every hotel, boarding house and rooming house, for each five persons
or fraction thereof, residing within the hotel, boarding house and
rooming house including members of the operator's family, wherever
they share the use of sanitary facilities, there shall be provided at least
§ 15-6.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 15-6.5
AO:572
one flush water closet, one lavatory wash basin, one bathtub, or one
shower, all properly connected to the water sewer system as approved
by the Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and
Zoning or his designee and maintained continuously in good working
condition. In hotels, boarding houses and rooming houses, however,
where the occupants are only members of the male sex, flush urinals
may be substituted for not more than 1/2 the required number of
the water closets. Hot water shall be supplied at all times for every
lavatory wash basin, bathtub or shower. All sanitary facilities shall be
located above the street level and within the building, so as to be
reasonably accessible from a common hallway or passageway to all
persons sharing such facilities.
k. The operator of every hotel, boarding house and rooming house shall,
upon renting a room, supply or furnish clean bed linen and towels for
the use of the occupants of each room and shall furnish and supply a
change of fresh bed linens and towels at least once a week for the
occupants of each room.
l. All supplied bedding shall be maintained by the operator in a clean and
sanitary condition.
m. No basement space or room or any part of which is below ground level
shall be used as a habitable room for guests.
n. The premises shall not be used for immoral purposes and the owner of
the premises and the persons operating the hotel, boarding house or
rooming house, shall not permit the premises to be used for immoral
purposes.
o. No room shall be let or leased to any persons who are unable to ascend
or descend stairs unassisted, dress and bathe without assistance, or
leave the premises without assistance, care or supervision. This section
shall not apply if, in the opinion of the Department Head of the
Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning or his designee, such
person or persons are under sufficient care and supervision so as not to
unduly endanger the health, welfare and safety of such person or
persons.
p. The operation, conduct and management of a hotel, boarding house or
rooming house shall not be under the management, control or
supervision of any person, in whole or in part convicted of a crime
involving moral turpitude, or suffering from a contagious or venereal
disease.
q. No person shall be allowed to use a lobby, hallway, closet, bathroom or
kitchen for a sleeping room.
r. No cooking or storing of foodstuffs shall be permitted in any sleeping
room of any hotel, boarding house or rooming house.
§ 15-6.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-6.5
AO:573
§ 15-6.6. Violations and Penalties. [1971 Code § 13-2.6; New]
s. Except as hereinafter provided, no community or common cooking and
eating facility (hereinafter referred to as "community kitchen") shall be
allowed in rooming houses, boarding houses or hotels. The Department
Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning or his
designee may permit a community kitchen if in the opinion of the
Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning
or his designee the operation of the community kitchen will not be
detrimental to the health and welfare of the public and of the occupants
of the rooming house, and upon substantial compliance by the operator
of the rooming house with the following standards and conditions.
1. No such special permit shall be issued to a rooming house having
over 25 rooms.
2. In the event that a community kitchen is permitted, there shall be
no cooking or storing of food permitted in any sleeping rooms.
3. There shall be provided an adequate kitchen and dining area for
the benefit of the guests making use of the kitchen and dining room
facilities.
4. The owner or operator shall be solely responsible for the
management, cleanliness and sanitation of the kitchen and dining
room area.
5. All food shall be properly stored and refrigerated and proper
garbage or refuse disposals shall be provided by the management.
6. All cooking and washing facilities shall be adequate to provide for a
clean and sanitary kitchen and dining room area.
7. The Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and
Zoning or his designee at any time shall have the right to revoke
the privilege of having a community kitchen in the event that the
community kitchen and dining room is not maintained in a proper
sanitary condition.
a. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section will, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as stated in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5.
b. Additionally, violation of any of the provisions of this section will subject
the owners and/or operator of the subject premises to the revocation or
suspension of the certificate of approval and/or mercantile license by
the Township Committee in accordance with the procedures set forth in
Chapter 4 of Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Lakewood
as more particularly set forth in subsection 4-1.8 thereof.
§ 15-6.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 15-6.7
AO:574
§ 15-6.7. Section to Act Retroactively. [1971 Code § 13-2.7]
This section shall be construed to operate retroactively as well as
prospectively in that all buildings used as hotels, boarding houses and
rooming houses shall comply with all of the terms of this section regardless
of whether the buildings were constructed or operated before or after July
12, 1962.
§ 15-6.8. Conflict of Regulations. [1971 Code § 13-2.8]
In any case where a provision of this section is found to be in conflict with
a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or other
ordinances of the Township or any other law applicable to the Township
of Lakewood, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the
promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail
and the lower standard is hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that
it is in conflict with the higher standard or provision.
§ 15-7. SENIOR CITIZEN AND DISABLED TENANTS PROTECTION
IN CONDOMINIUM, COOPERATIVE, AND BUILDING
CONVERSIONS.
§ 15-7.1. Administration. [1971 Code § 13B-1]
The Township Committee does hereby appoint the Township Clerk as the
designated administrator of this program pursuant to P.L. 1981 C. 226.
§ 15-7.2. Responsibilities of Owners and Landlords. [1971 Code
§ 13B-2]
An owner, landlord or sponsor who initiates a conversion of a building
containing rental housing units to condominium or cooperative forms of
housing must submit a notification to the Township Clerk containing a
complete list of tenants in the building, stamped envelopes addressed to
each, sufficient copies of the Notice of Intent, tenant notification
requirement, application form and fact sheet for all tenants as set forth in
the Senior Citizen and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act and the regulations
promulgated thereunder, along with the filing fee set forth herein.
§ 15-7.3. Responsibilities of the Administrator. [1971 Code § 13B-3]
a. The Township Clerk or the designated representative shall, upon the
notification from an owner, landlord or sponsor of intention to convert
rental property to a condominium or cooperative, collect the fee
therefor as set forth below, the list of tenants residing in the building, a
stamped-addressed, unsealed envelope and a protected tenancy
application for each tenant with the notice from the Department of
Community Affairs, Bureau of Landlord-Tenant Relations and all other
required notification or information set forth in the aforementioned Act
or the regulations promulgated by the State of New Jersey Department
of Community Affairs, Division of Housing in accordance with said law.
§ 15-6.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-7.3
AO:575
§ 15-7.4. Application Fee. [1971 Code § 13B-4]
There is hereby established a fee of $20 per unit to be converted which shall
be payable upon filing the Notification of Conversion with the Township
Clerk. Said fee is established to help defray the cost of administering this
section.
§ 15-7.5. Right of Appeal. [1971 Code § 13B-5]
Any tenant or owner, landlord or sponsor who feels aggrieved by the
determination of eligibility by the Township Clerk may appeal the
determination to the Appeal Board established herein provided said appeal
is made within 10 days of written notification of eligibility status.
§ 15-7.6. Appeal Board. [1971 Code §§ 13B-6—13B-13]
b. In addition to the above duties the Township Clerk shall determine
eligibility requirements for Protected Tenancy under P.L. 1981, C. 226
for all tenants who file within 60 days of receipt of the information
referred to in paragraph a of this section. Said decisions shall be
rendered within 30 days of receipt of the eligibility application, shall be
in writing and shall contain the reasons therefor.
c. Any complaints concerning illegal evictions, or unlawful rental
increases in violation of the Senior Citizen and Disabled Protected
Tenancy Act shall be within the jurisdiction of the Township of
Lakewood Rent Control Board and not the Township Clerk.
a. Created. There is hereby created by the Township Committee a Senior
Citizen and Disabled Protected Tenancy Appeal Board consisting of
three members who must be residents of the Township.
b. Terms of Office. The first member appointed shall be for a term of three
years, the second member for a term of two years, and the third
member for a term of one year. Thereafter, the term of office for each
member of the Board shall be three years so as to provide for staggered
expiration dates. Members shall serve until their term expires and until
a successor is appointed.
c. Conflict of Interest. No member shall be permitted to act on any matter
on which he or she has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest.
d. Removal. A member may, after public hearing if he or she requests it, be
removed by the governing body for cause.
e. Vacancy. If any vacancy shall occur, it shall be filled by appointment as
above provided for the unexpired term and until a successor is
appointed.
§ 15-7.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 15-7.6
AO:576
§ 15-7.7. Hearings. [1971 Code § 13B-14]
The Board shall schedule a hearing within 10 days of receipt of the appeal
and render its decision within 10 days of the hearing. In conducting the
hearing the Board shall have the following additional powers:
f. Quorum. A majority of the whole number of members of the Board shall
constitute a quorum. No decision shall be rendered by the Board
without the affirmative vote of the majority of the quorum.
g. Chairman and Vice-chairman. The members of the Board shall annually
choose a chairman and in his absence a vice-chairman to preside over
all meetings of the Board.
h. Powers and Duties. The Board is hereby granted jurisdiction to hear
appeals or challenges filed by any tenant, owner, landlord or sponsor
who feels aggrieved by the determination of eligibility made by the
Township Clerk. The Board shall have all the powers necessary and
appropriate to carry out and execute the purposes of appeals under the
Senior Citizen and Disabled Protected Tenancy Act, including but not
limited to, the power:
1. To adopt by-laws governing its procedural operation.
2. To conduct hearings on each appeal properly presented to it as
more particularly set forth in the hearing procedure outlined below.
3. To reverse, modify or affirm the decision of the Township Clerk.
4. Each of its members shall have the power to administer oaths and
issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and
production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and
documents presented by the parties and the provisions of the
"County and Municipal Investigations Law," P.L. 1953 c.38
(2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
a. The testimony of all witnesses shall be taken under oath or affirmation
by the presiding officer or such designee, and the right of crossexamination
shall be permitted to all interested parties subject to the
discretion of the presiding officer and to reasonable limitations as to
time and the number of witnesses.
b. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but
the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious
evidence.
c. The Board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the proceedings
by mechanical or electronic means. Any person desiring a transcript of
the hearing shall obtain same at his or her own cost through the use of a
certified shorthand reporter licensed in the State of New Jersey.
§ 15-7.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 15-7.7
AO:577
§ 15-7.8. Appeal Fees. [1971 Code § 13B-15]
Each appellant shall pay a fee of $50 upon filing the appeal to help defray
the costs of administering this section.
§ 15-8. EMERGENCY FUEL OIL DELIVERY.
§ 15-8.1. Authorization of Public Officer as Agent. [1971 Code
§ 13-11.1; Ord. No. 2003-25 § 14]
§ 15-8.2. Payment. [1971 Code § 13-11.2]
The Township shall issue a voucher to any fuel oil dealer who delivers fuel
oil or refires the burner as set forth in subsection 15-8.1 hereinabove, for
the money amount due on the fuel oil delivered and the service for refiring
the burner, if any. The voucher shall be paid in the manner provided for the
approval and payment of claims pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17.
§ 15-8.3. Penalty; Reimbursement for Costs. [1971 Code § 13-11.3]
d. Each decision shall be in writing and include findings of fact and
conclusions of law based upon the evidence presented before the Board
or reasonable inferences therefrom.
a. The Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and
Zoning or his designee is hereby designated whenever necessary to
protect the health and safety of residential tenants, to act as an agent
for any landlord of a residential rental property within the Township
where the landlord has failed to maintain heat in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 26:3-31.
b. The designated agent may engage a fuel oil dealer to deliver fuel oil at a
reasonable price per gallon and to refire the burner in order to restore
the proper heating of any residential property rented by said landlord;
provided, however, that at least 12 hours have elapsed, if the outside air
temperature is between 33 degrees Fahrenheit and 55 degrees
Fahrenheit, inclusive or, at least four hours have elapsed if the outside
air temperature is 32 degrees Fahrenheit or less, from the filing of a
complaint with the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning. Prior
to the filing of a complaint a bona fide attempt must be made by the
tenant or his representative to notify the landlord of the lack of heat,
and the landlord has failed to take appropriate action.
c. Notwithstanding any provisions contained in this section to the
contrary, the Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement
and Zoning or his designee shall have no authority to implement the
terms of this subsection without obtaining prior approval by the
Township Committee in each instance. Said approval may be issued by
the Township Committee on a case by case basis and it may be done by
motion of the Township Committee.
§ 15-7.7 LAKEWOOD CODE § 15-8.3
AO:578
§ 15-8.4. Non-Liability of Township. [1971 Code § 13-11.4]
Neither the Township nor any of its employees shall be liable for any
damages to any person or property in enforcing this section except for the
gross negligence or malfeasance of any official, officer or employee of the
Township, and under no circumstances shall the Township be held liable for
damages from the lack of heat in the residential property.
§ 15-8.5. Non-Applicability. [1971 Code § 13-11.5]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to owner-occupied residential
rental properties containing five units or less.
Chapter 16
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
[Editor's Note: For regulations concerning abandoned motor
vehicles, see Chapter 3, Section 3-9. See also Chapter 20, Section
20-5, for removal of snow and ice on streets and sidewalks.]
§ 16-1. REMOVAL OF GRASS, WEEDS, BRUSH, TRASH AND
DEBRIS.
a. Any landlord or his agent whose negligence or failure to act results in
municipal action pursuant to subsection 15-8.1 shall be liable to a civil
penalty of not more than $300 for each affected dwelling unit in the
residential rental property. Pursuant to P.L. 1980, c. 170, such penalty
shall be recoverable by the Township in a civil action by a summary
proceeding under the "Penalty Enforcement Law," N.J.S.A. 2A:58-1 et
seq. Any action to collect or enforce any such penalty shall be brought
in the Superior Court, Special Civil Part or Municipal Court. The
amount of such penalty shall be paid to the Township to be used for
general municipal purposes.
b. In any penalty enforcement proceeding brought pursuant to P.L. 1980,
c. 170, the Court shall also order the landlord or his agent to reimburse
the Township for the actual costs incurred for any fuel oil delivered and
the service charge for refiring the burner, if any, and for reasonable
attorney's fees and costs. The Court shall further be empowered to
issue any appropriate injunctive orders, and to authorize immediate
collection of reimbursable costs due the Township out of the goods and
chattels of the landlord, including all sums due, or which may come due,
as present or future rents. Any landlord who prevails in such an action
shall be entitled to reimbursement by the Township for all reasonable
costs and expenses. Such landlord, however, shall still remain
responsible for the cost of any fuel oil delivered and any charge for
refiring the burner, incurred by the Township.
§ 15-8.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.1
AO:579
§ 16-1.1. Definitions. [1971 Code § 4-5.1]
As used in this section:
ENCLOSED GARAGE — Shall mean a garage or building having all sides
sufficiently enclosed to prevent access to automobiles by children, rodents,
vermin or insect pests and enclosed in such manner as to screen such
automobiles or parts thereof from public view.
TRASH OR DEBRIS — Shall mean and include the following:
§ 16-1.2. Duties of Owners and Tenants. [1971 Code § 4-5.2]
It shall be the duty of any owner or tenant or person in possession of any
lands in the Township:
§ 16-1.3. Order to Remove. [1971 Code § 4-5.3]
Whenever any Township Inspector, Police Officer or Special Police Officer
deems it necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public health,
safety, general welfare, or the elimination of a fire hazard, or upon
investigation of a complaint of any resident, officer or employee of the
Township, he may order the owner, tenant or person in possession of any
lands on which any brush, grass, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps,
roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash or other debris are found to
exist, to remove same within 10 days or to cause the removal thereof if the
order is not complied with.
Automobiles left standing in an unlicensed and unusable state or
condition, or parts thereof left outside of an enclosed garage, so as
to be accessible to children, rodents, vermin, or insect pests, or in
such condition or location as to create an unsightly appearance to
neighboring property owners or the general public. In no event shall
such an automobile or parts thereof be left standing in other than an
enclosed garage for a period in excess of 15 days unless the automobile
is situated on a used car lot or new car sales establishment duly
licensed for such purpose.
a.
Junk shall include but not be limited to scraps of metal, wood, pieces
of stone, cement, cans, bottles, scrap paper, or a combination thereof,
left in such a condition as to create an unsightly, unhealthful, unsafe,
or unsanitary condition, or in such manner as would constitute a fire or
health hazard.
b.
a. To keep such lands free of brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps,
roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris, where the
same are inimical to the preservation of public health, safety or general
welfare of the Township, or which may constitute a fire hazard.
b. Where the lands abut or border upon any public street in the Township,
to remove all grass, weeds, brush and other debris from that part of the
street bordering on their respective lands.
§ 16-1.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 16-1.4
AO:580
§ 16-1.4. Service of Notice. [1971 Code § 4-5.4]
After an investigation of a complaint of any resident, officer or employee
of the Township, or upon his own motion, any Township Inspector, Police
Officer or Special Police Officer shall proceed with regard to the manner
of service of notice to remove the contents thereof as provided in N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.13.
§ 16-1.5. Removal by Township; Costs Established as a Lien. [1971
Code § 4-5.5; New; Ord. No. 2004-43 §§ 1—4; Ord. No. 2009-23 § 1]
In the event the owner, tenant or person in possession of the lands in
question refuses or neglects to abate or remedy the condition complained
of within seven days after receipt of notice, any Township Inspector, Code
Enforcement Officer, Police Officer or Special Police Officer may cause the
condition complained of to be abated and remedied and shall certify the
cost thereof to the Township Tax Collector, who shall cause the cost as
shown thereon to be charged against the lands. The amount so charged
shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands and shall be added to and
become and form a part of the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon
such lands, the same to bear interest at the same rate as taxes, which shall
be collected and enforced by the Tax Collector in the same manner as taxes.
Costs shall be in addition to any penalties imposed for a violation of this
section.
In the event that the order for removal of trash or debris is as a result
of the trash or debris being located on the Township right-of-way and the
owner, tenant or person in possession of the lands in question refuses or
neglects to abate or remedy the condition complained of within 48 hours
after receipt of notice, any Township Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer,
Police Officer or Special Police Officer may cause the condition complained
of to be abated and remedied and shall certify the cost thereof to the
Township Tax Collector, who shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be
charged against the lands. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a
lien upon such lands and shall be added to and become and form a part of
the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon such lands, the same to bear
interest at the same rate as taxes, which shall be collected and enforced by
the Tax Collector in the same manner as taxes. Costs shall be in addition to
any penalties imposed for a violation of this section.
§ 16-1.6. Exceptions. [1971 Code § 4-5.6]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to a regular established and
licensed business known as a junk yard, or a towing operator's storage yard,
a. Violations and Penalties. All violators of this section shall be subject to a
penalty of $250 for each violation or 30 days community service or
both.
Each and every day in which a violation of this section exists shall
constitute a separate violation subject to a penalty.
§ 16-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-1.6
AO:581
which business is subject to the special regulations provided in Chapter 4,
General Licensing.
§ 16-1.7. Regulations for the Removal of Household Goods. [Ord.
No. 2015-56]
§ 16-2. CLEAR VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS.
a. Regulations. In the event the contents of a house are removed without
following the Township bulk pick up procedure, the owner, tenant or
person in possession of the land in question must remove the contents
from the property in question within seven days after receipt of a notice
to remove the same.
Any Township Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, Police Officer or
Special Police Officer who deems it necessary and expedient for the
preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare may order
the owner, tenant or person in possession of the land in question, who
has not notified the Township Department of Public Works requesting a
bulk pick up, to remove the contents from the property within 10 days
or cause the removal thereof if the order is not complied with.
After investigation of a complaint of any resident, officer or employee
of the Township, or upon the Township employee's own motion, any
Township Inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, Police Officer or Special
Police Officer shall proceed with regard to the manner of the service of
notice to remove the contents thereof.
In the event the owner, tenant or person in possession of the land
in question refuses or neglects to abate or remedy the condition
complained of within seven days after receipt of the notice, any
Township inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, Police Officer or Special
Police Officer may cause the condition complained of to be abated
and remedied and shall certify the course thereof to the Township Tax
Collector who shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged
against the land. The amount so charged shall become a lien upon such
lands and shall be added to and become part of the taxes next to be
assessed and levied upon such land, the same to bear interest at the
same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced by the Tax
Collector in the same manner as taxes.
The cost to be determined for the removal of the property shall be
determined by the Department of Public Works which shall include
manpower and equipment costs.
b. Violations and Penalties.
1. All violators of this subsection shall also be subject to a penalty of
$250.00 for each violation.
2. Each and every day in which a violation of this subsection exists
shall constitute a separate violation subject to a penalty.
§ 16-1.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 16-2.1
AO:582
§ 16-2.1. Height Restricted. [1971 Code § 4-6.1]
It shall be the responsibility of any owner, tenant or occupant of any parcel
of land within the Township to cut all brush, hedges and other plant life
growing within 10 feet of any roadway and within 25 feet of any intersection
of two roadways, to a height of not more than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet
provided such shall be necessary and expedient for the preservation of the
public safety. The owner, tenant or occupant shall have 10 days after notice
to cut the same.
§ 16-2.2. Inspection and Determination by Township. [1971 Code
§ 4-6.2]
At least once in each calendar year the Township Committee shall examine
all roadways in the Township and make a determination of each parcel of
land where it is necessary and expedient for the preservation of the public
safety to have any brush, hedges or other plant life cut in accordance with
this section of the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.26 and 40:48-2.27.
§ 16-2.3. Notice to Remove. [1971 Code § 4-6.3]
When the Township Committee ascertains that there is a parcel of land on
which exist the conditions described in this section, it shall cause notice
to be given to the owner, tenant or occupant of the land to cut the brush,
hedges or other plant life within 10 days after the notice is given. The notice
shall be given in writing, either personally or by the United States mail. If
neither method of giving notice is possible or practical, notice may be given
by posting it in a prominent place on the parcel of land.
§ 16-2.4. Removal by Township; Cost Established as Lien. [1971
Code § 4-6.4; Ord. No. 2009-23 § 2]
If the owner, tenant or occupant fails to cut the brush within 10 days, the
Public Works Director shall direct the Township employee or arrange for an
independent contractor, to cut the brush, hedges or other plant life. Where
such cutting is done by the Public Works Director, or any other person, or
under his direction, he shall certify the cost thereof to the Township Tax
Collector who shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged against
the land. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon the
lands and shall be added to and become and form part of the taxes next to
be assessed and levied upon the lands, the same to bear interest at the same
rate as other taxes and shall be collected and enforced by the same officers
and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 16-3. STANDARDS FOR ALL STRUCTURES.
§ 16-3.1. Findings. [1971 Code § 13-9.1; Ord. No. 2008-53 § 1]
There exists in the Township structures used for various purposes which
are, or may become in the future, substandard with respect to structure,
equipment or maintenance due to structural deterioration, lack of
§ 16-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-3.1
AO:583
maintenance in the appearance of the exterior of premises, infestation, lack
of essential heating, plumbing, storage or refrigeration equipment, lack
of maintenance or upkeep of essential utilities and facilities, inadequate
provisions for light and air, unsanitary conditions and overcrowding. These
structures constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals, welfare and
reasonable comfort of the citizens and inhabitants of the Township. In
addition, by reason of lack of maintenance and progressive deterioration,
certain properties may have the further effect of creating blighted
conditions and initiating slums, and that if the same are not curtailed and
removed, the aforesaid conditions will grow and spread and will necessitate
in time the expenditure of large amounts of public funds to correct and
eliminate the same. By reason of timely regulations and restrictions as
herein contained, the growth of slums and blight may be prevented and
the neighborhood and property values thereby maintained, the desirability
and amenities of residential and nonresidential uses and neighborhoods
enhanced and the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered.
§ 16-3.2. Purpose. [1971 Code § 13-9.2]
The purpose of this section is to protect the public health, safety, morals,
and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the
maintenance, appearance, condition and occupancy of nonresidential
premises. This section also establishes minimum standards governing
utilities, facilities and other physical components and conditions essential
to make the aforesaid facilities fit for human habitation, occupancy and
use. This section also fixes certain responsibilities and duties upon owners
and operators, and distinct and separate responsibilities and duties upon
occupants, to authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of
premises. It also sets penalties for the violations of this section; and
provides for the repair, demolition or vacation of premises unfit for
occupancy or use. This section is hereby declared to be remedial and
essential for the public interest and it is intended that this section be
liberally construed to effectuate the purposes as stated herein.
§ 16-3.3. Definitions. [1971 Code § 13-9.3]
As used in this section.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure the use of which is
incidental to that of the main building and which is attached thereto or
located on the same premises.
DETERIORATION — Shall mean the condition of a building or part thereof,
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting,
or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of maintenance or
excessive use.
FIRE HAZARD — Shall mean:
Any device or condition likely to cause fire and which is so situated to
endanger either persons or property.
a.
§ 16-3.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 16-3.3
AO:584
GARBAGE — Shall mean all refuse of residences, hotels, restaurants, or
other places where food is prepared for human consumption, and all offal
from fish, meat and vegetable markets, and all vegetable or organic
substances unfit for food that are subject to immediate decay.
INFESTATION — Shall mean the presence of insects, rodents, vermin or
other pests on the premises.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any person who has charge, care or control of a
premises, or any part thereof, whether with or without the knowledge and
consent of the owner.
OWNER — Shall mean any person who, alone or jointly or severally with
others, shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care or
control as owner or tenant of the owner, or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee, receiver, or guardian of the estate,
or as a mortgagee in possession regardless of how such possession was
obtained.
PLUMBING — Shall mean all of the following: supplies, facilities and
equipment, gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage
disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers,
lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes washing machines,
catch basins, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all
connections to water, sewer and gas lines, and water pipes and lines utilized
in conjunction with air-conditioning equipment.
PREMISES — Shall mean a lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings
or structures thereon.
REST ROOM — Shall mean an enclosed space containing one or more toilets
and one or more lavatories or fixture serving similar purposes.
RUBBISH — Shall mean all combustible and non-combustible waste
materials, except garbage, and shall include, but not be limited to, the
residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other combustible
material, paper, rags, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery,
abandoned automobiles and dust.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean any combination of any materials, whether fixed
or portable, forming a construction, including buildings.
VENTILATION — Shall mean supply and removal of air to and from any
space by natural or mechanical means.
The creation, maintenance or continuance of any physical condition by
reason of which exists a use, accumulation or storage of combustible
explosive material in such a manner to put in jeopardy, in event of
ignition, either persons or property.
b.
Obstruction of fire escapes, ladders, stairways, aisles, exits, doors,
windows, passageways or hallways. In the event of fire, interference
with the operations of the Fire Department to safely exit occupants.
c.
§ 16-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-3.3
AO:585
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL — Shall mean ventilation by power-driven
devices.
VENTILATION, NATURAL — Shall mean ventilation by opening to outer air
through windows, skylights, door, louvres, or stacks with or without winddriven
devices.
WEATHERING — Shall mean deterioration, decay or damage caused by
exposure to the elements.
§ 16-3.4. Applicability. [1971 Code § 13-9.4]
Every building and the premises on which it is situated shall comply with
the provisions of this section, whether or not such building shall have been
constructed, altered or repaired before or after February 24, 1972, and
irrespective of any permits or licenses which shall have been issued for
the use or occupancy of the building or premises for the construction or
repair of the building, or for the installation or repair of equipment or
facilities. This section establishes minimum standards for the initial and
continued occupancy and use of all such buildings, and does not replace
or modify standards otherwise established for the construction, repair,
alteration or use of the building, equipment or facilities contained therein,
except as provided in Chapter 12, Section 12-1, the Uniform Construction
Code Enforcing Agency.
§ 16-3.5. Higher Standard to Prevail. [1971 Code § 13-9.5]
In any case where the provisions of this section impose a higher standard
than set forth in any other ordinance or law, then the standards as set
forth herein shall prevail; but if the provisions of this section impose a
lower standard than any other ordinance or law, then the higher standard
contained in such other ordinance or law, shall prevail.
§ 16-3.6. Enforcement and Compliance. [1971 Code § 13-9.6]
No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this section
shall constitute a defense to any violation of any other ordinance of the
Township applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provisions
herein relieve any owner, operator or occupant from complying with any
such other provisions, nor any official of the Township from enforcing any
such other provisions.
§ 16-3.7. General Responsibilities. [1971 Code § 13-9.7]
a. Owners and operators shall have all the duties and responsibilities as
prescribed in Chapter 12, and the regulations promulgated pursuant
thereto, and no owner or operator shall be relieved from any such duty
and responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge of
violation thereof by reason of the fact that the occupant is also
responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
§ 16-3.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 16-3.7
AO:586
§ 16-3.8. Duties and Responsibilities of Owner and Operator. [1971
Code § 13-9.8]
The following duties and responsibilities are hereby imposed upon every
owner and operator of any building covered by the provisions of this section.
b. Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as prescribed in
Chapter 12, and all the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, and
the occupant shall not be relieved from any such duty and responsibility
nor be entitled to defend against any charge of violation thereof by
reason of the fact that the owner is also responsible therefor and in
violation thereof.
c. Unless expressly provided to the contrary in this section, the respective
obligations and responsibilities of the owner and operator on one hand,
and the occupant on the other, shall not be altered or affected by any
agreement or contract by and between any of the aforesaid or between
them and other parties.
a. The exterior of the premises and all structures thereon shall be kept
free of all nuisances, and any hazards to the safety of occupants,
pedestrians and other persons utilizing the premises, and free of
unsanitary condition. Any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed
and abated by the owner or operator. The items prohibited hereby shall
include, but not be limited to: brush, weeds, broken glass, stump roots,
obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash, refuse, debris, dead and dying
trees and limbs or other natural growth, loose and over-hanging
objects, and ground surface hazards.
b. Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound, free from defects and
damage, and capable of bearing imposed loads safely.
c. Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto shall be maintained
structurally sound, free from defects, and so maintained as to capably
perform at all times the functions for which they were designed.
Chimneys, flues, gas vents or other draft producing equipment shall
provide sufficient draft to develop the rated output of the connected
equipment, shall be structurally safe, durable, smoke-tight and capable
of withstanding the action of flue gases.
d. Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall be
provided with banisters or railings properly designed and maintained to
minimize the hazard of falling, and the same shall be kept structurally
sound, in good repair, and free from defects.
e. The exterior of the premises and the condition of accessory structures
shall be maintained so that the appearance of the premises and all
buildings thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with
standards of the Township.
f. Premises shall be kept landscaped and lawns, hedges and bushes shall
be kept trimmed and properly maintained.
§ 16-3.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-3.8
AO:587
g. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to public view permitted by
reason of other ordinances or laws shall be maintained in good repair.
Any signs which have excessively weathered or faded or those upon
which the paint has peeled or cracked shall, with their supporting
members, be removed forthwith or put into a good state of repair.
h. All display windows or store fronts constructed of plate glass shall be
kept clean and free of cracks, and no storage shall be permitted therein.
Broken or cracked windows must be replaced within five days.
i. All store fronts shall be kept in good repair, painted where required,
and shall not constitute a safety hazard or nuisance. In the event
repairs to a store front become necessary, such repairs shall be made
with the same or similar materials used in the construction of the store
front in such a manner to maintain the appearance in accordance with
the standards of the Township.
j. Except for "For Rent" and "For Sale" signs, any temporary sign or other
paper advertising material glued or otherwise attached to a window or
otherwise exposed to public view shall be removed either at the
expiration of the event or sale for which it is erected, or within 30 days
after erection, whichever shall occur first.
k. Any awnings or marquees and its accompanying structural members
which extend over any street, sidewalk or other portion of the premises
shall be maintained in good repair and shall not constitute a nuisance or
a safety hazard. In the event such awnings or marquees are not
maintained in accordance with the foregoing, they shall, together with
their supporting members, be removed forthwith. In the event such
awnings or marquees are made of cloth, plastic or similar materials,
such cloth or plastic where exposed to public view shall be maintained
in good condition and shall not show evidence of excessive weathering,
discoloration, ripping, tearing or other holes. Nothing herein shall be
construed to authorize any encroachment on streets, sidewalks or other
parts of the public domain.
l. The exterior of every structure or accessory structure shall be kept in
good repair and kept painted where necessary for purposes of
preservation and appearance. All surfaces shall be maintained free of
broken glass, loose shingles, crumbling stone or brick, peeling paint or
other conditions reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance.
m. Restrooms shall be surfaced with waterproof floors and shall be kept
dry, clean, and sanitary at all times. Sufficient restrooms shall be
installed and maintained commensurate with the use of the premises.
Every restroom shall be provided with a permanently installed artificial
lighting fixture, and a wall switch in accordance with the State Uniform
Construction Code.
n. All premises shall be properly connected to and provided with electric
power. All such connections and electrical equipment shall be installed
§ 16-3.8 LAKEWOOD CODE § 16-3.8
AO:588
§ 16-3.9. Duties of Occupant. [1971 Code § 13-9.9; Ord. No. 2003-30
§ 1]
The following duties and responsibilities are hereby imposed upon every
occupant of any building covered by the provisions of this section.
§ 16-3.10. Administration. [1971 Code § 13-9.10]
Except for paragraph h of subsection 16-3.8 pertaining to dangerous or
hazardous condition, a notice in writing shall be given to the owner or
occupant thereof to remove or abate the same within such time as shall
be specified therein but not less than five days from the date of service
thereof. In the event the owner cannot be so notified, such notice shall be
left at that place with the tenant or occupant, or posted on the premises and
such action shall be considered proper notification to the owner, tenant or
occupant thereof.
§ 16-3.11. All Units or Buildings; Certificates of Occupancy
Required.50 [1971 Code § 13-9.11; New; Ord. No. 2003-30 § 2; Ord.
No. 2008-53 § 1; Ord. No. 2009-13 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-14]
and maintained in conformity with the provisions of the State Uniform
Construction Code and other applicable ordinances.
o. Maximum fuse sizes consistent with safety shall be posted
conspicuously, and no fuse shall be installed in a fuse box in excess of
the stated maximum except that owners and operators shall not be
responsible for violation in fuse installations without their knowledge
where the correct maximum is stated and the fuse box is located within
any part of the premises which is in the exclusive possession of
occupants other than the owner, in which case such occupant shall be
responsible for such violations.
a. Upon discovery by an occupant of any condition on the premises which
constitutes a violation of the provisions of this section, the occupant
shall report the same to the Office of the Department of Code
Enforcement and Zoning.
b. All parts of the premises under the control of the occupant shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition.
c. Storage bins, rooms and areas shall not be used for the accumulation of
garbage or refuse.
d. Every occupant shall be responsible for the elimination of infestation in
and on the premises subject to his control.
e. No occupant shall install electrical fuses in a fuse box in excess of the
posted limit.
f. Each occupant shall be responsible for the elimination and removal of
trash and garbage from premises under his control.
§ 16-3.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-3.11
AO:589
a. Certificate of Occupancy. Any person, corporation, partnership, agent,
firm or other legal entity who sells, leases, rents, or sublets any
nonresidential building or structure in whole or in part, or who changes
the use thereof, shall be required to, prior to said action, obtain a
Certificate of Occupancy or a temporary Certificate of Occupancy from
the Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and
Zoning of the Township of Lakewood or his designee.
b. Application Procedure; Fee.
1. The application for a Certificate of Occupancy shall be in writing on
a form approved by the Department Head of the Department of
Code Enforcement and Zoning of the Township of Lakewood or his
designee and shall list at least the following information:
(a) Name and address of applicant.
(b) Street address, tax block and lot of the premises to be
inspected.
(c) Name and current address of proposed occupant.
(d) Existing use of the premises.
(e) Proposed use of the premises.
(f) A description of any proposed alterations or modifications to
the premises in brief detail or an indication that there will be
no alterations or modifications to the premises.
(g) Any other pertinent information that may be requested by the
Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning or the
Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and
Zoning or his designee.
2. Fees. The fee for the Certificate of Occupancy, including the review
of the application and inspection, shall be $150 and shall be paid
with the submission of the application. The fee for each
reinspection for the Certificate of Occupancy shall be $55 and shall
be paid with the submission of the application.
c. Time for Inspection; Waiver. It shall be the obligation of the Department
Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning or his
designee, upon receipt of a completed written application and
appropriate fee as set forth above, to have an inspection made of the
premises and a written report thereof completed and available to the
applicant at the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning of the
Township of Lakewood within 72 hours of receipt of a complete written
inspection application with an appropriate fee therefor. In the
calculation of the 72 hours only normal working days shall be included,
50.Editor's Note: See also Chapter 12, Subsection 12-2.6 for fees for Certificates of
Occupancy.
§ 16-3.11 LAKEWOOD CODE § 16-3.11
AO:590
excepting therefrom holidays and weekends. Additionally, the time for
commencing of the 72 hour time period shall be the next regular
working day after receipt of the completed application and fee. The
failure of the Township to issue a Certificate of Occupancy, a temporary
Certificate of Occupancy, or a written inspection report denying the
certificates and specifying the reasons within the time period therefor
shall be deemed a waiver by the Township of the requirement for a
Certificate of Occupancy from the premises for this particular sale,
rental or occupancy.
d. Purpose. The purpose of the inspection required herein shall be as
follows:
1. To determine that the use and occupancy thereof is in conformance
with zoning regulations.
2. To eliminate any fire or safety hazards that may exist in the
premises.
3. To determine that all means of ingress and egress are adequate per
applicable building code requirements.
4. To determine that the structural strength of the building is
adequate for the proposed use and occupancy.
5. To determine whether unauthorized work has taken place at the
premises in violation of applicable fire, health, safety and building
codes.
6. To insure that the premises are safe for use by occupants and
members of the public.
7. To provide accurate information on file for the use of all
Departments of the Township of Lakewood concerning the use,
ownership, tenancy, occupancy and other important information
pertaining to the subject premises.
e. Definitions. As used in this section:
BUILDINGS — Shall mean all buildings which are intended, arranged,
or designed for human occupancy for any purpose whatsoever.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — Shall mean a certificate issued by
the Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and
Zoning or his designee which indicates that an inspection has been
made of the subject premises and that the proposed use or occupancy of
the subject premises, which shall be listed thereon and derived from the
application, is not in violation of any applicable Federal, State, County
or municipal law, regulation, code or ordinance.
CHANGE OF USE — Shall mean any change in the use or activity of
a subject premises from the current use to a use not permitted by
the existing Municipal Land Use Ordinance; or a change in use which
would require under other provisions of law enacted for the protection
§ 16-3.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-3.11
AO:591
§ 16-4. GRAFFITI ABATEMENT.
§ 16-4.1. Purpose and Intent. [Ord. No. 2010-60]
The Township Committee of the Township of Lakewood finds graffiti on
public or private property a blighting element, which leads to depreciation
of the value of property that has been targeted by such vandalism and
depreciates the value of the adjacent and surrounding properties to the
extent that graffiti creates a negative impact upon the entire Township.
The Township Committee finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious
and a public nuisance, and must be eliminated by means of prevention,
education and abatement to avoid the detrimental impact of such graffiti on
the Township and its residents, and to prevent the further spread of graffiti.
The purpose and intent of the Township Committee, through the adoption of
this section, is to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and
private property from acts of vandalism and defacement. It is the further
intent of the Township Committee, through the adoption of this section, to
provide notice to all of those who disregard the property rights of others,
that the law enforcement agencies of the Township, the Police Department,
Code Compliance Section and the Township Attorney, will strictly enforce
the law and vigorously prosecute those persons engaging in violations of
this section.
of the public health, safety and welfare, greater building construction
requirements than presently exist for the current use of the premises.
TEMPORARY CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — Shall mean a
certificate issued by the Construction Official or his designated
representative indicating that an inspection was made of the subject
premises and that there exist minor violations of applicable laws, etc.,
as set forth above, which are designated thereon, and which violations
do not constitute a danger to the public health, safety or welfare, and
which permits a temporary occupancy or change in use of the premises
for a period not to exceed 30 days, provided both the owner and
proposed occupant sign said certificate and acknowledge same prior to
the change in occupancy or use thereof.
f. Liability. Any person or legal entity that sells, leases, rents, sublets or
occupies a building or structure, in whole or in part, whether that
person or legal entity be the owner, tenant or mere occupant thereof,
shall be jointly and severally liable for a violation of this subsection
unless a certificate of occupancy or a temporary certificate of
occupancy has been issued for the subject premises prior to the change
in use or occupancy thereof or a waiver of the requirement as set forth
above has occurred.
g. Penalty. Any person or legal entity found guilty of a violation of this
subsection shall be subject to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Section
1-5.
§ 16-3.11 LAKEWOOD CODE § 16-4.2
AO:592
§ 16-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2010-60]
AEROSOL PAINT CONTAINER — Shall mean any aerosol container, which
is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substance
capable of defacing property.
FELT-TIP MARKER — Shall mean any tipped style marker or similar
implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is one-eighth (1/8) inch,
or greater.
GRAFFITI — Shall mean any unauthorized inscribing, word, figure, or
design which is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted, pasted or
otherwise affixed to or on any surface, regardless of the nature of the
material of that structural component, to the extent the same was not
authorized in advance by the owner thereof, or despite advance
authorization, is otherwise deemed by the Township Committee to be a
public nuisance.
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT — Shall mean an aerosol paint container, a felt tip
marker, or any other device containing any solution or substance capable
of being used to leave a visible mark at least one-eighth (1/8) of an inch in
width upon any surface.
§ 16-4.3. Declaration of Nuisance. [Ord. No. 2010-60]
§ 16-4.4. Graffiti Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2010-60]
a. The Township Committee hereby declares and finds graffiti to be a
nuisance subject to abatement according to the provisions and
procedures herein contained and as authorized by New Jersey Statutes
N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.
b. The existence of any surface of a structure on any privately owned
parcel of land which has been defaced with graffiti after removal more
than five times in 12 months is hereby deemed to be a nuisance, and
may be abated by the Township by order of the Township Committee
requiring modifications thereto, or to the immediate area surrounding
same. Such modifications may include, but are not limited to
retrofitting of such surfaces at the expense of the property owner(s) of
said lot, with such features or qualities as may be established by the
Township as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the surface for
graffiti, or as necessary to permit more convenient, expedient or
efficient removal of graffiti therefrom.
a. No person shall place graffiti or other writing upon any public or
privately owned tree or structures including, but not limited to,
buildings, walls, fences, poles and signs, ("structures" hereinafter in
this section) located within the Township. It shall also be unlawful for
any person to apply or affix any adhesive backed label, sticker, "bumper
sticker" or similar item, to any tree or structure not owned or lawfully
possessed by such person.
§ 16-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-4.4
AO:593
§ 16-4.5. Possession of Graffiti Implements by Minors Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 2010-60]
Possession of any graffiti implement by any person under the age of 18
years with the intent to deface property while upon public or private
property shall be unlawful unless that minor has received the consent of
the owner of such private property whose consent to such possession and
presence is given in writing in advance or unless that minor is accompanied
by and under the supervision of a parent or legal guardian. This provision
shall not apply to the possession of felt tip markers by minors attending, or
traveling to or from a school at which the minor is enrolled, if the minor is
participating in a class at said school, which formally requires possession of
such felt tip markers. The burden of proof in any prosecution for violation
of this subsection shall be upon the minor student to establish the need to
possess a felt tip marker.
§ 16-4.6. Possession of Graffiti Implements Prohibited in
Designated Public Places. [Ord. No. 2010-60]
Possession of any graffiti implement by any person under the age of 18
years with the intent to deface property while in any public park,
playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or while in or within 10
feet of an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain, or other similar type of
infrastructure not normally used by the public shall be unlawful except as
may be authorized by the Township or unless that minor is accompanied by
and under the supervision and control of a parent or legal guardian.
§ 16-4.7. Accessibility to Graffiti Implements Prohibited. [Ord. No.
2010-60]
§ 16-4.8. Right of Township to Require Removal. [Ord. No. 2010-60]
b. No person owning or otherwise in control of any real property within
the Township shall permit or allow any graffiti to be placed upon or
remain on any structure located on such property.
a. Furnishing of Graffiti Implements to Minors Prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal guardian, to sell,
exchange, give, loan, or otherwise furnish, or cause or permit to be
exchanged, given, loaned, or otherwise furnished, any graffiti
implement to any minor without the consent of the parent or lawful
guardian which consent shall be given in advance in writing.
a. In the event graffiti is found, the Township shall provide the owner of
record written notice of an order to remove said graffiti be certified
mail and regular mail, which order shall afford the owner the
opportunity to remove the graffiti within 90 days of the date that the
notice is sent, however, the State Department of Transportation shall be
afforded 120 days from the date that the notice is sent to remove graffiti
from property owned by the Department.
§ 16-4.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 16-4.8
AO:594
§ 16-4.9. Response to Order to Remove Graffiti from Property
Owner. [Ord. No. 2010-60]
A property owner who has been ordered to remove graffiti shall respond to
the Township by personal delivery or certified mail:
§ 16-4.10. Objection to Order to Remove Graffiti. [Ord. No. 2010-60]
A property owner who objects to an order to remove graffiti may institute an
action challenging the order before a court of competent jurisdiction within
60 days of the date of the order.
§ 16-4.11. Failure to Comply with Order to Remove Graffiti. [Ord.
No. 2010-60]
§ 16-4.12. Right of Township to Remove. [Ord. No. 2010-60]
b. The Township's order to remove shall contain a form to be utilized by a
property owner to inform the Township that the graffiti has been
removed and shall contain a certification stating that by affixing a
signature to the form indicating that the graffiti has been removed, the
owner is certifying that the facts set forth therein are true and that the
certification shall be considered as if made under oath and subject to
the same penalties as provided by law for perjury.
a. Any objection to the order, within 30 days of the date of the order;
b. Notice that the graffiti has been removed, within 90 days of the date of
the order, or in the case of the State Department of Transportation,
within 120 days of the date of the order.
a. If a property owner does not undertake the removal of graffiti within 90
days of the date of the order, or in the case of the Department of
Transportation, within 120 days of the date of the order, unless an
action challenging the order to remove graffiti is still pending, the
Township may remove the graffiti from that property and present the
property owner with a detailed itemization of the costs incurred by the
Township, by certified mail and regular mail, for reimbursement from
the property owner.
b. Whenever the Township undertakes the removal of graffiti from any
building, structure or other exposed surface, the Township Council, in
addition to assessing the cost of removal as municipal lien against the
premises, may enforce the payment of such assessment, together with
interest, as a debt of the owner of the property and may authorize the
institution of an action at law for the collection thereof. The Superior
Court shall have jurisdiction of any such action.
a. Whenever the Township becomes aware, or is notified and determines
that graffiti is so located on public or privately owned property viewable
from a public or quasi-public place within the Township, the Township
§ 16-4.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-4.12
AO:595
§ 16-4.13. Ease of Removal Provisions. [Ord. No. 2010-60]
shall be authorized to use public funds for the removal of same, or for
the painting or repairing of same, but shall not authorize or undertake
to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than
that where the graffiti is located, unless the Township Manager, or
designee, determines in writing that a more extensive area is required
to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid aesthetic disfigurement to
the neighborhood or community, or unless the responsible party agrees
to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive area.
b. Right of Entry on Private Property.
1. Securing Owner Consent. Prior to entering upon private property
or property owned by a public entity other than the Township, for
the purposes of removal of graffiti, the Township shall attempt to
secure the consent of the responsible party, and a release of the
Township from liability for private or public property damage.
2. Failure to Obtain Owner Consent. If a responsible party fails to
remove the offending graffiti within the time herein specified, or if
the Township shall have requested consent to remove or paint over
the offending graffiti and the responsible party shall have refused
consent for entry on terms acceptable to the Township consistent
with the terms of this subsection, the Township may commence
abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the removal of the
graffiti pursuant to the nuisance abatement authority granted by
New Jersey set forth in subsection 16-4.11, which authority
includes the recovery of all costs incurred by the Township in
abating graffiti and recordation of lien as to affected property.
a. Any gas, telephone, water, sewer, cable, electrical and other utility
operating in the Township, shall paint their freestanding, above-surface
metal fixtures which are installed after the effective date of this
section51 with a uniform paint type and color as directed by the
Township Manager.
b. Easements granted by the Township may, among other items, be
conditioned on one:
1. The grantee applying an anti-graffiti material to any structure in
the easement area which is acceptable to the Township Manager,
or his or her designee;
2. The immediate removal by the grantee of any graffiti;
3. The right of the Township to remove graffiti or to paint the object or
structure;
51.Editor's Note: This section was adopted by Ordinance 2010-60 on August 19, 2010
§ 16-4.12 LAKEWOOD CODE § 16-4.13
AO:596
§ 16-4.14. Reward. [Ord. No. 2010-60]
4. The grantee providing the Township with sufficient matching paint
and/or anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the painting of
the object or structure containing graffiti.
5. In imposing conditions upon site plan, conditional use permits,
variances, building permits or other similar land use or
entitlements or development or design applications, the Township
may impose graffiti removal requirements or any or all of the
following conditions, or other similar or related conditions:
(a) Applicant may be required to apply an anti-graffiti material or
provide a landscape design of a type and nature which is
acceptable to the Township Manager, or his or her designee, to
such of the publicly viewable surfaces to be constructed on the
site deemed by the Township Manager, or designee, to be likely
to attract graffiti ("graffiti attracting surfaces" hereinafter in
this subsection);
(b) Applicant shall grant, in writing, the right of entry over and
access to such parcels, upon 48 hours posted notice, by
authorized Township employees or agents, for the purpose of
removing or "painting over" graffiti on graffiti attracting
surfaces previously designated by the Township Manager, or
designee. Such grant shall be made an express condition of
approval and shall be deemed to run with the land;
(c) Applicant, and any and all successors in interest, shall, for a
specified period of years after approval, provide the Township
with sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti material on
demand for use in the painting over or removal of designated
graffiti attracting surfaces;
(d) Persons applying for site plan subdivision maps shall, as part of
any conditions, covenants and restrictions, covenant, which
covenant shall run with the land, in a form satisfactory to the
Township, that the owners of the lots shall immediately remove
any graffiti placed on publicly viewable trees and structures
thereon to the Township's satisfaction.
a. Pursuant to the rights granted to the Township by N.J.S.A. 2A:153-4.1,
the Township Committee may offer a reward or rewards not exceeding
$500 each for the detection, and apprehension of any person guilty of
purposely or knowingly damaging tangible property of another by an
act of graffiti in violation of N.J.S.A. 2C:17-3.
b. A reward is to be payable after conviction out of Township funds made
available therefor. The reward shall be paid to any person who the
Township Committee, acting upon the recommendation of the Chief of
Police or other principal municipal law enforcement officer, may deem
§ 16-4.13 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-4.14
AO:597
§ 16-5. CARE, MAINTENANCE, SECURITY AND UPKEEP OF THE
EXTERIOR OF VACANT OR ABANDONED RESIDENTIAL
PROPERTIES IN FORECLOSURE.
§ 16-5.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this Ordinance is for the Township of Lakewood to regulate
the care, maintenance, security and upkeep of the exterior of vacant or
abandoned residential properties on which a summons and complaint in a
foreclosure action has been filed.
§ 16-5.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2015-78]
For the purposes of this section, "vacant and abandoned" residential
property means residential real estate with respect to which the mortgagee
proves, by clear and convincing evidence, that the mortgaged real estate is
vacant and has been abandoned. Real property shall be deemed "vacant and
abandoned" if the court finds that the mortgaged property is not occupied
by a mortgagor or tenant as evidenced by a lease agreement entered
into prior to the service of a notice of intention to commence foreclosure
according to section 4 of the "Fair Foreclosure Act," P.L. 1995, c. 244
(C.2A:50-56), and at least two of the following conditions exist:
entitled thereto, but no reward shall be paid to any public employee
whose duty it is to investigate or to enforce the law or to the public
employee's spouse, child or parent, living in the same household.
a. Overgrown or neglected vegetation;
b. The accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers or mail on the
property;
c. Disconnected gas, electric or water utility services to the property;
d. The accumulation of hazardous, noxious, or unhealthy substances or
materials on the property;
e. The accumulation of junk, litter, trash or debris on the property;
f. The absence of window treatments such as blinds, curtains or shutters;
g. The absence of furnishings and personal items;
h. Statements of neighbors, delivery persons or government employees
indicating that the residence is vacant and abandoned;
i. Windows or entrances to the property that are boarded up or closed off
or multiple window panes that are damaged, broken and unrepaired;
j. Doors to the property that are smashed through, broken off, unhinged,
or continuously unlocked;
§ 16-4.14 LAKEWOOD CODE § 16-5.2
AO:598
§ 16-5.3. Property Not Considered Vacant or Abandoned. [Ord. No.
2015-78]
For the purposes of this section, a residential property shall not be
considered "vacant and abandoned" if, on the property:
§ 16-5.4. Summary Action to Foreclosure. [Ord. No. 2015-78]
In addition to the residential mortgage foreclosure procedures set out in the
"Fair Foreclosure Act," P.L. 1995, c. 244 (C.2A:50-53 et seq.), a summary
action to foreclose a mortgage debt secured by residential property that is
vacant and abandoned may be brought by a lender in the Superior Court. In
addition, a lender may, at any time after filing a foreclosure action, file with
the court, in accordance with the Rules Governing the Courts of the State
of New Jersey, an application to proceed in a summary manner because the
residential property that is the subject of the foreclosure action is believed
to be "vacant and abandoned"; provided, however, that this section shall not
apply to a foreclosure of a timeshare interest secured by a mortgage.
k. A risk to the health, safety or welfare of the public, or any adjoining or
adjacent property owners, exists due to acts of vandalism, loitering,
criminal conduct, or the physical destruction or deterioration of the
property;
l. An uncorrected violation of a municipal building, housing or similar
code during the preceding year, or an order by municipal authorities
declaring the property to be unfit for occupancy and to remain vacant
and unoccupied;
m. The mortgagee or other authorized party has secured or winterized the
property due to the property being deemed vacant and unprotected or
in danger of freezing;
n. A written statement issued by any mortgagor expressing the clear
intent of all mortgagors to abandon the property;
o. Any other reasonable indicia of abandonment.
a. There is an unoccupied building which is undergoing construction,
renovation, or rehabilitation that is proceeding diligently to completion,
and the building is in compliance with all applicable ordinances, codes,
regulations, and statutes;
b. There is a building occupied on a seasonal basis, but otherwise secure;
or
c. There is a building that is secure, but is the subject of a probate action,
action to quiet title, or other ownership dispute.
§ 16-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-5.5
AO:599
§ 16-5.5. Responsibility of Creditors of Vacant and Abandoned
Residential Properties in Foreclosure. [Ord. No. 2015-78]
There is hereby adopted a requirement that creditors of vacant and
abandoned residential properties on which a summons and complaint in a
foreclosure action has been filed to maintain the care, security and upkeep
of the exterior of vacant or abandoned residential properties.
§ 16-5.6. Responsibility of Creditor Filing Summons and Complaint.
[Ord. No. 2015-78]
The creditor filing the summons and complaint in an action to foreclose
on vacant or abandoned property shall be responsible for the care,
maintenance, security and upkeep of the exterior of the vacant or
abandoned residential properties.
§ 16-5.7. Out-of-State Creditor; Appointment of In-State
Representative. [Ord. No. 2015-78]
If the property creditor who institutes a foreclosure action or is the creditor
of a foreclosure action is located outside of the State of New Jersey, that
creditor shall appoint an in-State New Jersey representative or agent to act
for the foreclosing creditor.
§ 16-5.8. Notice of Failure to Maintain Property. [Ord. No. 2015-78]
The Zoning Officer, Construction Official or Law Enforcement Officer
responsible for the administration of the property maintenance or public
nuisance ordinances of the Township of Lakewood shall issue a notice to
the creditor filing the summons and complaint in an action of foreclosure,
if the Construction Official, Zoning Official or Law Enforcement Agency
determines that the creditor has violated Township Ordinances by failing to
provide for the care, maintenance, security and upkeep of the exterior of
the property subject to the foreclosure action.
§ 16-5.9. Time for Abatement of Violation. [Ord. No. 2015-78]
The notice shall require the creditor or its agent to correct the violation
within 30 days of receipt of the notice or within 10 days of receipt of the
notice of violation if the violation presents an imminent threat to public
health and safety.
§ 16-5.10. Determination of Threat to Public Health and Safety.
[Ord. No. 2015-78]
The Construction Official, Zoning Official or Law Enforcement agency shall
determine if the violation of the Township Ordinances presents an imminent
threat to public health and safety.
§ 16-5.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 16-5.11
AO:600
§ 16-5.11. Notice to be Evidence of Vacant or Abandoned Property.
[Ord. No. 2015-78]
The issuance of a notice pursuant to this section shall constitute clear and
convincing proof that the property is vacant or abandoned.
§ 16-5.12. Violation of Section. [Ord. No. 2015-78]
Any creditor found to be in violation of this section or any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant to this section shall be subject to a fine of $1,500.00 for
each day of the violation.
§ 16-5.13. Funds Expended by Township; Reimbursement. [Ord. No.
2015-78]
If the Township expends public funds in order to abate a nuisance or correct
a violation on a residential property in situations which the creditor was
given notice, but failed to abate the nuisance or correct the violation as
directed, the municipality shall have the same recourse against the creditor
as it would have against the title owner of the property, including but
not limited to the recourse provided under section 23 of P.L. 2003, c. 210
(C.55:19-100).
§ 16-5.14. Failure to Appoint In-State Representative; Penalty. [Ord.
No. 2015-78]
Any out-of-State creditor who fails to appoint an in-State agent or
representative shall be subjected to a fine of $2,500.00 for each day of the
violation. The violation shall commence on the day after the 10 day period
set forth for the correction of the violation.
§ 16-5.15. Fines for Violations. [Ord. No. 2015-78]
Any creditor found to be liable for the violation of the requirement to correct
the care, maintenance, security or upkeep violation shall be subject to a
fine of $1,500.00 for each day of the violation. Fines imposed pursuant this
section shall commence 31 days following receipt of the notice except if the
violation presents an imminent risk to public health and safety, in which
case any fine shall commence 11 days following receipt of the notice.
§ 16-5.16. Notice to Clerk of Summons and Complaint by Creditor.
[Ord. No. 2015-78]
Any creditor serving a summons and complaint in an action to foreclose
on a mortgage on residential property in the Township of Lakewood shall
within 10 days of the service of the summons and complaint of foreclosure
notify the Municipal Clerk. The notice shall contain the name and contact
information for the representative of the creditor who is responsible for
receiving complaints of property maintenance and code violations. If the
creditor is located out of State, the notice shall also contain the full name
and contact information of the in-State representative or agent who is
§ 16-5.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-5.16
AO:601
responsible for the care, maintenance, security and upkeep of the exterior
of the property if it becomes vacant or abandoned.
§ 16-5.17. Rights of Tenant to Possession of Leasehold Interest.
[Ord. No. 2015-78]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the rights of a tenant to
possession of a leasehold interest under the Anti-Eviction Act, P.L. 1974, c.
49 (C.2A:50-69 et seq.), or any other applicable law.
§ 16-6. OUTDOOR LANDSCAPE WATER CONSERVATION.
§ 16-6.1. Applicability. [Ord. No. 2017-25]
The water conservation and water use restrictions provided in the following
subsections shall become effective only upon the declaration of a water
emergency by the Mayor of the Township of Lakewood.
§ 16-6.2. Water Use Restrictions. [Ord. No. 2017-25]
Restrictions on outdoor landscape water use apply to all users in Township
of Lakewood at all times regardless of source of supply (e.g. public water
supplies, well or ground water, lakes, streams, or ponds) unless expressly
exempt in subsection 16-6.5. Exemptions. Such water use shall conform to
the following Outdoor Landscape Water Use Restrictions:
a. Lawn watering with a hose or hose-end sprinkler:
1. May only be done on odd-even days corresponding to the street
address number of the property;
2. Watering shall only be conducted between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 9:00 a.m. or between 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m.;
3. The watering of any single area shall not exceed 30 minutes per
day;
4. Flowers and shrubs may be watered as needed with a hand-held
hose equipped with an automatic shut-off nozzle;
5. No hose or hose-end watering shall be permitted when it is raining.
b. Irrigating lawns and landscapes with automatic irrigation systems
equipped with a conventional irrigation controller (this includes all
systems that do not have a "SMART" controller as defined in subsection
16-6.2c):
1. May only be done on odd-even days corresponding to the street
address number of the property;
2. Irrigation shall only be conducted between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 9:00 a.m.;
§ 16-5.16 LAKEWOOD CODE § 16-6.2
AO:602
3. Operation of any irrigation zone equipped with spray (mist) heads
shall not exceed 15 minutes per zone. Operation of any irrigation
zone equipped with rotary sprinkler heads shall not exceed 30
minutes per zone.
c. Irrigation with systems equipped with a SMART controller.
1. To qualify for this provision, the SMART controller must have met
the minimum requirements of IA-SWAT protocol testing. Lists of
climate-based and sensor based controllers that have successfully
completed the protocol testing can be found at:
http://www.irrigation.org/Tested_Products.aspx
2. The property owner must register the SMART controller with the
Township of Lakewood.
(a) The Township of Lakewood will issue a yard placard which the
owner must display signifying that the property is irrigated
with a SMART controller.
3. The SMART controller must be programmed by an EPA WaterSense
Partner who holds a New Jersey Landscape Irrigation Contractor
Certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:5AA-3.
(a) The SMART controller must be programmed to irrigate
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 9:00 a.m.;
(b) Proper sprinkler head data and accurate soil/plant/irrigation
information must be entered;
(c) The SMART controller programming data shall be posted at
the controller;
(d) The WaterSense Partner must make a minimum of (2) two site
visits after the initial programming to adjust and fine tune the
irrigation schedule.
d. Irrigation systems programmed and monitored by an irrigation
manager.
1. The property owner must designate a qualified person who will be
the irrigation manager and register that person with the Township
of Lakewood with defining qualifications.
(a) The Township of Lakewood will issue a yard placard which the
owner must display signifying that the property is irrigated by
an irrigation manager.
2. The irrigation manager must be an EPA WaterSense Partner or
show evidence of successfully completing one of the approved
courses listed below:
(a) Rutgers University Continuing Education Course, Irrigation
Systems: Scheduling.
§ 16-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-6.2
AO:603
(b) Irrigation Association's online course, Landscape Irrigation
Scheduling.
(c) A comparable course offered by a recognized continuing
education facility or professional association.
3. A property specific irrigation program shall be developed by the
irrigation manager based on plant variety, soil type, exposure,
slope, precipitation rate, and irrigation efficiency.
4. Weekly adjustments shall be made to the irrigation schedule based
on current evapotranspiration (ET) rates or weather conditions.
5. If it is found that an irrigation manager does not follow any of the
terms prescribed in this section, they may be disqualified from
acting as a property's irrigation manager.
e. All automatic irrigation systems:
1. Shall be equipped with an operational automatic rain sensor
device, which disables the system when a predetermined amount of
rainfall has occurred. Each rain sensor device shall be capable of
and programmed to interrupt the automatic irrigation cycle when
one-quarter (1/4) inch of rain has fallen.
2. Any work performed on a system as a result of any inspection made
by the homeowner or a professional must be in compliance with the
Landscape Irrigation Contractor Certification Act of 1991 (N.J.S.A.
45:5AA-3).
3. Flowers and shrubs irrigated with drip or micro irrigation may be
watered as needed.
f. All new irrigation systems must comply with the following:
1. The system must be installed by an EPA WaterSense Partner who
holds a New Jersey Landscape Irrigation Contractor Certificate
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:5AA-3.
2. New Jersey Irrigation Best Management Design Practices listed
below:
(a) Designing a system that insures sufficient operating pressure
at the sprinkler head;
(b) Dividing irrigated areas into hydro-zones of turf and plants
with similar water requirements;
(c) Creating zoning systems according to exposure;
(d) Considering the soil type so the sprinkler irrigation
precipitation rate is compatible with the soil infiltration rate or
dividing the zone runtimes into multiple short cycles;
§ 16-6.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 16-6.2
AO:604
(e) Providing separate control of sloped areas;
(f) Preventing sprinkler heads from overthrowing onto driveways,
roads, and sidewalks;
(g) Providing for separate irrigation for parkway strips between
curbs and sidewalks that minimizes overthrow onto walks,
pavement, and other impervious surfaces;
(h) Using pressure regulating technology as necessary to ensure
sprinkler heads operate within the manufacturer's
recommended range. The pressure regulation may be:
(1) A pressure regulation device at the point of connection;
(2) Pressure regulation at each remote-control valve;
(3) Pressure regulation at the sprinkler head;
(4) A combination of the above.
(i) Irrigating all flowers and shrubs with drip and/or microirrigation;
(j) Including check valves in low sprinkler heads to prevent lowpoint
drainage;
(k) Having a pressure regulating device and wye strainer on each
drip/micro control valve.
3. System must have a SMART controller capable of estimating or
measuring depletion of available plant soil moisture and operating
the irrigation system only to replenish the water as needed while
minimizing excess water use.
(a) The SMART controller must be an EPA WaterSense labeled
SMART controller and listed on their website
http://www.epa.gov/watersense/product_search.html and
select irrigation controllers from the drop-down menu.
(b) The SMART controller must be programmed by an EPA
WaterSense Partner who holds a New Jersey Landscape
Irrigation Contractor Certificate pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:5AA-3.
(1) Proper sprinkler head data and accurate soil/plant/
irrigation information must be entered;
(2) The SMART controller programming data shall be posted
at the controller;
(3) The WaterSense partner must make a minimum of two site
visits after the initial programming to adjust and fine tune
the irrigation schedule.
g. (Reserved)
§ 16-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 16-6.2
AO:605
§ 16-6.3. Violations. [Ord. No. 2017-25]
§ 16-6.4. Enforcement of Water Conservation Guidelines. [Ord. No.
2017-25]
The water use restrictions and automatic rain sensor requirement imposed
pursuant to this section shall be enforced by the local authorized official.
Whenever a local authorized official shall find a violation of the water use
restrictions, regardless of the source of the water (public supply or private
source), such authorized official shall issue a written warning and explain
the penalties for a second and third offense, as provided in subsection
16-6.5. The local authorized official shall keep such records as may be
reasonable and necessary for the purpose of determining the persons and
businesses who have been warned upon a first offense. The local authorized
official is hereby empowered to write summons for the violation of the water
use restrictions imposed pursuant to this section.
§ 16-6.5. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2017-25]
After a warning for a first offense in accordance with subsection 16-6.4
above, any person or business that thereafter violates the water use
restrictions imposed pursuant to this section shall be subject to the penalty
provisions stated in the Municipal Code.
h. Upon the Declaration of Water Emergency by the Township of
Lakewood Township Committee additional restrictions may be imposed
and shall supersede the restrictions in this section.
i. State of New Jersey requirements shall supersede those identified in
this section when more stringent than those identified in this section.
a. Violations include knowingly or recklessly watering or irrigating or
permitting irrigation of lawn or landscape on owned, leased, or
managed property that results in the following:
1. Watering during any form of precipitation;
2. Water leaking from any irrigation equipment;
3. Water puddling on landscape or impervious surfaces;
4. Water run-off from irrigated property;
5. Irrigating on days not permitted in this section;
6. Irrigating at hours not permitted in this section.
b. Violators of these guidelines and requirements are subject to fines and
penalties described in subsection 16-6.5, Penalties.
c. All water users in Township of Lakewood are responsible for preventing
the above violations.
§ 16-6.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 16-6.6
AO:606
§ 16-6.6. Exemptions. [Ord. No. 2017-25]
Restrictions in Section 16-6 above do not apply to the following:
Chapter 17
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
§ 17-1. UNIFORM FIRE SAFETY CODE.
§ 17-1.1. Local Enforcement. [1971 Code § 12A-1]
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383) the
New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be locally enforced in the Township of
Lakewood.
§ 17-1.2. Agency Designation. [1971 Code § 12A-2]
The local enforcing agency shall be the Ocean County Bureau of Fire Safety
under the supervision of the Ocean County Fire Marshal.
§ 17-1.3. Duties. [1971 Code § 12A-3]
The Ocean County Bureau of Fire Safety shall enforce the Uniform Fire
Safety Act and the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings,
structures and premises within the established boundaries of the Township
of Lakewood other than owner-occupied one and two family dwellings, and
shall comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the
Uniform Fire Code.
a. Outdoor water use from rain water harvesting, gray water, or reclaimed
water are exempt from the provisions of the section. Use of gray or
reclaimed water must have an approved NJPDES permit issued through
the NJDEP.
b. Outdoor water use for commercial farms producing harvestable crops,
commercial nurseries, sod farms and golf courses are exempt from the
provisions of the section.
c. Outdoor irrigation necessary for one day only where treatment with an
application of chemicals require immediate watering to preserve an
existing landscape or to establish a new landscape.
d. Outdoor irrigation necessary for the establishment of newly sodded
lawns or landscaping within the first 21 consecutive days of planting.
e. Visually supervised operation of an irrigation system by a person in
compliance with the New Jersey Landscape Irrigation Contractor
Certification Act of 1991 (N.J.S.A. 45:5AA-1) and at the minimum rate
necessary in order to check system condition and effectiveness.
§ 16-6.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-1.4
AO:607
§ 17-1.4. Life Hazard Uses. [1971 Code § 12A-4]
The Ocean County Bureau of Fire Safety shall carry out the periodic
inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 17-1.5. Organization. [1971 Code § 12A-5]
The local enforcing agency, established by subsection 17-1.2, shall be the
Office of the Fire Marshal, Ocean County, and shall be under the direct
supervision and control of the Fire Marshal of Ocean County, who shall
serve as the Fire Official; and the Department shall consist of the Fire
Official, and such other inspectors and employees as may be necessary to
enforce the Code, being appointed by the Board of Chosen Freeholders,
pursuant to the procedures set forth herein below. Additionally, any and
all reports submitted by the Fire Official shall also be submitted to the
Lakewood Board of Fire Commissioners, upon reasonable request.
§ 17-1.6. Appointments. [1971 Code § 12A-6]
§ 17-1.7. Board of Appeals. [1971 Code § 12A-7]
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person
aggrieved by a ruling, action, notice or order of the Ocean County Bureau
of Fire Safety shall have the right to appeal to the Construction Board of
Appeals of the County of Ocean.
§ 17-1.8. Permits. [1971 Code § 12A-8]
The permit fees shall be established pursuant to the Uniform Fire Code.
They shall be as follows, unless modified by resolution of the Ocean County
Board of Freeholders, and/or ordinance of the Township, as required by
statute:
Type 1 $25.00
Type 2 $100.00
Type 3 $200.00
Type 4 $300.00
Type 5 $1,000.00
a. Fire Official. The local enforcing agency shall be under the supervision
of the Fire Marshal who shall be appointed by the Ocean County Board
of Freeholders, pursuant to Title 11, Civil Service, of the New Jersey
Statutes.
b. Inspectors and Employees. Such inspectors and other employees as
may be necessary for the local enforcing agency to properly carry out
its responsibilities shall be appointed by the Ocean County Board of
Freeholders, pursuant to Title 11, Civil Service, of the New Jersey
Statutes.
§ 17-1.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 17-1.9
AO:608
§ 17-1.9. Additional Required Inspections and Fees. [1971 Code
§ 12A-9]
In addition to the inspections and fees required and regulated by the
Uniform Fire Safety Act, P.L. 1983, c. 383, the following additional
inspections and fees shall be required:
A-20 Assembly uses with a maximum permitted occupancy of between 25 to
49 persons. Type of use to include:
Assembly halls Restaurants
Auditoriums Club rooms
Exhibition halls Passenger stations
Museums Conference rooms
Libraries Mortuary chapels
Billiard rooms Card rooms
A-21 Assembly uses with a maximum permitted occupancy of between 50 to
99 persons. (Same Type of Use as A-20)
A-22 Churches
B-30 All professional and business offices with a total gross floor space of
under 25,000 square feet.
B-31 Same uses as B-30 (with 25,000 to 49,999 square feet total gross floor
space).
B-32 Same uses as B-30 (with 50,000 to 99,999 square feet total gross floor
space).
B-33 Same uses as B-30 (with 100,000 square feet and over total gross floor
space).
E-40 All private schools, academies, college and university buildings with a
total gross floor space of under 25,000 square feet.
E-41 Same uses as E-40 (with 25,000 to 49,999 square feet total gross floor
space).
E-42 Same uses as E-40 (with 50,000 to 99,999 square feet total gross floor
space).
E-43 Same uses as E-40 (with 100,000 square feet and over total gross floor
space).
I-50 Industrial uses and factories of all kinds, with a total gross floor space
of under 5,000 square feet.
I-51 Same uses as I-50 (with 5,000 to 9,999 square feet total gross floor
space).
§ 17-1.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-1.9
AO:609
I-52 Same uses as I-50 (with 10,000 to 14,999 square feet total gross floor
space).
I-53 Same uses as I-50 (with 15,000 to 19,999 square feet total gross floor
space).
I-54 Same uses as I-50 (with 20,000 to 49,999 square feet total gross floor
space).
I-55 Same uses as I-50 (with 50,000 to 74,999 square feet total gross floor
space).
I-56 Same uses as I-50 (with 75,000 to 99,999 square feet total gross floor
space).
I-57 Same uses as I-50 (with 100,000 square feet and over total gross floor
space).
M-60 All mercantile and retail stores and all service offering facilities, other
than offices, with a total gross floor space of under 6,000 square feet.
M-61 Same uses as M-60 (with 6,000 to 11,999 square feet total gross floor
space).
R-70 Hotels, motels, dormitories, apartment buildings and houses (other
than one and two family, owner occupied dwellings and/or which are not
classified as a Life Hazard Use) with less than 25 living units.
R-71 Same uses as R-70 (with 25 to 49 living units).
R-72 Same uses as R-70 (with 50 to 99 living units).
R-73 Same uses as R-70 (with 100 to 149 living units).
R-74 Same uses as R-70 (with 150 to 199 living units).
R-75 Same uses as R-70 (with 200 to 249 living units).
R-76 Same uses as R-70 (with 250 to 299 living units).
R-77 Same uses as R-70 (with over 299 living units).
S-80 Storage buildings, warehouses and parking garages with under 5,000
square feet total gross floor space.
S-81 Same uses as S-80 (with 5,000 to 9,999 square feet total gross floor
space).
S-82 Same uses as S-80 (with 10,000 to 14,999 square feet total gross floor
space).
S-83 Same uses as S-80 (with 15,000 to 19,999 square feet total gross floor
space).
S-84 Same uses as S-80 (with 20,000 to 49,999 square feet total gross floor
space).
§ 17-1.9 LAKEWOOD CODE § 17-1.9
AO:610
S-85 Same uses as S-80 (with 50,000 to 74,999 square feet total gross floor
space).
S-86 Same uses as S-80 (with 75,000 to 99,999 square feet total gross floor
space).
S-87 Same uses as S-80 (with 100,000 square feet and over total gross floor
space).
T-90 All buildings not previously classified, which are not one or two family
dwelling units and are under 5,000 square feet gross floor space.
T-91 Same uses as T-90 (with 5,000 to 9,999 square feet gross floor space).
T-92 Same uses as T-90 (with 10,000 to 14,999 square feet gross floor
space).
T-93 Same uses as T-90 (with 15,000 to 19,999 square feet gross floor
space).
T-94 Same uses as T-90 (with 20,000 to 49,999 square feet gross floor
space).
T-95 Same uses as T-90 (with 50,000 to 74,999 square feet gross floor
space).
T-96 Same uses as T-90 (with 75,000 to 99,999 square feet gross floor
space).
T-97 Same uses as T-90 (with 100,000 square feet and over total gross floor
space).
Required Inspections:
All additional uses as listed hereinabove shall be inspected for compliance
with the provisions of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the regulations
adopted thereunder periodically, but not less than once every 12 months.
Required Fees:
A-20, B-30, E-40, I-50, M-60, R-70, S-80 & T-90: $ 25.00 per year
A-21, B-31, E-41, I-51, M-61, R-71, S-81 & T-91: 50.00 per year
B-32, E-42, I-52, R-72, S-82 & T-92: 75.00 per year
B-33, E-43, I-53, R-73, S-83 & T-93: 100.00 per year
I-54, R-74, S-84 & T-94: 150.00 per year
I-55, R-75, S-85 & T-95: $200.00 per year
I-56, R-76, S-86 & T-96: 250.00 per year
I-57, R-77, S-87 & T-97: 300.00 per year
§ 17-1.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-1.9
AO:611
A-22: No Fee
Where more than one additional use exists under one ownership at a given
location, the highest use shall be registered at full fee and the subsequent
use at 1/2 the scheduled fee. In multi-tenant structures, each tenant shall
be registered at full fee.
§ 17-1.10. Technical Amendments. [1971 Code § 12A-10]
a. All health care facilities shall be inspected in accordance with
guidelines established by the Uniform Fire Safety Code and shall also
meet the requirements of the latest edition of the N.F.P.A. 101 Code for
Safety to Life from Fire in Buildings and Structures.
b. Key Boxes. The Fire Marshal shall have the authority to require a key
box to be installed in an accessible location where access to or within a
structure or area is difficult because of security. The key box shall be a
type approved by the Fire Marshal and shall contain keys necessary for
the Fire Department to gain access as required by the Fire Marshal.
The operator of the premises shall immediately notify the Fire Marshal
and provide new key(s) any time a lock is changed or re-keyed and a
key(s) to that lock is contained in the key box.
c. Fire Zones and Fire Lanes. The Fire Marshal shall have the power and it
shall be his duty to provide for the designation of fire lanes and fire
zones on public or private property when he deems such lanes to be
needed for the protection of life and property.
d. Upon finding that such action is necessary for the public safety, the Fire
Marshal may require the owner or owners of any shopping center,
commercial structure, place of public assembly, multiple dwelling,
industrial park, office building, hotel or motel, educational facility,
health care facility, day care facility or marina to designate "Fire Zones"
at entrances, means of egress, loading doors or access ways to said
premises and "Fire Lanes" in driveways and/or parking lots leading
from the street to the "Fire Zone."
e. The size of the "Fire Zone" and/or "Fire Lane" shall be set at the
discretion of the Fire Marshal based upon the size and use of the
property, the recommendation of the Board of Fire Commissioners and
such other facts that he may deem relevant. "Fire Zones" shall be
outlined in yellow on the paved surface and shall contain within said
outline the phrase "Fire Zone" in yellow lettering and shall be striped
with diagonal lines also in yellow. "Fire Lanes" shall be outlined in
yellow with the phrase "Fire Lane" in yellow lettering on the paved
surface. Marking of the paved surface shall be provided for and
maintained by the owner or operator of the property. A diagram and
specifications demonstrating the proper manner of painting and
lettering "Fire Zones" and "Fire Lanes" on paved surfaces shall be made
available by the Fire Marshal and the Lakewood municipal offices
during normal business hours for public inspection. A metal "Fire Zone"
§ 17-1.9 LAKEWOOD CODE § 17-1.10
AO:612
§ 17-1.11. Penalty for Fire Zone and Fire Lane Violation. [1971 Code
§ 12A-11; New]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided for by New Jersey Statute,
every person convicted of a violation of a provision of this section or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty as stated in Chapter 1,
Section 1-5.
§ 17-1.12. Violations and Penalties. [1971 Code § 12A-12]
All penalties under the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:18-1 et
seq.) are hereby adopted for the purpose of enforcing this section against
or "Fire Lane" sign shall be provided, erected and maintained by the
owner or operator of the property and shall be placed as directed by
the Fire Marshal. The sign shall indicate the term "Fire Zone" or "Fire
Lane," shall be of a design and quality and lettered according to the
provisions of the State Code, and shall be approved by the Fire Marshal.
A diagram and specifications of a "Fire Zone" or "Fire Lane" sign shall
be made available by the Fire Marshal and the Lakewood municipal
offices during normal business hours for public inspection. In instances
where pavement is not provided for marking, the property owner shall
submit for approval to the Fire Marshal, a site plan indicating the
location and dimensions of the "Fire Zone" and/or "Fire Lane" and the
placement of said signs in lieu of pavement marking.
f. The parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing a "Fire Zone" or
"Fire Lane" shall be prohibited at all times.
g. Blocked Fire Hydrants and Fire Department Connections. It shall be
unlawful to obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or restrict the
access to any fire hydrant or any Fire Department connection for the
pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and
Fire Department connections located on public or private streets and
access lanes or on private property.
h. The parking of a motor vehicle within 10 feet of a fire hydrant or
otherwise obstructing a fire hydrant or Fire Department connection
shall be prohibited at all times. The above Fire Department Connections
shall be designated a "Fire Zone."
i. The Lakewood Township Police Department and the Ocean County Fire
Marshal shall have concurrent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of
this chapter relating to "fire lanes," "fire zones" and "blocked fire
hydrants and Fire Department connections. The Township Police
Department is authorized to tow motor vehicles and remove all
obstructions from any "fire lane," "fire zone" or "blocked fire hydrant."
All motor vehicles and other obstructions removed pursuant to this
section may be stored in a storage area approved by the Township
Police Department. The cost of removal and storage shall be charged to
the owner of the vehicle or other obstruction.
§ 17-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-1.12
AO:613
any person or persons, firm, partnership or corporation, violating any of the
provisions of this section.
§ 17-1.13. Disposition of Fees. [1971 Code § 12A-13]
The County of Ocean shall retain 100% of all revenues collected under the
Uniform Fire Safety Code as well as under subsections 17-1.8 and 17-1.9
above.
§ 17-2. THE FIRE PROTECTION GUIDE ON HAZARDOUS
MATERIALS AND A SYSTEM FOR IDENTIFICATION OF
HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS.
§ 17-2.1. Findings. [1971 Code § Ch. 14A]
The Township Committee is concerned with the occurrence of fires in
industrial plants, warehouses and commercial facilities within the Township
of Lakewood, where the fire hazards of materials stored therein may not
be readily apparent. In order to safeguard the lives of our firefighters
and citizens, and to promote the public safety and welfare, it has become
necessary to adopt a system of readily recognizable and easily understood
markings. These will provide our firefighters at a glance a general idea of
the inherent hazards of any material, and the order of severity of these
hazards as they relate to fire prevention, exposure and control. A material
identification system is necessary in order to give basic information to fire
fighting personnel so as to enable them to decide whether to evacuate the
area or to fight the fire, and will guide them in the solution of fire fighting
techniques and protective measures.
§ 17-2.2. Fire Protection Guide Adopted by Reference. [1971 Code
§ 14A-1]
There is hereby adopted by the Township of Lakewood, by reference, the
"Fire Protection Guide on Hazardous Materials," the most recent edition,
prepared by the National Fire Protection Association, Batterymarch Park,
Quincy, Massachusetts, which includes the Standard System for the
Identification of the Fire Hazard of Material (NFPA 704), Hazardous
Chemicals Data (NFPA 49), and Manual of Hazardous Chemical Reactions
(NFPA 491M), copies of which shall be on file in the Office of the Ocean
County Fire Marshal and the Inspection Department for public reference.
§ 17-2.3. Applicability. [1971 Code § 14A-2]
This section shall govern the identification of material within any structure
classified as a life hazard use as defined by N.J.A.C. 5:18-2.4 and/or as a
use requiring a permit, as described by N.J.A.C. 5:18-2.7 of the Uniform Fire
Code of the State of New Jersey or any location as required by the Fire
Official.
§ 17-1.12 LAKEWOOD CODE § 17-2.4
AO:614
§ 17-2.4. Identification. [1971 Code § 14A-3]
Where there are present any quantities of materials as defined by
subsection 17-2.2 of this chapter, at any location within the Township of
Lakewood, as defined by subsection 17-2.3 of this chapter, said materials
shall be identified by the system defined in subsection 17-1.4 of this chapter,
as required by the Fire Official.
§ 17-2.5. Description of the Systems. [1971 Code § 14A-4]
a. NFPA 704 - Standard System for the Identification of the Fire Hazards
of Materials provides a simple system of readily recognizable and easily
understood markings, which will give at a glance a general idea of the
inherent hazards of any material, and the order of severity of these
hazards as they relate to fire prevention, exposure and control. Its
objectives are to provide an appropriate signal or alert, and on-the-spot
information to safeguard the lives of both public and private firefighter
personnel during emergencies.
The system identifies the hazards of a material in terms of three
principal categories, namely — "HEALTH", "FLAMMABILITY" and
"REACTIVITY (Instability)", and indicates the order of severity
numerically by five divisions, ranging from "four," indicating a severe
hazard, to "zero", indicating no special hazard. This information is
presented by a spatial system of a figure with a "diamond" shape,
with "Health" always being to the left; "Flammability" at the top; and
"Reactivity (Instability)" on the right. Examples of spatial arrangement
are shown in Appendix A, Page 9 of NFPA-704. Supplementing the
spatial arrangements, colored backgrounds or numbers are used for the
three categories — Blue for "Health" hazard; Red for "Flammability";
and Yellow for "Reactivity (Instability)". The fourth space in the diagram
shall be used to indicate unusual reactivity with water, radioactivity,
proper fire extinguishing agent, or protective equipment required in
case of fire or other emergency.
b. The Lock-Box - Material Safety Data Sheet System - The Lock-Box is a
"key vault" which is mounted on the structure and is accessible by a
master key retained by the Fire Department. The Lock-Box style
denominated as "key-vault storage container" is capable of retaining a
floor plan of the structure, indicating the location of hazardous
materials, location of fire sprinkler service valves, location of utilities,
fire alarm annunciator panel, emergency phone numbers, Material
Safety Data Sheets (MSDS), and any other information as required by
the Fire Official.
The Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS), required to be made available
by the supplier of materials by the U.S. Department of Labor,
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, contains the following
information: Identification of the material; physical data; fire and
explosion hazard data; reactivity data; spill, leak and disposal
procedures; health hazard data; First Aid procedures and physician's
§ 17-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 17-2.5
AO:615
§ 17-2.6. Persons Responsible. [1971 Code § 14A-5]
Any person, partnership, corporation or agent or manager thereof, owning,
possessing, controlling, responsible for or in charge of the use,
manufacture, storage or presence, within the Township of Lakewood, of
any materials defined in subsection 17-2.3 of this chapter, shall identify
and label said materials pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and the
National Fire Protection Association standards adopted by reference herein
within 24 hours of the presence of materials in the Township.
§ 17-2.7. Penalties. [1971 Code § 14A-6; New]
Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall subject the
violator(s) to a penalty as stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, enforceable by
the Office of the Fire Marshal, County of Ocean, State of New Jersey.
§ 17-2.8. Prohibited Materials. [1971 Code § 14A-7]
This section shall not be construed so as to permit within the Township,
or any zone thereof, the presence of any materials prohibited by any other
ordinances of the Township.
Chapter 19
PROTECTION OF TREES
[Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes 1971 Code
§§ 4-19.1 — 4-19.9 and Ordinance No. 2003-29]
§ 19-1. INTENT AND PURPOSES. [Ord. No. 2010-95]
notes; special handling information; special precautions, and additional
information; and hazardous ingredients.
Where the Lock-Box-MSDS System is required by the Fire Official, the
person(s) responsible shall install a Key-Vault Storage Container, in
the interior of the structure; in the alternative, a Key-Vault Storage
Container shall be installed in a weatherproof housing on the exterior
of the structure.
All installation locations shall be approved by the Fire Official. The Key-
Vault Storage Container shall be accessible to the person(s) responsible
for updating the information enclosed within. The contents of the
storage container shall be approved by the Fire Official.
a. Indiscriminate, uncontrolled and excess destruction, removal and
cutting of trees upon lots and tracts of land within Lakewood Township
will cause increased drainage control costs, increased soil erosion and
sedimentation, decreased fertility of the soil, degradation of water
resources, decreased groundwater recharge, increased buildup of
atmospheric carbon dioxide, the establishment of a heat island effect
and increased dust and pollution.
§ 17-2.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 19-1
AO:616
The singular or cumulative effect of any of the foregoing could
adversely impact the character of Lakewood Township, decrease
property values, render the land unfit and unsuitable for its most
appropriate use, and negatively affect the health, safety and general
welfare of Lakewood's residents. Thus, the Township Governing Body
desires to regulate and control indiscriminate and excessive cutting of
trees within the Township and to require appropriate tree replacement.
b. It is recognized that there is a strong interrelationship between the
integrity of the Township's water resources, development on steep
slopes, tree removal, soil disturbance, storm water management and
the general use of the land resources. Fewer trees throughout the
Township also correlates with increased air pollution. Therefore, the
Township Committee finds that the appropriate management of these
resources is an important health, safety and general welfare concern.
Managing the Township's tree resources is consistent with the Stateapproved
Community Forestry Management Plan, as P.L. 1996, c.135.
The appropriate management guidelines for tree preservation to be
utilized are:
1. The American National Standard, ANSI A300 (Part 5) Management;
2. Trees and Development: A Technical Guide to Preservation of Trees
During Land Development. Nelda Matheny and James R. Clark; and
3. Protection and Care of the Urban Forest, NJDEP Division of Parks
and Forestry.
c. Trees are declared to be an important cultural, ecological, scenic and
economic resource. Proper management of this resource will ensure its
maintenance and result in economic returns. A forestry management
program is intended to meet the objectives of preserving, protecting,
enhancing and maintaining trees and providing opportunities for the
continued use of forest resources which are compatible with the
maintenance of the environment. This will be accomplished by ensuring
management of forest and trees through the application of sound
management practices. To that end, it shall be unlawful to cut down,
damage, poison or in any other manner destroy or cause to be
destroyed any trees covered by this chapter, except in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
d. The enforcement of this chapter shall be the duty of the Lakewood
Department of Code Enforcement. When he deems appropriate the
Code Enforcement Officer shall use the expertise of the Shade Tree
Commission through the regulation, planting, care and control of
shade, ornamental and evergreen trees and shrubs in the streets,
highways, public places of the Township and tree removal on all lands
within the Township.
e. Tree removal and replacement shall be in accordance with this chapter
and Section 18-803 H of the UDO. Terms not specifically defined this
§ 19-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-1
AO:617
§ 19-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2010-95]
CALIPER: ANSI Z60 FOR NURSERY STOCK — Shall mean a type of
diameter measurement used in the nursery industry. The height
measurement shall be taken from ground level for field grown stock and
from the soil line for container grown stock, which should be at or near
the top of the root flare. Caliper measurement of the trunk shall be taken
six inches above the top of root flare up to and including four inch caliper
size. If the caliper at six inches above the ground exceeds four inches, the
caliper should be measured at 12 inches above the top of root flare. Seldom
are tree trunks perfectly round. The most accurate measurement will result
from the use of a diameter tape. Caliper measurements taken with manual
or electronic "slot" or "pincer" type caliper tools should be the average of
the smallest and largest measurements.
The plan is to be approved by the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, Division of Parks and Forestry, New Jersey Forest Service. The
Shade Tree Commission shall oversee the implementation of the Community
Forestry Management Plan.
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) — Shall mean the diameter of a tree
measured four and one-half (4 1/2) feet above the uphill/highest side.
EROSION — Shall mean the detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, ice, wind and gravity.
EXEMPT AREA — Shall mean the lot area as provided in this chapter for
which tree replacement shall not be required.
FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN — Shall mean a plan for the management
of timbered or forested lands approved by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, New Jersey Forest Service, or similar state or
federal agency.
HISTORIC TREE — Shall mean a tree that has been found to be of notable
historic interest to Lakewood Township because of its age, type, size or
historic association and which has been so designated by the governing
body by resolution.
OPEN SPACE — Shall mean any parcel or area of land or water essentially
unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or
private use and enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners and
occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open spaces, provided that
such areas may be improved with only those buildings, structures, streets
and off-street parking and other improvements that are designated to be
incidental to the natural openness of the land.
SHADE TREE COMMISSION — Shall mean the Shade Tree Commission
formed by municipal ordinance, N.J.S.A. 40:64-1, et seq.
SPECIMEN TREE — Shall mean those trees listed as "Specimen Trees" in
Section 18-803 H.2 of UDO.
section shall have the same meanings assigned to such terms in the
UDO.
§ 19-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 19-2
AO:618
TREE — Shall mean any deciduous or coniferous species which has a DBH
of 10 inches or greater.
TREE ESCROW FUND — Shall mean a fund established by the governing
body for the administration and promotion of tree and shrubbery resource
sustainability projects and practices which may be consistent with the
Community Stewardship Incentive Program as outlined within the New
Jersey Shade Tree and Community Forestry Assistance Act P.L. 1996,
chapter 135.
TREE PLANTING PLAN — Shall mean a specific plan adopted by Lakewood
Township for the location and placement of trees on public property.
TREE PRESERVATION AND REMOVAL PLAN (TREE SAVE PLAN) — Shall
mean a specific plan that contains tree locations and other information in
accordance with Section 19-5 herein.
TREE REMOVAL PERMIT — Shall mean the permit issued by the Lakewood
Inspection Department, or its designee, to remove or destroy a tree or trees.
TREE REPLACEMENT PLAN — Shall mean a specific plan for replacement
of removed trees in accordance with the provision of this chapter.
UDO — Shall mean the Lakewood Township Unified Development
Ordinance of 2005. (The UDO may be found in a separate volume.)
§ 19-3. APPLICABILITY. [Ord. No. 2010-95]
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply as follows:
a. Unless specifically excepted in paragraph c below, it shall be unlawful
for any person to remove or cause to remove trees with a DBH of 10
inches or more without first having obtained a tree removal permit as
provided herein.
b. Specimen and Historic Trees. Trees, which have been designated as
specimen or historic under the provisions of this chapter shall be
maintained in a living condition and it shall be unlawful for any person
to remove such tree without an approved tree removal permit. No
specimen or historic tree shall be removed unless the applicant has
obtained the approval of the Code Enforcement Officer.
The condition of trees proposed to be saved shall be evaluated by use
of guides as follows:
1. Evaluation of Hazard Trees in Urban Areas. ISA Books, Nelda
Matheny and James R. Clark.
2. Urban Tree Risk Management, USDA Forest Service, Northeastern
Area.
3. The Guide for Plant Appraisal, The Council of Tree and Landscape
Appraisers.
§ 19-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-3
AO:619
§ 19-4. TREE REMOVAL PERMITS; GENERAL. [Ord. No. 2010-95]
c. Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the
following:
1. Any property upon which no trees are located, as confirmed by a
Statement of No Tree Verification, signed and by the property
owner.
2. Any tree of less than 10 inches DBH.
3. Any tree or trees removed or cut in accordance with a forest
management plan, provided that such plan is filed with the Code
Enforcement Officer, Tree Specialist, Shade Tree Commission and
Tax Assessor.
4. Any tree or trees removed or cut in accordance with a conservation
plan approved by the Soil Conservation District, provided that such
plan has been filed with the Shade Tree Commission or the Tax
Assessor.
5. Any tree or trees planted and grown for commercial purposes on
property used as a commercial nursery, tree farm, garden center,
Christmas tree plantations or tree orchards.
6. Any tree located on a tract of land one acre or less in size on which
a single-family dwelling has been erected and a Certificate of
Occupancy issued.
7. Any tree growing on land actually being used for a sanitary landfill
operation or for surface mining.
8. Any tree growing in a public right-of-way.
9. Any dead, diseased, or other tree that is likely to endanger life or
property.
10. Any tree located on a tract of land for which a site that has received
preliminary or final minor or major subdivision approval,
preliminary or final site plan approval from the Planning Board or
Board of Adjustment or where an application has been filed and
deemed complete for the erection of residential dwellings,
commercial or industrial uses.
11. Any tree located within 10 feet of the proposed lines of a building
foundation for which a building permit has been issued.
12. Any tree located within the actual proposed placement of
driveways and sidewalks incidental to the construction of a
principal building, for which a building permit has been issued.
13. Any tree in a drainage or utility easement.
§ 19-3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 19-4
AO:620
§ 19-5. TREE REMOVAL PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
[Ord. No. 2010-95]
A tree removal and permit application shall be submitted to the Inspection
Department. Applications that require Planning Board or Zoning Board
approval shall have tree removal permit application as part of the submittal
to the Planning Board or Zoning Board and said plans provided to the
Inspection Department for review and approval in accordance with this
chapter. Tree removal permit application shall contain the following:
a. Any person wishing to obtain a tree removal permit shall make
application to the Lakewood Inspection Department by filing a written
application and paying such fees as set forth in Section 19-8. No permit
shall be issued until a tree preservation and removal plan for the lot or
parcel has been reviewed and approved as compliant with Section 19-5.
b. Where an application, as required by this chapter, has been submitted,
no permit shall be issued until a tree save plan for the lot or parcel, if
necessary, has been reviewed and approved as compliant with Section
19-5, and until the filing of a written report of an on-site inspection by
the Code Enforcement Officer. Where an application is made in
connection with the construction of a building or other improvement,
no building permit shall be issued until the tree removal permit has
been issued.
c. All required escrow and bond fees for any application, including
required tree replacements or fees, shall be verified as paid prior to the
issuance of the tree removal permit.
d. Tree removal permit applications shall be filed at the Inspection
Department's office and shall be completed in full. The application must
be deemed complete and all required fees, as set forth in Section 19-8,
be paid prior to review.
e. Inspections. After the application is complete and reviewed, the Code
Enforcement Officer or the Tree Specialist shall inspect the trees and
property, which are the subject of the permit application.
f. Permit Approval or Denial. The Code Enforcement Officer shall approve
or deny the tree removal permit within 20 business days after the
application is declared to be complete. The Code Enforcement Officer
shall notify the applicant in writing of the factual basis and criteria for
any denial. The final decision of the Code Enforcement Officer may be
appealed to Township Committee by filing written notice within 10 days
of the final decision. The governing body shall hold a public hearing and
issue its decision within 60 days after notice of appeal is filed, unless
the applicant requests, and the governing body consents to an
extension of time. The governing body may delegate its appeal
responsibilities to the Shade Tree Commission.
a. The name and address of the applicant.
§ 19-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-5
AO:621
§ 19-6. TERM OF PERMIT. [Ord. No. 2010-95]
Any and all permits approved by the Inspection Department shall be
declared null and void if the tree removal is not completed within a
reasonable time, not to exceed 36 months, from the date of approval unless
extended by the Code Enforcement Officer. Permits not used within this
period will require a new application and the payment of new fees. For
b. The name and address of the owner of the property from which the
trees are to be removed.
c. The lot and block of the property.
d. The shape and dimensions of the lot or parcel, including the location of
all existing and proposed easements. If the tree removal permit is for a
single-family residence, the plan shall consist of a tree location sketch
containing the minimum amount of pertinent information to enable the
determination of compliance with the regulations in this chapter. The
plan for any other property shall include a survey prepared by a
licensed land surveyor that contains tree locations. The survey shall
contain, at a scale of no less than one inch equals 50 feet the following
information:
1. The existing and proposed tree preservation limits.
2. The proposed limit of the clearing and all Historic and Specimen
Trees to be retained outside the tree clearing identified by some
approved method as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer
or his designee, such as flagging, prior to the field inspection. For
any clearing greater than or equal to two acres, a representative
one hundred by one hundred (100 x 100) foot sample area reviewed
and approved by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be
inventoried. In addition all Historic and Specimen Trees shall be
located.
3. The installation and limits of a temporary existing tree protection
fence along the limits of the proposed tree removal shall be
designated on the plan.
4. All Specimen and Historic Trees to be removed shall be indicated
on the plan. All reasonable efforts shall be made to preserve such
trees.
5. A proposed tree replacement plan, if required, in accordance with
this chapter. A tree replacement plan shall be considered the
proposed landscaping plan required for all subdivision and site
plan approvals.
6. A North arrow.
7. The location of existing and proposed structures and
improvements, if any.
§ 19-5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 19-6
AO:622
purposes of this section, a permit shall no longer be valid when the work
authorized by the permit is completed.
§ 19-7. CRITERIA FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMITS. [Ord. No. 2010-95]
Upon completion of the review by the Planning Board, Zoning Board or
Code Enforcement Officer, as applicable, the permit will be approved,
provided:
§ 19-8. FEES. [Ord. No. 2010-95]
a. The tree removal permit is compliant with Section 19-5;
b. The tree replacement plan is approved by the Code Enforcement
Officer;
c. At least one of the criteria as follows has been satisfied:
1. The tree is located in an area where a structure or improvements
will be placed according with the approval of Planning/Zoning
Boards.
2. The tree is dead, diseased, injured in danger of falling, is too close
to existing or proposed structures, interferes with existing utility
service, creates unsafe vision of clearance or conflicts with other
ordinances or regulations.
3. The tree is to be removed for harvesting as a commercial product
or for the purpose of making land available for farming or other
agricultural activity, or is to be removed in furtherance of a forest
management plan or soil conservation plan, or to serve some other
purpose which is consistent with the purposes of this ordinance.
a. Application.
1. The applicant, at time of filing the application, shall pay the
application fee of $10 for each new or existing lot. No application
shall be considered without the payment of the required fees. An
inspection fee of $25 will be applied to all applications requiring an
on-site verification.
2. Replacement fee will be in accordance with subsection 19-8.1 and
shall be paid prior to the release of any performance guarantee.
b. Tree Escrow Fund. A Tree Escrow Fund shall be established and
maintained by the Chief Financial Officer of Lakewood Township to
receive and disburse replacement tree contributions. Appropriations
from the Tree Fund shall be authorized by the governing body with
consideration of the Shade Tree Commission recommendation in
accordance with the municipal tree planting plan.
The primary purpose of said fund is to provide for the planting and
maintenance of trees and shrubs on public property. The fund will also
§ 19-6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-8
AO:623
§ 19-8.1. Replacement Trees. [Ord. No. 2010-95]
cover administrative costs to implement the provisions of this chapter,
including but not limited to site inspections, processing of permits and
supervision of tree replacements.
a. Any tree removed pursuant to this chapter, unless exempt under
Sections 19-3c or 19-10c, shall be replaced based on the following:
Number of
Trees to be
Removed
Size/
Diameter in
Inches
Number of
Replacement
Trees
Size of
Replacement
Trees
Or Dollar
Amount
1 Greater than
10" up to 16"
1 2 — 2 1/2" $200.00
1 Greater than
16" up to 23"
2 2 — 2 1/2 $400.00
1 Greater than
23" up to 30"
4 2 — 2 1/2 $600.00
1 Greater than
30"
5 2 — 2 1/2 $800.00
In cases where the tree cost requirement criteria is combined with
other criteria of this subsection, the value of proposed shade,
ornamental, evergreen and shrub material shall be deducted from the
calculated amount for replacement trees. The value of the proposed
landscape material shall be calculated based upon average local
material costs for planting.
b. The applicant will receive a one-for-one replacement tree credit for
trees greater than four inches in diameter that are preserved within the
exempt area set forth in Section 19-10c.
c. All replacement trees shall be planted on site in accordance with the
foregoing. However, if one or more of the following conditions exist,
some or all of the replacement trees may be planted off-site:
1. The site in question cannot physically accommodate the total
replacement amount of trees, and the applicant contributes an
amount equal to the calculated monetary value of non-replaced
trees to the Tree Escrow Fund; or
2. The Code Enforcement Officer, or the Planning Board and Zoning
Board and applicant agree in writing that the applicant shall make
payment to the Tree Escrow Fund based upon the chart provided;
or
3. The Code Enforcement Officer or the Planning Board and Zoning
Board and applicant agree in writing that the applicant shall plant
replacement trees off-site on municipally owned property pursuant
to the municipal tree planting plan.
§ 19-8 LAKEWOOD CODE § 19-8.1
AO:624
§ 19-9. EXISTING TREE PROTECTION DURING CONSTRUCTION.
[Ord. No. 2010-95]
§ 19-10. TREE REPLACEMENT. [Ord. No. 2010-95]
Any tree removed pursuant to a tree removal permit shall be replaced
as provided below, unless said free is located in an exempt area, is dead
or fatally diseased as determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, or
tree replacement payment is made pursuant to subsection 19-8.1. Tree
d. Notwithstanding the tree replacement fee schedule in paragraph a
above the maximum tree replacement fee shall be limited to $2,000 per
acre of clearing.
a. 1. Prior to construction and any tree removals, suitable tree
protective barriers shall be erected and this protection, where
required, shall remain until such time as the protection is
authorized to be removed by the Code Enforcement Officer or after
issuance of a final Certificate of Occupancy. In addition, during
construction no attachments or wires shall be attached to any of
said trees so protected. Where some grading must take place
within the drip line of trees in the protection zone, appropriate
measures shall be taken to minimize impact to the trees. Any trees
seriously damaged during construction must be professionally
treated by a N.J. Certified Tree Expert or replaced according to the
schedule in subsection 19-8.1a if the damage is beyond treatment.
2. A detail of the existing tree self-supported protective barrier shall
be provided on all applications. The protective barrier shall be a
minimum of four feet high.
3. The self-supported protective barrier shall be placed at the drip
line of any tree along the limit of clearing and around the entire
drip line for trees to remain undisturbed within the limit of
clearing. Refer to: Section 18-803 B, General Standards of the
UDO.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person in the construction of any
structure or other improvement to place solvents, material,
construction machinery or temporary soil deposits within the drip
line.
b. Street right-of-way and utility easements may be delineated by placing
stakes a minimum of 50 feet apart and tying ribbon, plastic tape, rope,
etc., from stake to stake along the outside perimeters of such areas to
be cleared.
c. Large property areas separate from construction and land-clearing
areas into which no equipment will venture may also be delineated as
set forth above in Section 19-9b, as determined by the Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 19-8.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-10
AO:625
replacement shall be required in accordance with the standards set forth in
ANSI Z60. I, American Standard for Nursery Stock. Tree replacement shall
be in accordance with either paragraph a, b, or c below or a combination of
paragraphs a, b, and c below.
a. Replacement trees shall be provided in accordance with subsection
19-8.1 All proposed replacement trees shall be in accordance with
selections from Trees For New Jersey Streets, published by the New
Jersey Shade Tree Federation, and Street Tree Fact sheets, a
publication of the Municipal Tree Restoration Program, and submitted
for review and approval prior to the issuance of a tree removal permit.
b. All replacement trees shall be planted on site, unless all of the
replacement trees cannot be physically accommodated. In such
instance, the applicant shall pay the tree replacement fee in accordance
with the schedule in subsection 19-8.1.
c. Exempt Areas.
1. For all new residential and mixed use development, the exempt
area will consist of the area required to construct the dwelling and
ancillary facilities. The ancillary areas shall include the driveway,
parking areas, garage, roads, basins, decks and all utilities,
including septic systems if required. The area required for
construction will include a perimeter of 20 feet around the
structure, and a perimeter of five feet around all ancillary facilities.
In addition, the balance of the area shall be exempt based on the
proposed lot size in accordance with the following:
Lot Size Additional Exempt Area
Up to 7,500 s/f or less 95%
Greater than 7,500 s/f but less than
10,000 s/f
90%
10,001 s/f— 12,000 s/f 85%
12,001 s/f— 15,000 s/f 80%
15,001 s/f— 20,000 s/f 75%
20,001 s/f— 40,000 s/f 70%
Greater than 40,000 s/f 50%
These sites shall be required to preserve or replace the following
minimum number of trees based on the lot size. The replacement
trees for this section shall be either two inch to two and one half
(2 1/2) caliper trees as specified in this ordinance or four to six
foot evergreen trees in accordance with the following:
§ 19-10 LAKEWOOD CODE § 19-10
AO:626
§ 19-11. EMERGENCIES. [Ord. No. 2010-95]
In case of emergencies such as hurricanes, fire, windstorm, ice storm,
flood, freezing temperatures or other disaster, or in the case of dead or
diseased trees which are a hazard to persons or property, the requirements
of the regulations set forth in this chapter may be waived by the Code
Enforcement Officer upon a finding that such waiver is necessary so that
the public or private work to restore order on the property in the Township
will not be impeded.
§ 19-12. STOP-WORK ORDERS. [Ord. No. 2010-95]
The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to issue stop-work
orders to the holder of the tree removal permit in the event that there is:
Lot Size Minimum Number of Trees
7,500 4
7,501-10,000 6
10,001-12,000 8
12,001-15,000 10
15,001-20,000 12
20,001-40,000 14
Greater than 40,000 16
2. Agricultural operations are exempt from replacement
requirements because such operations are governed by the Rightto-
Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 to 10, which preempts local regulation.
3. In all commercial, industrial and nonresidential developments the
developed area of the site shall be exempt. The sites shall be
required to preserve or replace trees based on the rate of four trees
per acre of clearing.
4. Utility line clearance operations, provided that such plan is filed
with the Inspection Department and work performed in accordance
with ANSI A300 Part 7: BMP "Utility Pruning of Trees," and Board
of Tree Experts "Pruning Standards for Shade Trees" section 5.5.
a. A failure to comply with the approved plan such as a site plan, forest
management plan or soil conservation plan;
b. Noncompliance with the tree removal permit granted pursuant to this
chapter; or
c. Noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 19-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 19-12
AO:627
§ 19-13. ENFORCEMENT. [Ord. No. 2010-95]
The Lakewood Department of Code Enforcement in consultation with the
Shade Tree Commission, if one has been appointed, shall oversee all tree
removals pursuant to an issued tree removal permit. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall conduct adequate inspections of all sites for which a tree
removal permit has been issued. Upon the ascertainment of a violation of
this chapter, the Shade Tree Commission shall refer enforcement actions to
the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 19-14. APPLICABILITY TO TREE REMOVAL CONSTRUCTION
COMPANIES; PERMIT REQUIRED. [Ord. No. 2010-95]
All provisions of this chapter shall apply to any person removing trees
on behalf of any other person, including all tree removal construction
companies or persons in the business of removing trees or construction.
It shall be unlawful for any person or company to remove or cause to be
removed any tree or undertake any work for which a permit is required
pursuant to this chapter unless a valid permit therefore is in effect and is
displayed in accordance with the provisions set forth in Section 19-15; such
removal or work shall constitute a violation of this section and shall subject
the person or company violating this section to all penalties provided
herein.
§ 19-15. DISPLAY OF PERMIT; CARRYING OF PLAN OR
AUTHORIZATION; RIGHT OF ENTRY. [Ord. No. 2010-95]
The stop-work order shall remain in effect until the Code Enforcement Officer,
if one has been appointed, has determined that the resumption of work will not
violate the plans, permit or the provisions of this chapter.
a. The applicant shall prominently display on the site the tree removal
permit issued. Such permit shall be displayed continuously while trees
are being removed or replaced or work done as authorized on the
permit and for 10 days thereafter. In addition, the person or persons
cutting or removing trees, if other than the applicant, shall carry with
him/her authorization from the owner or applicant authorizing such
person to cut or remove trees. In the event that the trees are being cut
or removed in accordance with a forest management plan or a soil
conservation plan, a copy of the plan shall be in the possession of the
person cutting or removing such trees.
b. As a condition for the issuance of the permit, the applicant shall agree
in writing to the entry onto his/her premises by the Code Enforcement
Officer and all law enforcement officers as necessary to effectuate the
provisions of this chapter, and such entries shall be deemed lawful.
Failure to allow such entry shall be unlawful and shall constitute a
violation of this chapter and shall constitute failure to display the
permit as required herein. It shall be unlawful and considered a
violation of this chapter for any person to engage in the business of
§ 19-12 LAKEWOOD CODE § 19-15
AO:628
§ 19-16. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2010-95]
Chapter 20
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 20-1. EXCAVATIONS IN THE PUBLIC STREETS. 52
§ 20-1.1. Definitions. [1971 Code § 15-1.1; Ord. No. 2015-71]
As used in this section:
STREET — Shall mean any road, highway, public way, public alley, easement
or other right of way accepted or maintained by the Township as a public
street, as well as any State or County road or highway over which the
Township has acquired jurisdiction by agreement.
§ 20-1.2. Permit Required. [1971 Code § 15-1.2; Ord. No. 99-11 § 2;
New; Ord. No. 2015-71]
plant cutting, trimming, removal, spraying or otherwise treating trees,
shrubs or vines within the Township and without the applicable
certification or license for the designated work.
a. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or other legal
entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction of such violation be punished by a fine of up to $2,000 for
each offense, in the discretion of the Judge before whom conviction may
be had. Each illegally removed tree shall be considered a separate
violation. Each violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and
each day the same is violated shall be defined and taken to be a
separate and distinct offense. In addition, the court may order
restitution (fine and/or appraised value, whichever is greater) and/or
replacement of the tree illegally removed.
b. In addition to other remedies, the Code Enforcement Officer or other
authorized official may institute any appropriate legal action to prevent
a continuing violation of the terms of this chapter.
a. No person shall make an excavation in or tunnel under any street
without first obtaining a permit from the Township Engineer, and
consulting the Police Department pursuant to subsection 11-8.2.
b. A tunnel or excavation may be commenced without a permit where an
emergency has arisen which makes it necessary to start work
immediately, provided that the application for permit is made
simultaneously with the commencement of the work or as soon
52.Editor's Note: The power to regulate excavation and construction in the public streets is
contained in N.J.S.A. 40:67-1. The incidental power to perform work where a land owner
has refused to do so and to recover the cost thereof is contained in N.J.S.A. 40:67-9. See
also Chapter 11, Traffic, for pre-construction meeting requirements and work regulations.
§ 19-15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-1.2
AO:629
§ 20-1.3. Denial of Permit; Appeal. [1971 Code § 15-1.3; Ord. No.
2015-71]
The Township Engineer shall refuse the issuance of any permit, if such
refusal is in the interest of public safety, public convenience or public
health. In the event that any permit shall be refused, an appeal may be
taken to the Township Committee.
§ 20-1.4. Applications for Permits. [1971 Code § 15-1.4; Ord. No.
99-11 § 4; Ord. No. 2015-71]
Applications for a permit shall be made to the Township Engineer and shall
contain the following information:
thereafter as is practical. The permit, when issued, shall be retroactive
to the date on which the work has begun.
c. Should it be determined by the Township Engineer, based on the
number of emergency openings performed by a public utility company
that the number of emergency openings being performed in a specific
area of the Township indicates need to permanently repair or replace
the facility(ies), the public utility company shall be so notified in writing
by the Township Manager. The public utility shall be required to submit
a plan to the Township within 30 calendar days of said notice to
permanently repair or replace their facility(ies) in order to eliminate the
occurrence of emergency openings.
After submission of the plan to the Township, the public utility company
shall have 60 calendar days to obtain the necessary street opening
permits and initiate the repair or replacement work. Failure of the
public utility to provide the information as required in this subsection
shall entitle the Township of Lakewood to declare a public health
hazard and petition the Board of Public Utilities to mandate that the
public utility company make the necessary repairs or replacement of
their facility(ies).
d. No permit for the excavation of any street shall be issued between
December 1 and March 1, except for emergencies at the discretion of
the Township Engineer, or as provided by resolution adopted by the
Township Committee. All street excavations commenced after March 1
must be completed, backfilled and restored prior to December 1.
a. Name and address of the applicant.
b. Name of the street where the opening is to be made and the street
number, if any, of the abutting property.
c. The Township tax map block and lot number of the property for the
benefit of which the opening is to be made.
d. Nature of the surface in which the opening is to be made.
§ 20-1.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 20-1.4
AO:630
§ 20-1.5. Permit Fees. [1971 Code § 15-1.5; Ord. No. 99-11 § 5; Ord.
No. 2009-52 § 1; Ord. No. 2015-71]
The following schedule of fees is hereby fixed, determined and established
as being the fees to be paid to the Township of Lakewood to be drawn upon
by the Municipal Engineer in conjunction with the issuance and servicing
of such permits, and supervision and inspection of such openings to proper
restoration.
e. Character and purpose of the work proposed.
f. Time when the work is to be commenced and completed.
g. A set of plot or site plans of the work site, in quadruplicate, indicating
the following:
1. The exact location and dimensions of all openings to be made.
2. The specific installations to be made.
3. The types of proposed traffic control devices to be utilized for the
projects, said devices to be in conformity with the guidelines set
forth in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, current
edition.
h. The name and address of the worker or contractor who is to perform
the work, as well as the names and telephone numbers of at least two
persons responsible on a 24 hour call basis to handle emergency
repairs for said contractor.
i. A statement from the applicant agreeing to replace at his own cost and
expense within 48 hours, the street, curb, gutter and sidewalk in
accordance with this section and to the satisfaction of the Township
Engineer.
j. A nonrefundable permit application fee, calculated in accordance with
subsection 20-1.5, to defray the engineering costs of permit review,
issuance, servicing, administration, and inspection.
a. Openings not greater than 50 feet in length, $100.
b. Openings up to 100 feet in length, $125.
c. Openings up to 200 feet in length, $150.
d. Openings up to 400 feet in length, $200.
e. Openings over 400 feet, $300, plus fifty ($0.50) cents per lineal foot in
excess of 400 feet.
f. An administrative fee of $25 shall be added to the permit fee amount
referenced above.
§ 20-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-1.6
AO:631
§ 20-1.6. Road Restoration Fee. [1971 Code § 15-1.6; Ord. No. 99-11
§ 6; Ord. No. 2017-71; Ord. No. 2017-56; Ord. No. 2018-15]
To insure complete restoration of the roadway, a non-refundable road
restoration fee shall be provided to the Township at the time the road
opening permit is filed. The fee shall be placed in a trust account for future
road repair work. The fee shall be $250 or $10 per square yard, of the
proposed final paved trench size, whichever is greater. The amount of the
fee shall be computed by multiplying the final paved trench length in feet by
the final paved trench width in feet, divided by nine, which produces square
yards. No fractions of area will be used. The value shall be rounded up to
the nearest square yard. Wherein the actual final paved trench size differs
from the proposed final paved trench size by 10% or more, the difference
shall either be paid to the Township or refunded to the applicant. Where
this fee is applicable, no temporary certificate of occupancy or certificate of
occupancy shall be granted, unless said fee has been paid.
§ 20-1.7. Bonds. [1971 Code § 15-1.7; Ord. No. 2015-71; Ord. No.
2017-56]
No permit shall be issued until the applicant has filed a bond in an amount
determined to be sufficient by the Township Engineer. The Township
Engineer may waive the requirements of this subsection in the case of
public utilities upon the presentation of satisfactory proof that it is capable
of meeting any claims against it up to the amount of the bond which would
otherwise be required. The bond shall be executed by the applicant as
principal and a surety company licensed to do business in the State of New
Jersey as surety and shall be conditioned as follows:
a. To indemnify and hold harmless the Township from all loss, damage,
claim or expense, including expenses incurred in the defense of any
litigation arising out of injury to any person or property resulting from
any work done by the applicant under the permit.
b. To indemnify the Township for any expense incurred in enforcing any of
the provisions of this section.
c. To indemnify any person who shall sustain personal injuries or damage
to his property as a result of any act of omission of the applicant, his
agents, employees or subcontractors, done in the course of any work
under the permit.
d. The bond shall also be conditioned upon the applicant's restoring
surface and foundation of the street for which the permit is granted in a
manner acceptable to the Department of Public Works.
e. For roads which have a moratorium still in effect, which the Township
Committee has granted permission to the Township Engineer to permit
the road to be opened, via resolution, a bond in the amount to be
determined by the Township Engineer, to mill and pave two inches thick
the entire frontage of the lot(s) from edge to edge, or curb to curb as
§ 20-1.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 20-1.7
AO:632
§ 20-1.8. Insurance Required. [1971 Code § 15-1.7A; Ord. No. 99-11
§ 8; Ord. No. 2015-71]
§ 20-1.9. Rules and Regulations; Backfilling. [1971 Code § 15-1.8;
Ord. No. 99-11 § 9; Ord. No. 2015-71]
the case may be shall be provided. Said bond shall remain in force for a
period of two years or the remaining time of the moratorium, whichever
period is longer. For utility companies, or other entities not associated
with a specific property or properties, opening said road, the limits
shall be for the length of the opening, plus five feet at both ends, or a
minimum length of 25 feet, whichever is greater.
One bond may be accepted to cover a number of excavations by the same
applicant.
a. A permittee, prior to the commencement of excavation work hereunder,
shall furnish the Municipal Manager with satisfactory evidence in
writing that the permittee has in force and will maintain in force, during
the performance of the excavation work and the period of the
excavation permit, public liability insurance of not less than $500,000
for any one person and one million ($1,000,000.00) dollars for any one
accident and property damage insurance of not less than $50,000 duly
issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this State.
The Township of Lakewood and its Engineer shall be named as
additional insureds.
b. In cases where the character or nature of the proposed excavation work
is such as to present an unusual hazard or a higher than normal risk of
damage or injury, the Township Committee may require provision of
increased amounts of liability and property damage insurance. Any
permits which occasion such increased hazard or liability shall be
referred by the Municipal Manager for the consideration by the
governing body prior to the issuance of a permit.
a. The methods of construction for excavation and backfill shall be in
accordance with the New Jersey Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 1983 or
latest edition, and such other provisions as are included herein and as
may be added in the special conditions.
b. No road opening or excavation of a cross trench shall extend beyond
the centerline of the road before being backfilled, compacted and the
surface of the roadway temporarily restored.
c. All utility facilities shall be located sufficiently ahead of trench
excavation work to avoid damage of those facilities and to permit their
relocation, if necessary. Storm drains, pipe culverts or other facilities
encountered shall be protected by the permittee. If the work performed
interferes with the established drainage system of any street or road,
provision shall be made by the permittee to provide proper drainage
§ 20-1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-1.9
AO:633
during construction and restore the existing system all to the
satisfaction of the Municipal Engineer.
d. No dewatering equipment, wells, points or piping shall occupy the
traveled portion of roadways unless specifically approved and
adequately protected to the satisfaction of the Municipal Engineer. In
addition, effluent from dewatering systems shall be discharged in such
a manner that erodible soils are not adversely affected. All silt and
sediments being carried in the dewatering effluent must be intercepted
prior to effluent discharge into any drainage system through the use of
a sediment basin designed to allow retention of discharge for sufficient
time to render such waters free from suspended silt and sediments. The
use of screening devices in lieu of sedimentation basin must receive
specific approval and be employed only for minor flows.
e. Any gravel, earth or other excavated material which is caused to roll,
flow or wash upon any Township road shall be removed from the
roadway within 24 hours after deposit. In the event the earth, gravel or
other excavated material so deposited is not removed, the Township
shall remove the material and the cost incurred shall be paid by the
permittee or deducted from his deposit. Applicants are put on notice
that due to the work schedule of the Public Works Road Department, it
will be necessary to make such repairs after normal working hours. The
permittee shall employ construction methods and means that will keep
flying dust to the minimum to the satisfaction of the Municipal
Engineer:
f. In the event of a snow or ice storm, the permittee will be required to
take whatever steps the Lakewood Township Department of Public
Works deems necessary to secure the traveled way for snow removal
operations. At the first sign of precipitation, all work on the shoulders
and traveled way shall stop and they shall be cleared of all dirt, etc., and
the area backfilled so as not to interfere with municipal snow
operations until the weather permits resumption of work.
g. Right-of-way or property monuments and/or markers, traffic control
devices and other Township maintained devices on the right-of-way
shall not be removed or disturbed unless permission to do so is first
obtained in writing from the Municipal Engineer. Permission shall be
granted only upon the condition that the permittee shall pay all
expenses incident to the replacement of such monumentation and/or
devices.
h. If tunneling operations are required, the tunnel shall be backfilled with
rammed concrete composed of one part cement to ten parts (1:10)
sand.
i. If blasting is required to be done in the course of any excavation, it shall
be done in strict compliance with all applicable State laws and
regulations.
§ 20-1.9 LAKEWOOD CODE § 20-1.10
AO:634
§ 20-1.10. Restoration of Surface Paving and Subsurface
Foundation. [1971 Code § 15-1.9; Ord. No. 99-11 § 10; Ord. No.
2015-71; Ord. No. 2017-56; Ord. No. 2018-15]
a. Within grassed areas, all trench openings and damaged areas shall be
backfilled for the top four inches with topsoil as defined in the New
Jersey Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Construction, 1983 or latest edition. Then, both the trench
and area disturbed by excavated material and construction operations
shall be seeded with Fertilizing and Seeding, Type A as specified in the
same specifications.
b. Within the limits of gravel roadways, driveways and parking areas all
trench openings shall be backfilled and contacted as heretofore noted.
The top eight inches shall be backfilled with eight inches of compacted
Soil Aggregate Designation I-5 (Formerly Type 2 Class A or B road
gravel) as defined in the New Jersey Department of Transportation
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 1983 or
latest edition.
c. Within the limits of bituminous concrete or bituminous treated
roadways all trench openings shall be backfilled and compacted as
required in the New Jersey Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, 1983 or latest edition.
The upper 12 inches of the trench shall receive a temporary repair of
six inches of compacted Soil Aggregate Designation I-5 (Formerly Type
2 Class B road gravel) as defined in the above-listed specifications,
topped with six inches of bituminous stabilized base course, (Mix I-2) as
defined in the above-listed specifications.
The temporary pavement shall remain in place until any residual
settlement takes place, which time shall not exceed four months.
During this time, the permittee shall assure maintenance of the
pavement surface level. Manholes, valve boxes or other physical utility
obstructions, shall have feathered approaches not to exceed a 5%
slope where necessary and pavement lining shall be restored by the
permittee for adequate traffic control.
Final paving shall be as follows; The existing pavement shall be milled
to a clean straight line approximately 12 inches away from each side
of the existing disturbed pavement to a depth of two inches. Pavement
to be milled in areas not accessible to the milling machine shall be
removed by other equipment. Any pavement below the specified level
of milling that becomes dislodged or delaminated prior to resurfacing
shall be replaced with bituminous concrete prior to resurfacing. Milled
area shall be swept clean. Prior to placement of the two inches of
Bituminous Concrete Surface Course, the existing asphalt shall be
prepared in accordance with NJDOT Standard Specifications. Tack coat
or prime coat, as applicable, shall be applied in accordance with the
applicable rates and application methods set forth in said
specifications. Placement, finishing, compaction and construction of the
§ 20-1.10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-1.10
AO:635
§ 20-1.11. Permit Conditions and Regulations. [1971 Code
§ 15-1.10; Ord. No. 99-11 § 11; Ord. No. 2015-71; Ord. No. 2017-56]
two inches of Bituminous Concrete Surface Course FA-BC (Mix I-5)
shall be performed in accordance with the requirements set forth in the
NJDOT Standard Specifications.
For roads which have a moratorium still in effect and said disturbance is
less than 10% of the road, final paving shall be as follows; The existing
pavement shall be swept and dried. The entire trench area plus one
foot border of the existing pavement to remain shall be heated with an
infrared heater to a temperature between 320 - 350 degrees, without
burning or oxidizing it. The heater shall be removed. The softened
asphalt shall be scarified to a depth of two inches. Rake the rejuvenator
into the softened asphalt. Place virgin Bituminous Concrete Type FA-BC
(Mix I-5) into the trench area and mix with the existing asphalt. Level
and compact the trench area.
For roads which have a moratorium still in effect and said disturbance
is equal to or greater than 10% of the road, final paving shall consist
of milling and paving two inches of the entire pavement surface from
curb to curb, with Bituminous Concrete Type FA-BC (Mix I-5) as defined
in the above-listed specifications. For applications associated with a
building permit, said limits shall extend from property line to property
line, for all other applications said limits shall extend a minimum of
five feet beyond the disturbance, or a minimum of 25 feet, whichever is
greater.
The applicant shall notify the Township Engineer at least two business
days prior to the final restoration of trenches so that the adequate
inspection can be arranged.
d. Within the limits of Portland cement concrete roadways, all trench
openings shall be backfilled and compacted as previously required, a
satisfactory foundation prepared, the reinforcement restored and the
concrete pavement equal in thickness to that in place in the roadway
replaced with concrete as defined in the above-listed specifications.
e. Road openings and/or trenches involving unusual or special conditions
including attachment to bridges shall be restored in accordance with
and pursuant to the direction of the Municipal Engineer.
f. In the event that temporary paving, patching, final paving, or any other
aspect of the restoration process is not completed to the satisfaction of
the Municipal Engineer, and Public Works Road Supervisor, or his
designated representative, the Township shall complete the restoration
and the cost incurred shall be paid by the permittee.
a. Transferability. Every permit shall apply only to the person to whom it is
issued and shall not be transferable.
§ 20-1.10 LAKEWOOD CODE § 20-1.11
AO:636
b. Commencement of Work. Work under a permit shall commence within
45 days from the date of issuance of the permit. If work is not
commenced within that time, the permit shall automatically terminate,
unless extended in writing by the Township Engineer.
c. Possession of Permit. A copy of the permit, together with a copy of the
plan endorsed with the approval of the Township Engineer, must be
kept in possession of the person actually performing the work and shall
be exhibited on demand to any duly authorized employee or to any
Police Officer of the Township.
d. Revocation of Permit. The Township may revoke a permit for any of the
following reasons:
1. Violation of any provision of this section or any other applicable
rules, regulations, law or ordinance.
2. Violation of any condition of the permit issued.
3. Performing work under the permit in a manner which endangers
life or property, or which creates any condition which is unhealthy,
unsanitary or declared by any provision of the revision to constitute
a nuisance.
The procedure for revoking a permit shall be the same as that set forth in
this revision for the revocation of licenses, except that the initial hearing
shall be before the Township Committee, and the Township Committee may
provide in the decision that the revocation shall not become effective if the
permittee corrects the violation within a specified period of time.
e. Protection for Traveling Public.
1. The applicant shall keep all trenches and/or street openings
properly guarded through the use of breakaway barricades,
flashing lights, signs and reflectorized drums consistent with the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Except as may be
specifically permitted under special conditions herein, the
applicant shall maintain one lane of traffic in each direction except
in the immediate vicinity of the excavation and then only during
working hours. In the vicinity of the excavation, one lane shall be
kept open and alternated in the direction of traffic through use of
uniformed traffic directors. While the excavation operation is in
progress, uniformed traffic directors shall be provided at all times.
Also, a 48" x 48" W20-1F "Road Construction Ahead" Sign and a 48"
x 48" W20- 7A(S) "Flagman Ahead" sign shall be installed in each
direction 1,000 feet and 500 feet respectively in advance of
operations. At the close of each day's operation, the applicant shall
return the roadway to operation of one lane of traffic in each
direction. NO excavation within and/or immediately adjacent to
roadways available to traffic shall remain open overnight.
§ 20-1.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-1.11
AO:637
2. Where specifically covered in the special conditions, a road may be
temporarily closed. Any anticipated closing of Township roads due
to construction must be approved by the Township Engineer with
detailed plans and plans for emergency vehicle access submitted to
him for review and approval a minimum of two weeks in advance of
any anticipated closing. Any anticipated closing of County or State
roads which would affect traffic on Township roads must be
reviewed and approved by the Township Engineer a minimum, of
two weeks before any anticipated traffic pattern change. The
Township reserves the right to alter the applicant's construction
schedules in the coordination of traffic flow through an area where
multiple openings are to take place.
3. All construction signing and protection devices must be in
accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. A
minimum of two business days' notice shall be given to the
Township Engineer in advance of the start of any road opening so
that an on-site review of such signs and protection devices can be
made by Township inspection personnel.
4. Construction equipment shall not be positioned or stored on any
street after working hours unless approved by the Traffic and
Safety Divisions of the Lakewood Police Department.
5. When a contractor is obligated to supply uniformed Police Officers
on the job site, as a condition of his permit, all arrangements shall
be made through the Traffic and Safety Division of the Lakewood
Police Department who shall assign the Officers two business days
in advance of the commencement of work on the project,
f. Indemnity. In accepting a permit, the permittee shall be deemed to have
agreed to indemnify and save harmless the Township from and against
any and all loss, costs or damages incurred by reason of any damage to
any property, injury to any person or any loss of life resulting from any
negligence of the permittee, its agents or servants in performing the
work covered by the permit. The Township of Lakewood and its
Engineer shall be named as additional insureds.
g. Applicability. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to
any excavation work under the direction of competent Township
Officials, by employees of the Township or by any contractor of the
Township or agency or department of the Township performing work
and in behalf of the Township necessitating openings or excavations in
streets, nor shall the provisions of subsection 20-1.5, subsection 20-1.6
and subsection 20-1.7 apply to any excavation work performed adjacent
to or within public rights-of-way by subdividers or site developers in
accordance with approved subdivision or site plans, provided that such
subdividers or site developers have posted cash guarantees and surety
in accordance with the applicable ordinance requirements.
§ 20-1.11 LAKEWOOD CODE § 20-1.11
AO:638
§ 20-1.12. Power to Make Additional Rules and Regulations. [1971
Code § 15-1.11; Ord. No. 2015-71]
The Township Committee may make any rules and regulations, by
resolution, which it considers necessary for the administration and
enforcement of this section, but no regulation shall be inconsistent with,
alter or amend any provision of this section, or impose any requirement
which is in addition to those expressly or by implication imposed by this
section. Copies of all current regulations shall be furnished each permittee
at the time of the issuance of the permit.
§ 20-1.13. Liability of Township. [1971 Code § 15-1.12; Ord. No.
2015-71]
This section shall not be construed as imposing upon the Township or any
official or employee thereof any liability or responsibility for damages to
any person injured by the performance of any excavation work for which
an excavation permit is issued hereunder; nor shall the Township or any
official or employee thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or
responsibility by reason of inspections authorized hereunder, the issuance
of any permit or the approval of any excavation work.
§ 20-1.14. Violations and Penalties. [1971 Code § 15-1.13; Ord. No
99-11 § 14; Ord. No. 2015-71]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment for
a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 20-1.15. Excavations in Recently Improved Streets. [Ord. No.
99-11 § 15; Ord. No. 2015-71; Ord. No. 2017-56]
h. The applicant shall give the required two business days' notice as
applicable to the Township Engineer prior to making any road
openings, except in cases of emergency. No project shall commence on
a Saturday, Sunday or holiday and no work which will interfere with
traffic, or restrict the width of pavement available for traffic, shall be
performed on those days. Further, work authorized by a permit shall be
performed between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m., Monday
through Friday, unless the permittee obtains written permission from
the Township Engineer to do work at an earlier or later hour. Such
permission shall be granted only in the case of an emergency or in the
event that work authorized by the permit is to be performed in trafficcongested
areas.
i. All trench openings must be backfilled and compacted immediately and
the trench shall have been restored to at least temporary pavement
requirements daily. Final paving shall be completed within four months.
§ 20-1.11 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-1.15
AO:639
§ 20-1.16. Required Street Improvements; Exception. [Ord. No.
2001-68; Ord. No. 2015-71]
a. Whenever the Township Committee enacts any ordinance or resolution
providing for the paving or repaving of any street, the Municipal
Manager shall promptly mail a written notice thereof to each person
owning any sewer, main, conduit or other utility in or under the street.
The notice shall notify such persons that no excavation permit shall be
issued for opening, cuts or excavations in the street for a period of five
years after the completion of the improvements. The notice shall notify
such persons that applications for excavation permits, for work to be
done prior to such paving or repaving, shall be submitted promptly in
order that the work covered by the excavation permit may be completed
not later than 12 months from the date of the notice. The Municipal
Manager shall promptly mail copies of such notice to the occupants of
all houses, buildings or other structures abutting the street for their
information, and to all property owners whose property abuts the
street. The Municipal Manager must also mail such notices to the State
agencies and departments or other persons that may desire to perform
excavation work in the street.
b. Within 12 months, every public utility company receiving notice as
prescribed herein shall perform such excavation work, subject to the
provisions of this section, as may be necessary to install or repair
sewers, mains, conduits or other utility installations, In the event any
owner of real property abutting the street shall fail within the 12
months to install or repair utility, service lines or service connections to
the property lines, any and all rights of such owner or his successors in
interest to make such openings, cuts or excavations in the street shall
be forfeited for a period of five years from the date of the notice.
c. Every Township department or official charged with responsibility for
any work that may necessitate any opening, cut or excavation in the
street is directed to take appropriate measures to perform such
excavation work within the 12 month period as to avoid the necessity
for making any openings, cuts or excavations in the new pavement in
the Township street during said five year moratorium period.
a. Whenever building permits are issued for new construction involving
heretofore undeveloped land or land cleared by demolition or the
renovation to an existing structure that results in an increase of at least
1,000 square feet of floor area on properties abutting a street, the
owner/developer shall be required to construct municipal
improvements along the entire frontage of his property abutting the
street. Construction of said improvements shall require the acquisition
of street opening permit(s) in accordance with this chapter. No
Certificates of Occupancy shall be issued without recommendation by
the Municipal Engineer that the developer has complied with the
requirements of this section.
§ 20-1.15 LAKEWOOD CODE § 20-1.16
AO:640
§ 20-2. SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REMOVAL.
§ 20-2.1. Permit Required. [1971 Code § 15-2.1; Ord. No. 2001-68;
Ord. No. 2015-71]
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or remove, or cause to be
constructed or removed, any sidewalk, driveway apron, curb or gutter or
any part thereof within any public right-of-way in the Township without first
having obtained a permit to do so from the Township Engineer, Property
owners shall be responsible for maintaining sidewalks, driveway aprons,
and concrete curbs. In the event that the Township should repair any
sidewalk, driveway apron, concrete curb, or gutter, the Township shall be
reimbursed by the owner.
§ 20-2.2. Application Information. [1971 Code § 15-2.2; Ord. No.
2015-71]
Application for a permit under this section shall be made to the Township
Engineer by the owner of the premises or his agent upon forms provided by
the Township and shall contain the following information:
§ 20-2.3. Specifications. [1971 Code § 15-2.3; Ord. No. 2001-68;
Ord. No. 2015-71; Ord. No. 2017-56]
b. An exemption from the requirements of this section may be granted by
the Township Engineer. Said exemptions shall be based upon, but not
limited to a review of the current condition of the existing street
improvements to which the property abuts.
a. The name and address of the applicant.
b. The name and address of the person who is to perform the proposed
work, and the name and address of the owner of the property on which
the work is to be performed, if other than the applicant.
c. The location, by street number or otherwise, of the premises where the
work is to be done.
d. The estimated cost of the proposed work.
e. A line and grade plan showing the proposed work, including its exact
location with respect to a street intersection or some other fixed and
prominent object, as well as its width and relationship to the grade of
the street and the adjacent property and, in the case of a driveway
apron, its slope or pitch.
f. Any other information that the Township Engineer deems necessary in
order to determine whether the work will comply with this chapter.
a. Materials, measuring, mixing, preparation of the foundation, forms,
joints, depositing of concrete, finishing, curing and protection are to be
in accordance with the current New Jersey State Highway Department
§ 20-1.16 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-2.3
AO:641
§ 20-2.4. Notice Required. [1971 Code § 15-2.4; Ord. No. 2001-68;
Ord. No. 2015-71; Ord. No. 2017-56]
The applicant shall notify the Township Engineer at least two business
days prior to the construction of improvements in accordance with the
street-opening ordinance so that the adequate inspection and testing can
be arranged. Failure to do so may result in said work being removed and
redone.
§ 20-2.5. Exceptions. [1971 Code § 15-2.5; Ord. No. 2015-71]
This section shall not apply to:
§ 20-2.6. Order for Improvement by Township. [1971 Code § 15-2.6;
Ord. No. 2015-71]
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction or the latest
revision thereof. A copy of the specifications is to be on file with the
Township Clerk.
b. All sidewalk, driveway apron, curb, gutter, or other right-of-way
improvements shall be constructed in accordance with standard
construction detail established by the Municipal Engineer. Copies of
said detail sheets may be purchased from the Municipal Engineer's
Office.
c. The contractors shall be required to confer with the Township Engineer
two business days before starting any work, and further shall not be
permitted to pour any concrete until the Township Engineer has
checked and approved the forms for alignment and grade. Failure to do
so may result in said work being removed and redone.
d. For the installation of curb or sidewalk in the Township, forms shall be
of wood or metal, straight, free from warp, of sufficient strength, to
resist springing during construction and of a height equal to the full
depth of the finished curb or sidewalk. Wood forms shall be two inch
surfaced plank, it being understood that dressed lumber of one and fiveeighths
(1 5/8) inch width is herein permitted (where sharpness of
curvature does not permit the use of two inch material, plywood or fibre
board of lesser thickness may be used with the permission of the
Township Engineer) or as provided in the particular specifications for
the job in question.
a. The initial installation of sidewalks, driveway aprons, curbs or gutters
in a major subdivision where the work is covered by performance
guarantees required by the Planning Board.
b. The repair or replacement of less than eight lineal feet of an existing
sidewalk.
a. The Township Committee may by resolution order the construction of
sidewalks and curbs in any streets within the Township. The Municipal
§ 20-2.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 20-2.6
AO:642
§ 20-3. NUMBERING OF HOUSES AND BUILDINGS.
§ 20-3.1. Numbering Required. [1971 Code § 15-3.1; Ord. No.
2015-71]
All dwelling houses, stores or other buildings erected within the Township
shall be numbered in conformity with the street numbers on the tax and
assessment maps of the Township filed in the Office of the Director of
Inspections of the Township, and in the files of the Tax Assessor.
§ 20-3.2. Notification. [1971 Code § 15-3.2; Ord. No. 2015-71]
The owner of any dwelling house, store or other building incorrectly or
improperly or insufficiently numbered, shall be notified in writing by the
Municipal Manager or his appointed designee, or such other person so
designated by the Township Committee to change or replace such incorrect
or improper number or to affix a number where one is lacking within 10
days after date of such notice.
§ 20-3.3. Subdivisions. [1971 Code § 15-3.3; Ord. No. 2015-71]
Upon any subdivision or resubdivision of the land in the Township resulting
in lots other than those numbered on the tax and assessment maps on the
records, the Municipal Manager or his appointed designee, shall within
30 days after final approval thereof, assign a number to each lot resulting
from the subdivision or resubdivision which shall be in proper numerical
sequence in relation to the number assigned to other lots fronting on the
same street and the Municipal Manager or his appointed designee shall
record same upon the map and notify the owner of the property of the
numbers so assigned.
Manager may, by written notice filed with the Township Clerk, order the
repair of any existing sidewalk or curb not in good repair.
b. When the resolution above mentioned is adopted, the cost of the
construction of new curbs or sidewalks shall be paid by the owner or
owners of the real estate abutting said curb or sidewalk on which the
improvement is made except that the Township shall pay the entire cost
of curb and sidewalk lying in the angles of intersections of streets, and
the Township shall pay 2% of the cost of other curb and sidewalk
construction. Primary engineering costs shall be paid by the Township.
c. Following the adoption of a resolution providing for the construction of
sidewalk or curb, and prior to the making of the improvement, or the
awarding of a contract therefor, the Township Clerk shall give notice to
the owner or owners of all real estate affected. The notice shall contain
a description of the property affected sufficient to identify it, a
description of the improvement, a statement that the Township will
contract for the improvement, and a statement that 98% of the cost is to
be borne by the owner or owners of such real estate. The notice shall be
served as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:65-3 to 40:65-5.
§ 20-2.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-3.4
AO:643
§ 20-3.4. Display of Number. [1971 Code § 15-3.4; Ord. No. 2015-71]
The number so assigned to each building shall be displayed by the owner or
occupant on the front of the building or in the front yard of the lot on which
the same stands and shall be of a size not less than three inches in height
and so located as to be clearly visible to persons passing by the premises on
the abutting street.
§ 20-3.5. Certificate of Occupancy. [1971 Code § 15-3.5; Ord. No.
2015-71]
No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for occupancy of any building
hereafter erected or enlarged unless the provisions of the foregoing
subsection shall have been complied with.
§ 20-3.6. Application for Number. [1971 Code § 15-3.6; Ord. No.
2015-71]
Upon application by the owner of any property in the Township to the
appropriate municipal department head, said municipal official shall furnish
such owner with the correct number of such property.
§ 20-3.7. Compliance. [1971 Code § 15-3.7; Ord. No. 2015-71]
The occupant or owner of any building who shall not comply with the
provisions of subsection 20-3.4 within 60 days after notice of the number
assigned to such buildings shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more
than $50 at the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court.
§ 20-3.8. Method of Assigning House and Other Property
Identification Numbers. [1971 Code § 15-3.8; Ord. No. 2015-71; Ord.
No. 2017-56]
The Zoning Officer shall assign numbers according to the following
standards:
a. In the area bounded by Main Street, Lakewood Avenue, Somerset
Street and County Line Road:
1. Odd numbers on the north and east sides of the street.
2. Even numbers on the south and west sides of the street.
3. Streets south of Carey Street and east of Princeton Avenue will
have the directional designation east, as in "East Seventh Street".
4. Streets south of Carey Street and west of Princeton Avenue will not
have any directional designation, as in "Eleventh Street".
5. For numbered streets south of Tenth Street, numbers shall begin at
Princeton Avenue and progress in ascending order as they move in
a westerly direction further from Princeton Avenue and progress in
§ 20-3.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 20-3.8
AO:644
an ascending order as they move in an easterly direction, with each
block having a hundreds units designation.
6. For streets north of Carey and Fourteenth Streets, numbers shall
begin at the easternmost point and ascend in a westerly direction.
7. Numbers for Tenth and Twelfth Streets shall begin at Squankum
Road and ascend in a westerly direction.
8. Eleventh and Thirteenth Street numbers shall begin at Princeton
Avenue and progress in ascending order as they move in a westerly
direction and in a descending order as they move in an easterly
direction.
9. County Line Road and Kennedy Boulevard shall have a directional
designation of east on the east side of State Highway Route 9 and
shall have a directional designation of west on the west side of said
highway.
10. Avenue numbers shall begin at the southern end and progress in
ascending order as the numbers move further north.
b. Areas of the Township not bounded within the area designated in
paragraph a above:
1. Odd numbers on the north and east sides of the street.
2. Even numbers on the south and west sides of the street.
3. Numbers shall begin at the southern or easternmost end of the
street and progress in ascending order as the numbers progress in
a northerly or westerly direction, respectively.
c. All new and/or continuation of avenues, streets and roads in the
Township will:
1. Begin with the first block number range 1-99, then the next block
number range 100-199, then the next block number range 200-299
and so on.
2. With the exception of paragraph a3 above, new streets will not
have directional designators.
3. Apartment and/or office building structures will have a single
address, and these units will be identified with a numerical number
only, i.e. the first floor: 100-199, the second floor: 200-299 and so
on. In apartment buildings, units will be designated as
"apartments"; in office buildings, units will be designated "suites".
Alpha characters will not be used in part or in whole.
4. To the extent possible, strip mall stores will have individual address
numbers without the use of suite and/or unit identifiers.
§ 20-3.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-3.8
AO:645
§ 20-4. STREET LIGHTING.
§ 20-4.1. Authorization to Extend to Certain Roads and Streets.
[1971 Code § 15-4.1; Ord. No. 2015-71]
§ 20-4.2. Procedures. [1971 Code § 15-4.2; Ord. No. 2015-71]
5. To the extent possible, townhouse and/or condominiums will have
individual address numbers without the use of unit identifiers.
6. The Township will notify and seek the cooperation of the local
postal authority in regards to addressing.
a. Authorization to Extend to Certain Roads and Streets. N.J.S.A.
40:67-23.1 enables the Governing Body of a municipality to make,
amend, repeal and enforce ordinances to provide for the lighting of any
roads or streets upon which the travel is sufficient, in the opinion of the
Governing Body, to warrant such expenditures, even though such roads
or streets shall not have been taken over by the Municipal Governing
Body or dedicated and accepted as public highways; and
b. Power of Governing Body to Require Improvements and Dedication. The
law allows municipalities at their own option to require the roads and
streets to be suitably improved in accordance with any requirements
established pursuant to the "Official Map and Building Permit Act
(1953)," N.J.S.A. 40:55-1.30 et seq. and dedicated to the municipality,
within two years of the effective date of any ordinance adopted
providing for the lighting of the road or street.
a. Application for Street Lighting. Such request shall be submitted in
writing to the Clerk of the Township Committee, signed by all of the
owners of such roads. If the roads are owned by a corporation or
association the request shall be in the form of a proper resolution of
such entity incorporating the request and duly certified as having been
properly passed and containing the proper corporate seal.
b. Necessary Reports. Upon receipt of the request by the Township
Committee, it shall be forwarded to the Chairman of Street Lighting (if
in existence), Engineer, Treasurer, Attorney and Traffic and Safety
Departments for their study and written recommendation.
The report from the Treasurer shall contain an estimate as to the actual
cost of providing street lighting by the Township;
The engineering and attorney reports shall advise the Township
Committee of any engineering or legal problems. All of the above
reports shall be submitted to the Township Clerk within 30 days of the
referral by the Township Committee.
The Township Committee, after receipt of the reports, shall determine
whether the travel on such roads or streets is sufficient to warrant the
expenditures of providing street lighting.
§ 20-3.8 LAKEWOOD CODE § 20-4.2
AO:646
§ 20-4.3. Definitions. [1971 Code § 15-4.3; Ord. No. 2015-71]
As used in this section:
STREET OR ROAD — Shall mean any strip of land appropriated for and used
for general travel whether by an individual, a corporation or the public and
indicated on a recorded map, plot plan or site plan which is, in the opinion
of the Township Committee, used to such an extent that public lighting is
considered justifiable.
REASONABLE AMOUNT OF LIGHTING — Shall mean in determining that
which is to be considered a reasonable amount of lighting for any given
street, road or other area, the Division of Traffic and Safety of the Lakewood
Police Department shall, before street lighting is approved for any
additional streets or roads other than those presently being lighted at the
time of passage of this section, make a study and report of pedestrian
and vehicle travel with emphasis to any particular dark spots or hazardous
areas that may need special lighting attention. Additionally, there shall
be obtained from the utility company furnishing the light to the area of
the Township under study a report or recommendation by such utility as
to the amount and positioning of lighting of those areas including the
recommendation as to the lumens necessary to and the type of lighting
recommended for safe, sufficient and adequate lighting of the area.
§ 20-4.4. Decision of Township Committee. [1971 Code § 15-4.4;
Ord. No. 2015-71]
Based upon the reports cited in subsection 20-4.2 and the Township
Committee's own observation and knowledge, the Township Committee
shall decide where and under what circumstances lighting of roads and
streets shall be done throughout the community.
§ 20-4.5. Withdrawal of Request. [1971 Code § 15-4.5; Ord. No.
2015-71]
The applicant for street lighting shall at any time prior to final passage
of the ordinance providing for the lighting have a right to withdraw such
request by letter through the Township Clerk to the Township Committee,
or, subsequent to final passage of the ordinance, at any time request that
his development or street be exempt from the provisions of such ordinance
and cancel his consent to furnishing by the municipality of street lighting on
any of such streets or roads.
§ 20-5. REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE.
c. Ordinance Required. If the Township Committee is in favor of granting
the request, it shall enact an ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-23.1,
which ordinance shall indicate whether or not the Township intends to
exercise its option of requiring the streets and roads to be suitably
improved and dedicated within two years.
§ 20-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 20-5.1
AO:647
§ 20-5.1. Removal Required. [1971 Code § 4-7.1; Ord. No. 2015-71]
§ 20-5.2. Removal by Township. [1971 Code § 4-7.2; Ord. No.
2015-71]
If any owner or occupant fails to remove the snow or ice, the Public Works
Director shall cause it to be removed. The cost paid and incurred by the
Public Works Director for removing snow and ice from any sidewalk shall
be certified by him to the Township Committee which shall examine the
certificate and cause the cost as shown to be charged against the lands
abutting the sidewalk. The amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien
upon the lands and shall be added to and become part of the taxes next to
be assessed and levied upon the lands and shall be collected and enforced
according to law. The above shall be in addition to any other penalty for
violation of this provision.
§ 20-6. OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
§ 20-6.1. Prohibited. [1971 Code § 4-8.1; Ord. No. 2015-71]
No person shall obstruct or endanger, or place or permit anything to
obstruct or endanger, the free passage or proper use of the public of any
street, highway, sidewalk, crosswalk, bridge or entrance to any public hall
or building, except as may be necessary while loading or unloading any
goods, merchandise, materials or persons, or except as may be otherwise
permitted by this section.
§ 20-6.2. Building Materials in Street. [1971 Code § 4-8.2; Ord. No.
2015-71]
No person shall place or deposit any building materials in or upon any street
of the Township and allow or permit the same to remain for more than 24
hours without a written permit for that purpose. A permit shall be obtained
a. Every owner or occupant of any house or other building, any owner or
occupant of any multiple family dwelling, store, apartment, or
commercial or industrial building, and any owner of a vacant lot shall
remove snow or ice from the sidewalks in front of or adjacent to such
buildings or lot within 12 hours after the snow ceases to fall or ice is
formed. The hours from 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall be excluded in
computing the 12 hours during which snow must be removed.
b. The owners of apartment projects having more than one apartment
house on the same parcel of land shall secure the removal of snow and
ice from the streets and sidewalks of the apartment project within the
same time as set forth in paragraph a above.
c. If snow or ice is of such a thin coat or is so adhered to the sidewalk that
it cannot be reasonably removed with shovels or standard snow
removal equipment, it shall be covered with fine sand, salt or other
material suitable to prevent slipping.
§ 20-5.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 20-6.2
AO:648
from the Township Clerk and for each permit issued the applicant shall pay
a fee of one ($1.00) dollar. The permit shall state the date of issuance, the
person to whom granted, be signed by the Township Clerk, and shall provide
that no more than one-third of (1/3) the street shall be occupied by such
obstruction. All permits shall terminate 20 days after the date of issuance.
Chapter 21
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND RECYCLING
§ 21-1. REIMBURSEMENT OF GARBAGE, RECYCLING AND REFUSE
COLLECTION COSTS.
§ 21-1.1. Procedure for Reimbursement. [1971 Code § 15-5.1; Ord.
No. 2009-39 § 1]
a. Any owner of a single-family residential dwelling located within the
Township who, individually or through an association, contracts with a
private contractor for garbage and refuse collection service because of
the unavailability of the service by the Township shall be entitled to
reimbursement for the cost. The request shall be made to the Township
Clerk's Office that the Township reimburse the private garbage and
refuse collection costs for the dwelling pursuant to paragraph f of this
subsection.
b. The request for reimbursement shall be in writing on a form available in
the Township Clerk's Office.
c. All requests for reimbursement shall be forwarded to the Manager,
Attorney, Treasurer and Director of Public Works for their review and
approval. Additionally, the report from the Treasurer and Director of
Public Works shall provide an estimate of the cost that the Township
would incur if its employees provided curbside garbage and refuse
collection to the dwelling in the same manner and frequency as if the
dwelling was located on streets dedicated to the public.
d. The reports referred to in paragraph c of this subsection shall be issued
within 30 days of receipt by the Township of the request referred to in
paragraph b of this subsection.
e. After receipt of the various reports referred to in paragraph c of this
subsection, the Township, by resolution, may grant or deny the request
setting forth reasons for the decision.
f. If the request for reimbursement is granted, the Township resolution
shall authorize reimbursement of private garbage and refuse collection
costs in an amount equal to the actual cost or estimated cost to the
Township, as provided in paragraph c of this subsection, whichever is
less. Except in the instance of senior citizen condominiums wherein
special services are required, reimbursement may be allowed up to, but
not exceeding, an additional 5%.
§ 20-6.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-1.1
AO:649
§ 21-2. PROOF OF SERVICE FOR THE COLLECTION OF SOLID
WASTE.
§ 21-2.1. Definitions. [1971 Code § 15-6.1; Ord. No. 2009-39 § 1]
As used in this section:
PROOF OF COLLECTION SERVICE — Shall mean a written record, log, bill
or document evidencing receipt of service for the collection of solid waste
for the preceding month from a person lawfully engaging in private solid
waste collection services within the Township of Lakewood.
REGULAR SOLID WASTE COLLECTION SERVICE — Shall mean the
scheduled pick-up and removal of solid waste from a residential,
commercial or institutional premises located within the boundaries of the
Township of Lakewood at least once a week.
RESPONSIBLE SOLID WASTE GENERATOR — Shall mean any property
owner, tenant or occupant of any single-family residential dwelling or
multiple dwelling, or the owner of any commercial or institutional building
or structure located within the boundaries of the Township of Lakewood
who generates solid waste at those premises.
SOLID WASTE — Shall mean garbage, refuse, and other discarded
materials resulting from industrial, commercial and agricultural operations.
It shall include all waste materials including liquids. It shall not, however,
include solid animal and vegetable wastes collected by swine producers
licensed by the State Department of Agriculture who use such wastes to
feed swine on their own farms.
SOLID WASTE COLLECTION — Shall mean the activity related to pick-up
and transportation of solid waste from its source or location to a solid waste
facility or other destination.
SOLID WASTE CONTAINER — Shall mean a receptacle, container or bag
suitable for the depositing of solid waste.
SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL — Shall mean the storage, treatment, utilization,
processing or final disposal of solid waste.
SOLID WASTE FACILITIES — Shall mean and include the plants, structures
and other real and personal property acquired, constructed or operated
or to be acquired, constructed or operated by any person pursuant to
the provisions of this or any other act. It shall include transfer stations,
incinerators, resource recovery facilities, sanitary landfill facilities or other
g. Any individual, condominium association, corporation, group or other
entity, who have requested reimbursement pursuant to the terms of this
section shall have the right to withdraw from the reimbursement
program by notifying the Township Clerk in writing. Upon receipt of the
request by the Township Clerk, the withdrawal from the program shall
be automatically granted without any formal action by the Township
Committee and a copy of the request shall be forwarded to the
Treasurer's office for informational purposes.
§ 21-1.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 21-2.1
AO:650
plants for the disposal of solid waste. It shall also include all vehicles,
equipment and other real and personal property and rights therein and
appurtenances necessary or useful and convenient for the collection or
disposal of solid waste in a sanitary manner.
§ 21-2.2. Service Requirements. [1971 Code § 15-6.2; Ord. No.
2009-39 § 1]
§ 21-2.3. (Reserved)
§ 21-2.4. (Reserved)
§ 21-2.5. Opportunity to Contract; Notification. [1971 Code § 15-6.5;
Ord. No. 2009-39 § 1]
a. Single-Family Residential Housing. Each responsible solid waste
generator within the Township of Lakewood generating solid waste at a
single-family residential premises shall, in those instances where a solid
waste collection system is not otherwise provided for by the Township
of Lakewood, enter into a contract for regular solid waste collection
service with any lawful solid waste collector service providing such
services within the Township of Lakewood.
b. Multi-Family Residential Housing. Each responsible solid waste
generator within the Township of Lakewood generating solid waste at a
multi-family residential premises shall, in those instances where a solid
waste collection system is not otherwise provided for by the Township
of Lakewood, enter into a contract for regular solid waste collection
service with any lawful solid waste collector service providing such
services within the Township of Lakewood. It shall be the responsibility
of the owner of the multiple dwelling to provide a sufficient number of
appropriate solid waste containers for the deposit of non-recyclable
waste materials to be disposed of as solid waste.
c. Commercial or Institutional Buildings. Each responsible solid waste
generator within the Township of Lakewood generating solid waste at a
commercial or institutional facility within the Township shall, in those
instances where a solid waste collection system is not otherwise
provided for by the Township of Lakewood, enter into a contract for
regular solid waste collection service with any lawful solid waste
collector service providing solid waste collection services within the
Township of Lakewood.
a. The provisions of any other law, rule or regulation to the contrary
notwithstanding, the Township Committee may require that every
private solid waste collector who is registered pursuant to sections 4
and 5 of N.J.S.A. 13:1E-S, and holds a certificate of public convenience
and necessity, pursuant to sections 7 and 10 of N.J.S.A. 48: 13A-9, to
provide all responsible solid waste generators with the opportunity to
§ 21-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-2.5
AO:651
§ 21-2.6. Assistance to Municipality. [1971 Code § 15-6.6; Ord. No.
2009-39 § 1]
The Township Committee may request any solid waste collector engaging
in private solid waste collection services within the Township to assist the
Township in identifying those responsible solid waste generators who fail to
comply with the provisions of this section or the New Jersey Proof of Service
Statute.
§ 21-2.7. Solid Waste Facilities; Powers. [1971 Code § 15-6.7; Ord.
No. 2009-39 § 1]
The provisions of any other law, or of any rule or regulation adopted
pursuant thereto, to the contrary notwithstanding, the owner or operator of
a solid waste facility utilized by the Township shall establish weekly hours
during which individuals may directly transport the solid waste generated
at their residential premises for disposal at the solid waste facility. The
owner or operator of such solid waste facility shall establish an equitable
rate schedule for individual solid waste disposal by citizens on a "per pound"
basis.
§ 21-3. COLLECTION REGULATIONS. [1971 Code § BH14-5; Ord.
No. 97-54; Ord. No. 97-57; Ord. No. 97-59; Ord. No. 2005-41 § 6;
Ord. No. 2009-39 § 1; Ord. No. 2014-38]
contract for, on an individual basis, regular solid waste collection
services, if such services are not already provided for by the Township.
b. Whenever the Township Committee requires a solid waste collector to
provide all responsible solid waste generators with the opportunity to
contract for regular solid waste collection services, pursuant to
paragraph a of this subsection, the Township Committee shall notify the
Board of Public Utilities of these actions by certified mail.
c. In the event that a solid waste collector refuses the Township's
requirement to provide responsible solid waste generators with the
opportunity to contract for regular solid waste collection services
pursuant to paragraph a of this subsection, the Township Committee
shall notify the Board of Public Utilities of this refusal by certified mail.
d. The Township Committee shall notify the owner or operator of every
solid waste facility utilized by the Township, of the adoption of this
section, by certified mail.
a. All garbage and refuse shall be kept in the 95 or 65 gallon containers
supplied by the Township.
If determined by Public Works that a larger container is needed, it will
be supplied by the Township and placed on a concrete pad that will be
supplied and installed by the user in a location that is accessible and
acceptable. The area is to be fenced as approved by Public Works or
§ 21-2.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 21-3
AO:652
Township Engineer. The size of the of the pad will be determined based
on the number of containers needed.
b. All municipal solid waste (hereinafter referred to as "MSW") to be
collected by the Township shall be placed at the curbline in receptacles
as above described. They shall be set at the curbline approximately four
feet from any obstruction (trees, mailboxes, telephone poles, guy wires,
another container, etc.). No cars shall be parked in front of containers.
Such MSW shall be collected once weekly on a day scheduled by the
Township.
c. All MSW shall be thoroughly and completely drained of water and other
fluids, wrapped securely in plastic garbage bags, and placed in
appropriate receptacles as hereinbefore described.
d. All recyclables shall be collected in accordance with the statutory
requirements of N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq., also known as the "Solid Waste
Management Act"; Section 21-3 of the Revised General Ordinances of
the Township of Lakewood; administrative regulation, and as directed
by the Department of Public Works.
e. No person shall mix any fish, eggs, poultry, dog or cat carcasses, or any
animal carcasses, manure, ashes, building materials, hazardous waste
and other refuse with MSW to be collected by the Township.
f. The Township shall not be required to collect garbage or trash from any
slaughterhouse, poultry dealer, butcher or other establishment where it
is determined by the Board of Health either that more frequent
collections are required or that the placing of garbage or trash on the
sidewalk area near the curb for collection would be detrimental to
health, welfare and safety.
g. No loose garbage, grass or other refuse shall be swept or placed in
roadways.
h. No rubbish, leaves or other waste matter shall be burned in roadways.
i. Downtown Area.
1. The term "downtown area" as it appears in this section shall consist
of that area in the Township of Lakewood delineated by the
following boundaries:
Fifth Street to the North; Hurley Avenue to the South; Madison
Avenue to the West; and New Jersey Central Railroad Tracks to the
East.
2. In the downtown area, notwithstanding the type of receptacle
utilized for MSW containment, no MSW shall be placed on the
sidewalk area near the curb earlier than 6:00 a.m. nor later than
9:30 a.m. on the regular collection date scheduled by the Township.
§ 21-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-3
AO:653
3. In all residential zones, MSW contained in acceptable receptacles
as described in paragraphs a and b hereinabove shall not be placed
in the curb area for pickup before 6:00 p.m. of the day prior to the
regular scheduled day for pickup by the Township.
4. In the downtown area, MSW collection will occur daily, Monday
through Friday, weather conditions permitting, between the hours
of 9:30 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. All MSW containers are to be removed
from curbside immediately following MSW collection.
j. In all residential zones, all empty garbage cans and other receptacles,
including those receptacles utilized for the containment of recyclables,
shall be removed from the sidewalk area near the curb on the same day
as collected. In addition to the above, at all single family homes, all
empty garbage cans and other receptacles, including those receptacles
utilized for the containment of recyclables, shall be placed back on the
property at least behind the front yard setback.
k. It shall be unlawful for any person, excepting an employee of the
Township in the discharge of his duties, or an authorized garbage and
waste collector, to collect, pick up, rake or in any way disturb the
garbage or other refuse material of whatsoever nature deposited in any
receptacle laid or placed on any street or public place.
l. Receptacles that are badly broken or otherwise fail to meet the
requirements of this section or of any other of the regulations which
may be promulgated by the Township may be classified as rubbish and
may be collected as such by the Township.
m. The Department of Public Works shall collect MSW only from
residential uses and from those uses within the boundaries of the
downtown area set forth in paragraph i1 hereinabove or by approval of
the Township Committee.
n. Unless otherwise specified herein, the Department of Public Works is
authorized to establish schedules for the collection of MSW, including
garbage, trash, bulky waste and recyclables.
Items scheduled for bulk pickup may not be placed at curbside for
pickup earlier than the Saturday or Sunday before the scheduled
pickup. Bulk items shall be neatly set at curbside. All items scheduled
for bulk pickup must be generated by or from the residences at which
the bulk pickup is located. No construction or demolition materials will
be picked up.
The containers may not be placed at curbside for pickup earlier than
5:00 p.m. the day before the scheduled pickup and the containers must
be removed no later than 6:00 p.m. on the evening of the pickup.
The Township provided containers must be placed away from and out
of sight of the street and may not be placed in the front yards of homes
when not scheduled for pickup.
§ 21-3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 21-3
AO:654
§ 21-3.1. Exceptions to Regulations. [Ord. No. 2009-39 § 1]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to tree surgeons or gardeners
removing the debris resulting from operations of their trade; or to building
or plumbing contractors removing debris arising out of construction
operations; unless said debris is removed by private refuse collectors in
which event the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
§ 21-4. (RESERVED)
§ 21-5. MUNICIPAL SOURCE SEPARATION AND RECYCLING
PROGRAM.53
§ 21-5.1. Source Separation; Exemption from Source Separation
Requirements. [Ord. No. 2010-21 § 1]
Recycling materials shall be put at curbside no earlier than 5:00 p.m.
on the day before the pickup and recycling containers must be removed
no later than 6:00 p.m. on the evening of the scheduled pickup.
The recycling containers must be placed away from and out of sight of
the street and may not be placed in the front yards of homes when not
scheduled for pickup.
o. The Township Committee, Department of Public Works or the Board of
Health may promulgate additional rules and regulations in order to
insure the effective operation of the collection and storage of garbage
and trash and to insure the maintenance of proper sanitary and health
conditions throughout the Township.
p. In those instances where a household located within the Township
discovers a need for an additional Township issued refuse container for
municipal garbage collection, separate and apart from the original
Township issued refuse container issued at no cost to all households
located within the Township, the resident(s) shall notify the Public
Works Department of the need and, upon receipt of a forty-nine
($49.00) dollar service fee, the Public Works Department will issue the
additional refuse container to the resident(s). Said fee shall serve as a
deposit for the use of the additional refuse container and shall be
refunded in full to the resident(s) upon the return of the additional
refuse container to the Township. In the event the additional refuse
container shall be lost or damaged, not due to the fault of the Township,
the deposit shall be retained by the Township.
It shall be the responsibility of the Department of Public Works to
maintain any and all records relating to the distribution/collection of
the additional refuse containers. Any and all refunds of the deposit shall
be issued through the Finance Department.
53.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 2009-39.
§ 21-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-5.1
AO:655
§ 21-5.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2010-21 § 1]
COMMINGLED — Shall mean a combining of non-putrescible sourceseparated
recyclable materials for the purpose of recycling.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean those materials
designated within the Ocean County District Solid Waste Management Plan
to be source separated for the purpose of recycling. These materials
include: (list and define, as necessary, those designated recyclable materials
from the county recycling plan for the residential, commercial and
institutional sectors).
DUAL STREAM — Shall mean commingled all plastic bottles, aluminum
and steel cans; paper magazines, catalogues, junk mail, used writing paper,
newsprint, cardboard, office and school paper. No chipboard or pizza boxes.
a. Mandatory Source Separation. It shall be mandatory for all persons
who are owners, tenants, or occupants of residential and nonresidential
premises, which shall include but not be limited to retail and other
commercial locations, as well as government, schools and other
institutional locations within the Township of Lakewood, to separate
designated recyclable materials from all solid waste. Designated
recyclable materials shall be deposited separate and apart from other
solid waste generated by the owners, tenants, or occupants of such
premises and shall be placed separately at the curb in a manner and on
such days and times as may be hereinafter established by regulations
promulgated by the Lakewood Township Department of Public Works.
b. Exemptions. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.16(d), the governing body of
a municipality may exempt persons occupying commercial or
institutional premises within its municipal boundaries from the source
separation requirements of the ordinance which requires persons
generating municipal solid waste within its municipal boundaries to
source separate from the municipal solid waste stream, the specified
recyclable materials if those persons have otherwise provided for the
recycling of all designated recyclable materials. To be eligible for an
exemption pursuant to this chapter, a commercial or institutional
generator of solid waste shall file an application for exemption with the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator on forms to be provided for this
purpose. The form shall include, at a minimum, the following
information: the name of the commercial or institutional entity; the
street address location and lot and block designation; the name, official
title and phone number of the person making application on behalf of
the commercial or institutional entity; the name, address, official
contact person and telephone number of the facility which provides the
service of recycling those designated recyclable materials, and a
certification that the designated recyclable materials will be recycled,
and that, at least on an annual basis, said recycling service provider or
commercial/institutional generator shall provide written documentation
to the Municipal Recycling Coordinator of the total number of tons
collected and recycled for each designated material.
§ 21-5.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 21-5.2
AO:656
ELECTRONIC WASTE — (To be included in those instances where a
recycling program has been, or will be, established for these materials.
Additionally, the following definition may be changed to reflect individual
municipal program requirements) Shall mean a computer central
processing unit and associated hardware including keyboards, modems,
printers scanners and fax machines; a cathode ray tube, a cathode ray tube
device, a flat panel display or similar video display device with a screen that
is greater than four inches measured diagonally and that contains one or
more circuit boards, including a television, and cell phones.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — Shall mean toxic household products
such as herbicides, pesticides, household cleaners, paints and paint
thinners, solvent and photographic chemicals.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Shall mean any building or structure, or
complex of buildings in which three or more dwelling units are owneroccupied
or rented or leased, or offered for rental or lease, for residential
purposes (see N.J.S.A. 13:1E99.13a) and shall include hotels, motels, or
other guest houses serving transient or seasonal guests as those terms are
defined under subsection (j) of section 3 of the "Hotel and Multiple Dwelling
Law," P.L. 1967, c. 76 (C.55: 13A-1 et seq.).
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING COORDINATOR — Shall mean the person or
persons appointed by the municipal governing body and who shall be
authorized to, among other things, enforce the provisions of this section;
and any rules and regulations which may be promulgated hereunder.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW) STREAM — Shall mean all solid waste
generated at residential, commercial, and institutional establishments
within the boundaries of the Township of Lakewood.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Shall mean those materials which would
otherwise become solid waste, and which may be collected, separated, or
processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw
materials or products.
SINGLE STREAM — Shall mean the combination of commingled and paper
listed above in one container. Do not include plastic bags, food waste, paper
towels paper napkins, pizza boxes, egg cartons, aluminum foil, plastic cups
and utensils. No plastic other then bottles. No juice boxes or bags. No
garbage.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean recyclable
materials which are separated at the point of generation by the generator
thereof from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
SOURCE SEPARATION — Shall mean the process by which recyclable
materials are separated at the point of generation by the generator thereof
from solid waste for the purposes of recycling.
§ 21-5.3. Collection of Recyclable Materials. [Ord. No. 2010-21 § 1]
The collection of recyclable material shall be in the manner prescribed as
follows:
§ 21-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-5.3
AO:657
§ 21-5.4. Residential Dwelling Compliance Requirements. [Ord. No.
2010-21 § 1]
The owner of any property shall be responsible for compliance with this
section. For multifamily units, the management or owner is responsible
for setting up and maintaining the recycling system, including collection
of recyclable materials, in accordance with guidelines or regulations
established by the appropriate municipal office. Violations and penalty
notices will be directed to the owner or management, in those instances
where the violator is not easily identifiable. The management shall issue
notification and collection rules to new tenants when they arrive and every
six months during their occupancy.
§ 21-5.5. (Reserved)
§ 21-5.6. Nonresidential Establishment Compliance Requirements.
[Ord. No. 2010-21 § 1]
a. All containers and brown paper bags containing recyclable materials
shall be placed, prior to collection, between the curb and the sidewalk,
or in the absence of curb and sidewalk, as near to the street as not to
constitute a danger, where such receptacles shall be readily accessible
to the collector without providing obstruction to pedestrians. The
owner or occupant of the premises shall keep all receptacles clean and
in safe handling condition. Receptacles or other items to be disposed of
shall be placed as noted above anytime after 5:00 p.m. of the day
immediately preceding the day of collection, but no later than 6:00 a.m.
of the day of collection. After collection, any containers shall be
removed from the curbside by no later than 7:00 p.m. of the day of
collection.
b. All receptacles or dumpsters shall be maintained in clean and in a safe
manner in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
a. All commercial and institutional generators of solid waste shall be
required to comply with the provisions of this section.
b. The arrangement for collection of designated recyclables hereunder
shall be the responsibility of the commercial, institutional or industrial
property owner or their designee, unless the municipality provides for
the collection of designated recyclable materials. All commercial,
institutional or industrial properties which provide outdoor litter
receptacles and disposal service for their contents shall also provide
receptacles for designated recyclable materials, for those materials
commonly deposited, in the location of the litter receptacle, and shall
provide for separate recycling service for their contents.
c. Every business, institution, or industrial facility shall report on an
annual basis to the Recycling Coordinator, on such forms as may be
prescribed, on recycling activities at their premises, including the
§ 21-5.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 21-5.6
AO:658
§ 21-5.7. New Developments of Multifamily Residential Units or
Commercial, Institutional, or Industrial Properties (Pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13a and 99.16c). [Ord. No. 2010-21 § 1]
§ 21-5.8. Prohibition of the Collection of Solid Waste Mixed with
Recyclable Materials. [Ord. No. 2010-21 § 1]
amount of recycled material, by material type, collected and recycled
and the vendor or vendors providing recycling service.
d. All food service establishments, as defined in the Health Code, shall, in
addition to compliance with all other recycling requirements, be
required to recycle grease and/or cooking oil created in the processing
of food or food products, and maintain such records as may be
prescribed, for inspection by any code enforcement officer.
a. Any application to the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of
Adjustment of the Township of Lakewood, for subdivision or site plan
approval for the construction of multifamily dwellings of three or more
units, single family developments of 50 or more units or any
commercial, institutional, or industrial development for the utilization
of 1,000 square feet or more of land, must include a recycling plan. This
plan must contain, at a minimum, the following:
1. A detailed analysis of the expected composition and amounts of
solid waste and recyclables generated at the proposed
development; and
2. Locations documented on the application's site plan that provide
for convenient recycling opportunities for all owners, tenants, and
occupants. The recycling area shall be of sufficient size, convenient
location and contain other attributes (signage, lighting, fencing,
etc.) as may be determined by the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator.
b. Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy by the Township of
Lakewood, the owner of any new multifamily housing or commercial,
institutional, or industrial development must supply a copy of a duly
executed contract with a hauling company for the purposes of collection
and recycling of source-separated recyclable materials, in those
instances where the municipality does not otherwise provide this
service.
c. Provision shall be made for the indoor, or enclosed outdoor, storage and
pickup of solid waste, to be approved by the Municipal Engineer.
a. It shall be unlawful for solid waste collectors to collect solid waste that
is mixed with, or contains visible signs of designated recyclable
materials. It is also unlawful for solid waste collectors to remove for
disposal those bags or containers of solid waste which visibly display a
§ 21-5.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-5.8
AO:659
§ 21-5.9. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2010-21 § 1]
The Code Enforcement Official, the Department of Health, the Recycling
Coordinator, the Property Maintenance Official, the Housing Officer, and the
Ocean County Department of Health are hereby individually and severally
empowered to enforce the provisions of this section. An inspection may
consist of sorting through containers and opening of solid waste bags to
detect, by sound or sight, the presence of any recyclable material.
§ 21-5.10. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2010-21 § 1]
Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity that violates or fails to comply
with any provision of this section or any of the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof be punishable by
a fine not less than $250, nor more than $1,000. Each day for which a
violation of this section occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
(Note- municipalities are empowered to incorporate the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 into their ordinance. This provision may be viewed at the
New Jersey legislative website).
Fines levied and collected pursuant to the provisions of this section shall
be immediately deposited into the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund (or
equivalent). Monies in the Municipal Recycling Trust Fund shall be used for
the expenses of the municipal recycling program.
§ 21-5.11. Severability, Effective Date. [Ord. No. 2010-21 § 1]
In the event that it is determined, by a Court of competent jurisdiction,
that any provision or section of this section is unconstitutional, all other
sections and provisions shall remain in effect. This section shall take effect
immediately, unless otherwise provided by resolution of the governing body.
§ 21-6. YARD WASTE COLLECTION PROGRAM.
warning notice sticker or some other device indicating that the load of
solid waste contains designated recyclable materials.
b. It shall be the responsibility of the resident or occupant to properly
segregate the uncollected solid waste for proper disposal or recycling.
Allowing such unseparated solid waste and recyclables to accumulate
will be considered a violation of this article and the local sanitary code.
c. Once placed in the location identified by this section, or any rules or
regulations promulgated pursuant to this section, no person, other than
those authorized by the municipality, shall tamper with, collect, remove,
or otherwise handle designated recyclable materials.
§ 21-5.8 LAKEWOOD CODE § 21-6.1
AO:660
§ 21-6.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2006-53 § I; Ord. No. 2009-39 § 1]
The purpose of this section is to establish a yard waste collection and
disposal program in Lakewood Township, so as to protect public health
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 21-6.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2006-53 § II; Ord. No. 2009-39 § 1]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — Shall mean the placement of yard waste in a trash can,
bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling
or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of the State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing State, County or municipal
roadway, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Shall mean leaves, grass clippings, and brush.
§ 21-6.3. Yard Waste Collection. [Ord. No. 2006-53 § III; Ord. No.
2009-39 § 1]
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and shall not be
placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such
yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other
manner is a violation of this section. If such placement of yard waste occurs,
the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove the
yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this
section.
§ 21-6.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2006-53 § IV; Ord. No. 2009-39
§ 1]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by Code Enforcement.
§ 21-6.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-6.5
AO:661
§ 21-6.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2006-53 § V; Ord. No.
2009-39 § 1]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $100 for the first offense and $300
for subsequent offenses and/or incarceration in the County Jail for up to 90
days for each and every violation.
§ 21-7. USE OF PRIVATE CONTAINERS ON TOWNSHIP PROPERTY
PROHIBITED.
§ 21-7.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2008-37 § 1; Ord. No. 2009-39 § 1]
The purpose of this section is to keep Township property free from
containers that might be unsightly or interfere with the Township's use of
its property.
§ 21-7.2. Definition. [Ord. No. 2008-37 § 2; Ord. No. 2009-39 § 1]
A container is defined as something that holds things especially for
transport or storage.
§ 21-7.3. Prohibition. [Ord. No. 2008-37 § 3; Ord. No. 2009-39 § 1]
The placement of private trash, recycling, clothing and other containers
or storage facilities on Township property is hereby prohibited unless preapproved
by the Township Committee.
§ 21-7.4. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2008-37 § 4; Ord. No. 2009-39 § 1]
In addition to any other fines or penalties imposed under this act, the
Township may remove the container or receptacle. The person, corporation,
partnership or entity responsible for the placement of the container or
receptacle shall be subject to a storage fee of up to $10 per day.
§ 21-8. DEBRIS RECOVERY PLAN.
§ 21-8.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2009-39 § 1]
COVERED PROJECT — Means a construction, renovation, or demolition
project for which a building permit or a demolition permit is required, and
for which a dumpster or roll off container shall be placed on premises for
the purpose of placement of solid waste materials.
§ 21-8.2. Construction, Renovation and Demolition Debris Recovery
Plan. [Ord. No. 2009-39 § 1]
A debris recovery plan shall be filed with the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator prior to the commencement of any activity for which municipal
approval as further identified above. The debris recovery plan shall identify
the types and estimated quantities of construction and demolition debris to
§ 21-6.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 21-8.2
AO:662
be generated from the project, how each material will be managed, and the
name of each facility or service provider that the entity will use to manage
each material. The plan shall further detail how the applicant shall ensure
that a minimum of 50% of the materials to be generated will be separated
and recycled.
§ 21-8.3. Review of Debris Recovery Plan. [Ord. No. 2009-39 § 1]
§ 21-8.4. Diversion Requirement Adjustment. [Ord. No. 2009-39 § 1]
a. Approval. A debris recovery plan shall be reviewed by the Township
Construction Official and Municipal Recycling Coordinator, and
approved if it provides for all of the information required by this
chapter. An approved debris recovery plan shall be marked "Approved"
and returned to the owner of the entity which submitted the plan.
b. Denial. A debris recovery plan shall not be approved if it does not
provide all of the information required by this chapter. If a debris
recovery plan is not approved, the owner of the entity which submitted
the plan, shall be notified in writing that the plan has been rejected,
including the reasons for the rejection. In order to obtain the building
or demolition permit sought, the owner of the entity which will carry
out the construction, renovation, or demolition project shall make the
required changes and resubmit the debris recovery plan to the
Municipal Recycling Coordinator.
a. Application. If the owner of an entity carrying out a covered project
experiences circumstances that makes it infeasible to comply with the
diversion requirement cited in this chapter, the owner of the entity may
apply for an adjustment. The owner shall indicate in writing why it is
infeasible to divert 50% of the materials being generated from the
covered project and specify what percentage of diversion could be
achieved. Increased costs to the owner of the entity carrying out the
covered project will not be an acceptable justification for an
adjustment.
b. Review. The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall review the
information supplied by the owner. If warranted the Municipal
Recycling Coordinator shall attempt to contact the owner to discuss
possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement.
c. Granting of an Adjustment. If the Municipal Recycling Coordinator
determines that it is infeasible for the entity carrying out a covered
project to divert 50% of the generated C&D debris from the covered
project, the percent of diversion required shall be adjusted. The owner
shall be notified in writing of the adjusted diversion requirement. The
owner of the entity carrying out the covered project shall be required to
divert the percent of C&D debris required by the adjustment.
d. Denial of Adjustment. If the Municipal Recycling Coordinator
determines that it is feasible for the owner of an entity carrying out a
§ 21-8.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 21-8.4
AO:663
§ 21-8.5. Debris Recover Plan Reporting Requirements. [Ord. No.
2009-39 § 1]
§ 21-8.6. Compliance with Diversion Requirement. [Ord. No.
2009-39 § 1]
The Municipal Recycling Coordinator shall review the information
submitted pursuant to this chapter and determine whether the owner of the
entity carrying out the covered project has complied, or failed to comply
with the diversion requirement. The determination regarding compliance
will be provided to the owner of the entity carrying out the covered project
in writing.
§ 21-8.7. Appeal. [Ord. No. 2009-39 § 1]
An owner of the entity carrying out the covered project may appeal a
determination of failure to comply under this chapter to the municipality
within 30 days of the decision or determination. The appeal shall be in
writing and shall state the facts and basis for the appeal. A decision by the
department where appeal is to be filed shall be final.
§ 21-8.8. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2009-39 § 1]
The Code Enforcement Official, the Police Department, the Department
of Health, the Recycling Coordinator, the Property Maintenance Official,
and the Housing Officer are hereby individually and severally empowered
to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The respective enforcing official
may, in his or her discretion, post warning stickers for a first offense. An
covered project to meet the diversion requirement cited in this chapter,
the owner shall be notified in writing of the denial of the diversion
requirement adjustment.
a. Documentation. Upon completion of the covered project, but before the
final inspection, the owner of the entity carrying out a covered project
shall submit in person or by certified mail to the Municipal Recycling
Coordinator, the documentation required to demonstrate that the
applicant has met the diversion requirement. The required
documentation shall include the following:
1. A completed debris recovery report, signed by the owner of the
entity carrying out a covered project, indicating the quantity of
each material generated during the covered project diverted or
disposed;
2. Receipts from all facilities or service providers utilized to divert
and dispose materials generated during the covered project; and
3. Any additional information that the owner of the entity carrying out
the covered project believes is relevant to determining compliance
with the diversion requirement.
§ 21-8.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 21-8.8
AO:664
inspection may consist of dumping and opening of solid waste bags of
containers to detect, by sound or sight, the presence of any recyclable
material.
§ 21-8.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2009-39 § 1]
Any person, corporation, occupant, or entity that violates or fails to comply
with any provision of this chapter or any of the rules and regulations
promulgated hereunder shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a
fine not less than $250, nor more than $1000.
§ 21-8.10. Severability; Effective Date. [Ord. No. 2009-39 § 1]
If it is determined, by a Court of competent jurisdiction, that any provision
or section of this chapter is unconstitutional, all other sections and
provisions shall remain in effect. This chapter shall take effect immediately.
Chapter 22
CABLE TELECOMMUNICATION FRANCHISE
[Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of
Ordinance Nos. 99-30, 99-66 and 2001-86.]
§ 22-1. PURPOSE AND DETERMINATIONS. [Ord. No. 2013-38
Preamble]
The governing body of the Township of Lakewood (hereinafter referred
to as the "Township") determined that Cablevision of Monmouth, LLC,
(hereinafter referred to as "the Company" or "Cablevision") had the
technical competence and general fitness to operate a cable television
system in the Township, and by prior ordinance granted its municipal
consent for Cablevision to obtain a nonexclusive franchise (the "Franchise")
for the placement of facilities and the establishment of a cable television
system in the Township.
By application for renewal consent filed with the Township and the Office
of Cable Television on or about April 17, 2012, Cablevision has sought a
renewal of the Franchise.
The Township, having held public hearings, has made due inquiry to review
Cablevision's performance under the Franchise, and to identify the
Township's future cable-related needs and interests and has concluded
that Cablevision has substantially complied with its obligations under the
Franchise and applicable law and has committed to certain undertakings
responsive to the Township's future cable-related needs and interests;
The governing body of the Township has accordingly concluded that the
consent should be renewed subject to the requirements set forth below;
and that, provided Cablevision's proposal for renewal embodies the
commitments set forth below, the Township's municipal consent to the
renewal of the Franchise should be given; and
§ 21-8.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-1
AO:665
Imposition of the same burdens and costs on other competitors franchised
by the Township is a basic assumption of the parties;
Be it Ordained, by the Township Committee of the Township of Lakewood,
State of New Jersey as follows.
§ 22-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 1]
For the purpose of this Ordinance the terms defined above shall have the
meanings there indicated, and the following additional terms shall have the
following meanings:
ACT OR CABLE TELEVISION ACT — Shall mean that statute of the State of
New Jersey relating to cable television, known as the Cable Television Act,
N.J. S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq.
APPLICATION — Shall mean Cablevision's application for Renewal of
Municipal Consent, which application is on file in the Township Clerk's
office and is incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof,
except as modified, changed, limited or altered by this Ordinance.
BOARD — Shall mean the Board of Public Utilities of the State of New
Jersey or its successor agency.
COMPANY — Shall mean Cablevision of Monmouth, LLC ("Cablevision") the
grantee of rights under this Ordinance.
FCC — Shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.
FEDERAL ACT — Shall mean that Federal statute relating to cable
communications commonly known as the Cable Communications Policy Act
of 1984, 47 U.S.C. Section 521 et seq. and the Telecommunications Act of
1996, or as those statutes may be amended.
FEDERAL REGULATIONS — Shall mean those Federal regulations relating
to cable television services, 47 C.F.R. Section 76.1 et seq. (and, to the
extent applicable, any other Federal rules and regulations relating to cable
television, including but not limited to, those described in 47 C.F.R. Section
76.3), or as such regulations may be amended.
STANDARD INSTALLATION — Shall mean the installation of drop cable to
a customer's premises where the distance from the point of entry into the
building being served is less than 150 feet from the active cable television
system plant.
STATE — Shall mean the State of New Jersey.
STATE REGULATIONS — Shall mean those regulations of the State of
New Jersey Board of Public Utilities relating to cable television. N.J.A.C.
14:17-1.1 et seq. and N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq., or as such regulations may be
amended.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the governing body of the Township of Lakewood
in the County of Ocean, and the State of New Jersey.
§ 22-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 22-3
AO:666
§ 22-3. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 2]
A public hearing concerning the consent herein granted to Cablevision was
held after proper public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the
Act. Said hearing having been held and fully open to the public, and the
municipality having received all comments regarding the qualifications of
Cablevision to receive this consent, the Township hereby finds Cablevision
possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other
qualifications to support municipal consent, and that Cablevision's
operating and construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ 22-4. GRANT OF AUTHORITY. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 3]
The Township hereby grants to Cablevision its nonexclusive consent to
place in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under its highways, streets,
alleys, sidewalks, public ways, and public places in the municipality poles,
wires, cables, and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in
the Township of a cable television system or other communications facility,
and for the provision of any communication service over such facilities.
Operation and construction, pursuant to said consent, is conditioned upon
prior approval of the Board of Public Utilities.
§ 22-5. DURATION OF FRANCHISE. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 4]
This consent granted herein shall be nonexclusive and shall be for a term of
15 years from the date of issuance of a Certificate of Approval by the Board.
§ 22-6. EXPIRATION AND SUBSEQUENT RENEWAL. [Ord. No.
2013-38 § 5]
If Cablevision seeks successive consent, it shall, prior to the expiration of
this consent, apply for a municipal consent and Certificate of Approval in
accordance with N.J.S.A 48:5A-16, and applicable State and Federal rules
and regulations. In accordance with N.J. S.A. 48:5A-25.1, both the Township
and Cablevision shall be bound by the terms of this municipal consent until
such time as Cablevision converts the municipal consent (and any certificate
of approval) into a system-wide franchise.
§ 22-7. FRANCHISE TERRITORY. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 6]
The consent granted under this Ordinance to Cablevision shall apply to the
entirety of the Township and any property hereafter annexed.
§ 22-8. SERVICE AREA. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 7]
Cablevision shall be required to proffer video programming service along
any public right-of-way to any person's residence within the portion of the
Franchise territory, as described in the Application for Municipal Consent,
at Cablevision's schedule of rates for standard and nonstandard installation.
§ 22-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-9
AO:667
§ 22-9. EXTENSION OF SERVICE. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 8]
Commercial and residential entities will be proffered service in accordance
with the Company's line extension policy as identified in the Application.
§ 22-10. FRANCHISE FEE. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 9]
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Cable Television Act,
Cablevision shall pay to the Township, as an annual franchise fee, a sum
equal to 2% of the actual gross revenues received from all recurring
charges in the nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for its cable
television reception services in the Township. In the event applicable law
hereinafter permits a larger franchise fee to be collected, but does not fix
the amount thereof, the Township and Cablevision shall negotiate in good
faith with respect to the amount thereof; provided, however, that nothing
herein shall be construed to permit the Township to require payment of a
franchise fee by Cablevision that is higher than the fee paid by all other
cable television service providers offering service in the Municipality.
§ 22-11. FREE SERVICE. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 10]
Cablevision shall, upon written request, provide free of charge, one
standard installation and monthly cable television reception service to all
State or locally accredited public schools and all municipal public libraries,
as well as municipal buildings located within the Township.
Upon written request from the Township, the Company shall provide to
State and locally accredited elementary and secondary schools and
municipal public libraries in the Township, without charge, the following:
(I) one standard installation per school or library; (2) one cable modem
per installation; and, (3) basic cable modem service for the term of this
Ordinance for each installation. This offer shall be subject to the terms,
conditions and use policies of the Company, as those policies may exist from
time to time.
Upon written request from the Township, the Company shall provide to
(1) one municipally owned facility, without charge, the following: (1) one
standard installation; (2) one cable modem per installation; and (3) basic
cable modem service for the term of this Ordinance for each installation.
This offer shall be subject to the terms, conditions and use policies of the
Company as those policies may exist from time to time.
§ 22-12. CONSTRUCTION/SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. No.
2013-38 § 11]
Cablevision shall perform construction and installation of its plant and
facilities in accordance with applicable State and Federal law. The Company
shall be subject to the following additional construction requirements with
respect to the installation of its cable plant and facilities in the Township:
§ 22-9 LAKEWOOD CODE § 22-12
AO:668
§ 22-13. TECHNICAL AND CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS. [Ord.
No. 2013-38 § 12]
Cablevision shall comply with the technical and customer service standards
established for the cable industry under applicable Federal and State laws,
rules and regulations.
§ 22-14. LOCAL OFFICE OR AGENT. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 13]
Cablevision shall establish and maintain during the entire term of this
consent a local area business office or agent for the purpose of receiving,
investigating and resolving complaints regarding the quality of service,
equipment malfunctions and similar matters. Said office shall be open daily
during normal business hours, and in no event less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, with the exception of holidays.
§ 22-15. DESIGNATION OF COMPLAINT OFFICER. [Ord. No.
2013-38 § 14]
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designated as the complaint officer
for the Township pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26. All
complaints shall be reviewed and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:17-6.5.
a. In the event that the Company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways or other surfaces, the Company
shall at its sole expense restore and replace such disturbances in as
good a condition as existed prior to the commencement of said work.
b. If at any time during the period of this consent, the municipality shall
alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place, the
Company, upon reasonable notice by the Township shall remove or
relocate its equipment, at its own expense.
c. Upon request of a person holding a building or moving permit issued by
the Township, the Company shall temporarily move or remove
appropriate parts of its facilities so as to permit the moving or erection
of buildings or for the performance of other work. The expense of any
such temporary removal or relocation shall be paid in advance to the
Company by the person requesting the same. In such cases, the
Company shall be given not less than 14 days prior written notice in
order to arrange for the changes required.
d. During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this consent, the
Company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the Township so as to
prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
wires, cables, conduits and fixtures of the Company. Such trimming
shall be only to the extent necessary to maintain proper clearance for
the Company's facilities.
§ 22-12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-16
AO:669
§ 22-16. LIABILITY INSURANCE. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 15]
Cablevision agrees to maintain and keep in force and effect at its sole cost
at all times during the term of this consent, sufficient liability insurance
naming the Township as an additional insured and insuring against loss
by any such claim, suit, judgment, execution or demand in the minimum
amounts of $500,000 for bodily injury or death to one person, and one
million ($1,000,000.00) dollars for bodily injury or death resulting from any
one accident or occurrence stemming from or arising out of the Company's
exercise of its rights hereunder.
§ 22-17. PERFORMANCE BOND. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 16]
Cablevision shall obtain and maintain, at its sole cost and expense, during
the entire term of this Agreement, a bond to the municipality in the amount
of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful performance of its
obligations as provided in this Franchise.
§ 22-18. RATES. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 17]
a. The rates of the Company for cable television service shall be subject to
regulation to the extent permitted by Federal and State law.
b. Cablevision shall implement a senior citizen discount in the amount of
10% off the monthly broadcast basic level of cable television service
rate to any person 62 years of age or older, who subscribes to cable
television services provided by the Company, subject to the following:
1. Such discount shall only be available to eligible senior citizens who
do not share the subscription with more than one person in the
same household who is less than 62 years of age; and
2. In accordance with N.J. S.A. 48:5A-11.2, subscribers seeking
eligibility for the discount must meet the income and residence
requirements of the Pharmaceutical Assistance to the Aged and
Disabled program pursuant to N.J. S.A. 30:4D-21; and
3. The senior discount herein relates only to the broadcast basic level
of cable television service, and shall not apply to any additional
service, feature, or equipment offered by the Company, including
any premium channel services and pay-per-view services; and
4. Senior citizens who subscribe to a level of cable television service
beyond expanded basic service, including any premium or per
channel a la carte service, shall not be eligible for the discount; and
c. The Company shall have no further obligation to provide the senior
discount herein in the event that (a) the Company converts the
municipal consent granted herein to a system-wide franchise in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-25.1; or (b) upon Board approval of a
certification that another cable television service provider offering
services to residents of the Township files, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
§ 22-16 LAKEWOOD CODE § 22-18
AO:670
§ 22-19. EMERGENCY USES. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 18]
Cablevision shall be required to have the capability to override the audio
portion of the system in order to permit the broadcasting of emergency
messages by the Township pursuant to State and Federal requirements.
The Company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by
the Township or any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason
the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system
as contemplated herein. The Township shall utilize the State-approved
procedures for such emergency uses.
§ 22-20. EQUITABLE TERMS. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 19]
In the event that the service of another multi-channel video program
provider not subject to the Township's regulatory authority within the
Township creates a significant competitive disadvantage to Cablevision,
the Company shall have the right to request from the Township lawful
amendments to its Franchise that relieve it of burdens which create the
unfair competitive situation. Should the Company seek such amendments
to its Franchise, the parties agree to negotiate in good-faith appropriate
changes to the Franchise in order to relieve the Company of such
competitive disadvantages. If the parties can reach an agreement on such
terms, the Township agrees to support the Company's petition to the Board
for modification of the consent in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and
N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
If the parties are unable to reach an agreement on appropriate amendments
to the Franchise, the Township acknowledges that the Company shall have
the right to petition the Board directly for such amendments in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7; provided, however, the
Township shall be under no obligation to support Cablevision's request for
such relief from the Board.
In any subsequent municipal consent, Township shall require, at a
minimum, the same terms and conditions of any other provider of multichannel
video programming subject to the Township's regulatory authority
as those contained in the instant consent. In the event such subsequent
consent does not contain the same terms and conditions as the instant
consent, Township agrees to support the Company's petition to the Board
for modification of the consent in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47 and
N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7 to relieve the Company of competitive disadvantages
identified in the Company's petition.
48:5A-30(d), is capable of serving 60% or more of the households within
the Township. In the event the Company does cease providing a senior
discount pursuant to this provision, it shall comply with all notice
requirements of applicable law.
§ 22-18 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-21
AO:671
§ 22-21. REMOVAL OF FACILITIES. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 20]
Upon expiration, termination or revocation of this Ordinance, Cablevision at
its sole cost and expense and upon direction of the Board, shall remove the
cables and appurtenant devices constructed or maintained in connection
with the cable services authorized herein, unless Cablevision, its affiliated
entities or assignees should, within six months after such expiration,
termination or revocation obtain certification from the FCC to operate an
open video system or any other Federal or State certification to provide
telecommunications.
§ 22-22. PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL, AND GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS.
[Ord. No. 2013-38 § 21]
a. Cablevision shall continue to make available noncommercial public,
educational and governmental (PEG) access services available to the
residents of the Township as described in the Application for Municipal
Consent. All Cablevision support for PEG access shall be for the
exclusive benefit of Cablevision's subscribers.
b. The Township agrees that Cablevision shall retain the right to use the
PEG access channel, or portion thereof, for non-PEG access
programming, during times when the Township is not utilizing the
channel for purposes of providing PEG access programming. In the
event that the Company uses said PEG access channel for the
presentation of such other programming, the PEG programming shall
remain the priority use and the Company's rights with respect to using
the channel for non-PEG programming shall be subordinate to the
Township's provision of PEG access programming on such channel.
c. Cablevision shall have discretion to determine the format and method
of transmission of the PEG access programming provided for in this
Section 22-22.
d. Cablevision shall continue to provide and maintain the access return
lines at The Lakewood High School, the Georgian Court College, Lions
Head; the Enclave, Lake Ridge, Leisure Village and the 4 Seasons, for
use by the Township in the production of noncommercial public,
educational and governmental access programming on the cable
system. Cablevision shall have discretion to determine the format and
method of transmission of the PEG access programming provided for in
this Section 22-22.
e. Cablevision shall provide the Township with a one-time PEG grant of up
to $140,000 payable as follows: (1) an initial grant payment of $14,000
within 60 days of the issuance of the Certificate of Approval by the
Board of Public Utilities (the "Initial Grant"); and (2) a grant of $9,000
provided in annual installments, upon written request by the Township
(the "Annual Grant"). The Annual Grant shall be payable to the
Township within 90 days from receipt of the Township's written
§ 22-21 LAKEWOOD CODE § 22-22
AO:672
§ 22-23. INCORPORATION OF APPLICATION. [Ord. No. 2013-38
§ 22]
All of the commitments contained in the Application and any amendment
thereto submitted in writing to the Township by the Company except as
modified herein, are binding upon Cablevision as terms and conditions of
this consent. The Application and any other written amendments thereto
submitted by Cablevision in connection with this consent are incorporated
in this Ordinance by reference and made a part hereof, except as
specifically modified, changed, limited, or altered by this Ordinance, or to
the extent that they conflict with State or Federal law.
§ 22-24. CONSISTENCY WITH APPLICABLE LAWS. [Ord. No.
2013-38 § 23]
This consent shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable
Federal, State and local laws, as such laws, rules and regulations may be
amended from time to time.
§ 22-25. SEPARABILITY. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 24]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
of competent jurisdiction such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion thereof.
§ 22-26. NOTICE. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 25]
Notices required under this Ordinance shall be in writing and shall be
mailed, first class, postage prepaid, to the addresses below. Either party
may change the place where notice is to be given by providing such change
in writing at least 30 days prior to the time such change becomes effective.
The time to respond to notices under this Ordinance shall run from receipt
of such written notice.
request. Cablevision shall not be obligated to make any additional
payments beyond year 15 of the Franchise term.
f. The Township agrees that the Initial Grant and the Annual Grant
provided pursuant to paragraph e shall be used for the exclusive
support of PEG access programming, such as the purchase and/or
rental of PEG access equipment and facilities. On request, the Township
shall provide Cablevision with a certification of compliance with this
Section 22-22.
g. The Company shall have no further obligation to provide any PEG grant
payments due and payable after the date upon which the Company
converts the municipal consent granted herein to a system-wide
Franchise in accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-25.1.
§ 22-22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 22-26
AO:673
Notices to the Company shall be mailed to:
Cablevision Systems Corporation
111 Stewart Avenue
Bethpage, NY 11714
Attention: Vice President for Government/Public Affairs, New Jersey
With a copy to:
Cablevision of Monmouth
1111 Stewart Avenue
Bethpage, NY 11714
Attention: Legal Department
Notices to the Township shall be mailed to:
Township of Lakewood
231 Third Street
Lakewood, New Jersey 08701
Attention: Township Administrator
§ 22-27. EFFECTIVE DATE AND BOARD OF PUBLIC UTILITY
APPROVAL. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 26]
This Ordinance shall take effect upon issuance of a Certificate of Approval
as issued by the Board of Public Utilities that incorporates the material
terms of this Ordinance. Nothing herein shall alter the right of the Company
to seek modification of this Ordinance in accordance with N.J.S.A 48:5A-47
and N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 48:5A-25.1, the terms
of this Ordinance will no longer be in effect upon Cablevision converting
the municipal consent (and any certificate of approval) into a system-wide
Franchise.
§ 22-28. EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCE. [Ord. No. 2013-38 § 27]
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon final passage and
publication as required by law.
Chapter 23
(RESERVED)
[Editor's Note: Former Chapter 23, Private Swimming Pools,
previously codified herein and containing portions of 1971 Code
§§ 4-14.1 — 4-14.9 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No.
2003-28.]
Chapter 24
TAXATION
§ 22-26 LAKEWOOD CODE § 24-1
AO:674
§ 24-1. TAX EXEMPTION AND ABATEMENT.54
§ 24-1.1. Title. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.1; Ord. No. 2007-11 § 1]
This section shall be known as the Township of Lakewood Tax Exemption
and Abatement of Eligible Structures Ordinance.
§ 24-1.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.2; Ord. No. 2007-11 § 1]
The purpose of this section is to provide for exemption from real property
taxation of qualified improvements, and/or conversions, or for construction
of qualified commercial or industrial structures located in an area
hereinbefore designated, or hereinafter designated, by the Township
Committee, as an area in need of rehabilitation as defined below.
§ 24-1.3. Definitions. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.3; Ord. No. 2007-11 § 1]
As used in this section:
ABATEMENT — Shall mean that portion of the assessed value of a property
as it existed prior to construction, improvement or conversion of a building
or structure thereon, which is exempted from taxation pursuant to this
section.
AREA IN NEED OF REHABILITATION — Shall mean a portion or all of
a municipality which has been determined to be an area in need of
rehabilitation or redevelopment pursuant to the "Local Redevelopment and
Housing Act," (P.L. 1992, c.79), a "blighted area" as determined pursuant to
the "Blighted Areas Act," (P.L. 1949, c.187), or which has been determined
to be in need of rehabilitation pursuant to P.L. 1975, c. 104, P.L. 1977, c.12,
or P.L. 1979, c.233, or which is located in the "Urban Enterprise Zone"
pursuant to P.L. 1983, c.303.
ASSESSOR — Shall mean the officer of the Township of Lakewood charged
with the duty of assessing real property for the purpose of general taxation.
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure
or part thereof used for the manufacturing, processing or assembling of
material or manufactured products, or for research, office, industrial,
commercial, retail, recreational, hotel or motel facilities, or warehousing
purposes, or for any combination thereof, which the governing body
determines will tend to maintain or provide gainful employment within
the municipality, assist in the economic development of the municipality,
maintain or increase the tax base of the municipality and maintain or
diversify and expand commerce within the municipality. It shall not include
any structure or part thereof used or to be used by any business relocated
from another qualifying municipality unless: the total square footage of
the floor area of the structure or part thereof used to be used by the
54.Editor's Note: Section 24-1, Tax Exemption and Abatement, was readopted March 8, 2007
by Ordinance No. 2007-11 and shall remain in full force and effect for a period of 10
years. This section was readopted March 8, 2018 by Ord. No. 2018-7 and shall remain in
effect for a period of 10 years pursuant to and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1.
§ 24-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-1.3
AO:675
business at the new site together with the total square footage of the
land used or to be used by the business at the new site exceeds the
total square footage of that utilized by the business at its current site of
operations by at least 10%; and the property that the business is relocating
to has been the subject of a remedial action plan costing in excess of
$250,000 performed pursuant to an administrative consent order entered
into pursuant to authority vested in the Commissioner of Environmental
Protection under P.L. 1970, c.33 (C.13:1D-1 et seq.), the "Water Pollution
Control Act," P.L. 1977, c.74 (C.58:10A-1 et seq.), the "Solid Waste
Management Act," P.L. 1970, c.39 (C.13:1E-1 et seq.), and the "Spill
Compensation and Control Act," P.L. 1976, c.141 (C.58:10-23.11 et seq.).
COMPLETION — Shall mean substantially ready for the intended use for
which a building or structure is constructed, improved or converted.
CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean the provision of a new commercial or
industrial structure, or the enlargement of the volume of an existing
commercial or industrial structure by more than 30%, but shall not mean
the conversion of an existing building or structure to another use.
CONVERSION OR CONVERSION ALTERATION — Shall mean the alteration
or renovation of a building or structure in such manner as to convert
the building or structure from its previous use to use as a commercial or
industrial structure.
EXEMPTION — Shall mean that portion of the Assessor's full and true value
of any improvement, conversion alteration, or construction not regarded as
increasing the taxable value of a property pursuant to this section.
IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean a modernization, rehabilitation, renovation,
alteration or repair which produces a physical change in an existing
building or structure that improves the safety, sanitation, decency or
attractiveness of the building or structure as a place for work, and which
does not change its permitted use. In the case of a commercial or industrial
structure, it shall not include ordinary painting, repairs and replacement
of maintenance items, or an enlargement of the volume of an existing
structure by more than 30%. In no case shall it include the repair of fire or
other damage to a property for which payment of a claim was received by
any person from an insurance company at any time during the three year
period immediately preceding the filing of an application pursuant to this
section.
§ 24-1.4. Procedure for "Improvement" Tax Exemptions. [Ord. No.
98-54 § 21.4; Ord. No. 2007-11 § 1; Ord. No. 2009-41 § 1]
a. From and after the effective date of this section, any person,
corporation, partnership or other legal entity owning property, which
property is located in areas defined in subsection 24-1.2 herein, may
make a claim for a five year tax exemption with respect to certain
improvements allowable by N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq. for eligible
structures so located by filing with the Tax Assessor within 30 days
following the completion of the improvement an application form on file
§ 24-1.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 24-1.4
AO:676
§ 24-1.5. Procedures for "Commercial or Industrial Structure" Tax
Abatement. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.5; Ord. No. 2007-11 § 1; Ord. No.
2009-41 § 2]
From and after the effective date of this section, any person, corporation,
partnership or other legal entity may make a request for tax abatement for
in the Office of the Tax Assessor in the Township of Lakewood Municipal
Building. The application form shall be the form prescribed by the
Director of the Division of Taxation, Department of the Treasury.
b. In rendering its decision, the Township Committee shall review the
application to determine if it meets the following criteria:
1. The property is located in the designated areas.
2. The improvement and rehabilitation of the subject premises will
tend to increase opportunities for employment and ultimately
broaden the local tax base.
3. The improvement and rehabilitation will tend to induce
improvement, construction and rehabilitation of industrial and/or
commercial facilities in the area.
4. All other reasonable factors consonant with the legislative findings
set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1 et seq.
c. After approval for exemption, the Tax Assessor's full and true value of
the improvements shall not be regarded as increasing the value of such
property for a period of five years after their completion,
notwithstanding that the value of the industrial and/or commercial
structure is increased thereby. During the exemption period, the
assessment on the property shall not be less than the assessment
thereon existing immediately prior to the improvements, unless there is
damage to the structure through action of the elements sufficient to
warrant a reduction.
d. The granting of such exemption shall be recorded and made a
permanent part of the official tax records of the Township, which record
shall contain a notice of the termination date of the exemption and the
consequences of transfer of title.
e. Within 30 days after the execution of a tax agreement, the Township
Clerk shall forward a copy of the agreement to the Director of the
Division of Local Government Services in the Department of Community
Affairs.
f. Every application shall be accompanied by a two hundred fifty
($250.00) dollar nonrefundable application fee to defray the costs
associated with the application, including but not limited to public
advertising and mailing costs. This fee shall be nonrefundable in the
event that the application is denied or withdrawn.
§ 24-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-1.5
AO:677
construction on, or conversion of property located in the designated areas,
which construction or conversion qualifies as a "commercial or industrial
structure" by filing with the Township Committee through the Township
Tax Assessor an application in the form on file in the Assessor's office.
Applicants are encouraged to file the application with the Township before
the commencement of construction. The form of the application shall be in
the form prescribed by the Director, Division of Taxation, Department of the
Treasury and shall provide the following information:
a. A general description of the commercial or industrial structure for
which abatement is sought;
b. A legal description of all real estate necessary for the commercial or
industrial structure;
c. Plans, drawings and other documents as may be required by the
governing body to demonstrate the structure and design of the
commercial or industrial structure;
d. A description of the number, classes and type of employees to be
employed at the commercial or industrial structure site within two
years of completion of the commercial or industrial structure;
e. A statement of the reasons for seeking tax abatement on the
commercial or industrial structure, and a description of the benefits to
be realized by the applicant if tax abatement is granted;
f. Estimates of the cost of completing such commercial or industrial
structures;
g. A statement showing: (1) the real property taxes currently being
assessed, at the commercial or industrial structure site; (2) estimated
tax payments that would be made annually by the applicant on the
commercial or industrial structure during the period of tax abatement;
and (3) estimated tax payments that would be made by the applicant on
the commercial or industrial structure during the first full year
following the termination of the tax abatement agreement;
h. A description of any lease agreements between the applicant and
proposed users of the commercial or industrial structure, and a history
and description of the user's businesses;
i. A detailed statement setting forth why the availability of the five year
tax abatement is an essential inducement to the applicant to construct
the commercial or industrial structure;
j. A detailed statement setting forth the alternatives available to the
applicant if the five year tax abatement is not granted; and
k. Such other pertinent information as the governing body may require.
l. Every application for tax abatement pursuant to this subsection and
every application for continuance of tax abatement pursuant to
§ 24-1.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 24-1.5
AO:678
§ 24-1.6. Approval of Commercial or Industrial Structure Tax
Abatement by Ordinance; Standards. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.6; Ord.
No. 2007-11 § 1; Ord. No. 2009-41 § 3]
§ 24-1.7. Commercial or Industrial Structure Tax Abatement
Agreement. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.7; Ord. No. 2007-11 § 1; Ord. No.
2011-32 § 1; Ord. No. 2017-18]
Upon adoption of an ordinance granting tax abatement for a particular
commercial or industrial structure located in a designated area, the
Township Committee may enter into an agreement with the applicant for
the abatement of local real property taxes. The agreement shall provide for
the applicant to pay to the municipality in lieu of full property tax payments
an amount to be computed by one, but in no case a combination, of the
following formulas:
subsection 24-1.13 shall be accompanied by a two hundred fifty
($250.00) dollar nonrefundable application fee to defray the costs
associated with the application, including but not limited to public
advertising and mailing costs. This fee shall be nonrefundable in the
event that the application is denied or withdrawn.
a. After receipt of a properly completed application, and all required
supporting materials for commercial or industrial structure tax
abatement, the Township Clerk shall place the matter on the agenda for
a decision by the Township Committee. If the application is granted, an
ordinance shall be authorized directing that an agreement for tax
abatement for the particular commercial or industrial structure be
entered into by and between the applicant and the Township.
b. In determining whether or not to grant or deny an application for
commercial or industrial structure tax abatement, the Township
Committee shall be guided by the standards as set forth in subsection
24-1.4b.
a. Cost Basis. The agreement may provide for the applicant to pay to the
municipality in lieu of full property tax payments an annual amount
equal to 2% of the cost of the commercial or industrial structure. For
the purposes of the agreement, "the cost of the commercial or industrial
structure" shall be defined as only the cost or fair market value of direct
labor and all material used in construction, expansion or rehabilitation
of all buildings, structures, and facilities at the commercial or industrial
structure site, including the costs, if any, of land acquisition and land
preparation, provision of access roads, utilities, drainage facilities, and
parking facilities, together with architectural, engineering, legal,
surveying, testing and contractor's fees associated with the commercial
or industrial structure; provided that the applicant shall cause such
costs to be certified and verified to the Governing Body by an
independent and qualified architect, following the completion of the
commercial or industrial structure.
§ 24-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-1.7
AO:679
b. Gross Revenue Basis. The agreement may provide for the applicant to
pay to the municipality in lieu of full property tax payments an amount
equal to 15% of the annual gross revenues from the commercial or
industrial structure. For purposes of the agreement, "annual gross
revenues" means the total annual gross rental and other income
payable to the owner of the commercial or industrial structure from the
commercial or industrial structure. If in any leasing, any real estate
taxes or assessment on property included in the commercial or
industrial structure, any premiums for fire or other insurance on or
concerning property included in the commercial or industrial structure,
or any operating or maintenance expenses ordinarily paid by the
landlord, are to be paid by the tenant, then those payments shall be
computed and deemed to be part of the rent and shall be included in the
annual gross revenue. The tax agreement shall establish the method of
computing the revenues and may establish a method of arbitration by
which either the landlord or tenant may dispute the amount of
payments so included in the annual gross revenue.
c. Tax Phase-In Basis. The agreement may provide for the applicant to pay
to the municipality in lieu of full property taxes an amount equal to a
percentage of taxes otherwise due, according to the following schedule:
1. In the first full tax year after completion, no payment in lieu of
taxes otherwise due;
2. In the second tax year, an amount not less than 20% of taxes
otherwise due;
3. In the third tax year, an amount not less than 40% of taxes
otherwise due;
4. In the fourth tax year, an amount not less than 60% of taxes
otherwise due;
5. In the fifth tax year, an amount not less than 80% of taxes otherwise
due.
d. No Appeal. The agreement shall provide that during the term that the
agreement is in effect the applicant agrees not to file a tax appeal or in
any way contest the assessed value of the land, or the value of any
abated or non-abated improvements as set forth in the agreement.
e. Once an abatement is granted, all appropriate taxes and abatement
charges must be maintained and be current. If taxes and abatement
charges are not current, the holder of the abatement shall be given 30
days after notice to bring the taxes and abatement charges current.
Failure to do so will result in an irrevocable forfeiture of the abatement.
§ 24-1.7 LAKEWOOD CODE § 24-1.8
AO:680
§ 24-1.8. Effective Period. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.8; Ord. No. 2006-49
§ 1; Ord. No. 2007-11 § 1]
All tax abatement agreements entered into by the Township of Lakewood
pursuant to the terms of this section shall require the applicant to obtain a
building permit and commence construction of the commercial or industrial
structure within three years from the date of the tax abatement agreement.
At the conclusion of said three year period, any approval for exemption
or abatement shall lapse, unless the applicant, on or before 60 days prior
to said expiration date, files a written request for an extension and said
extension request is granted by the Lakewood Township Committee.
All tax abatement agreements entered into by the Township of Lakewood
pursuant to the terms of this section shall be in effect for a period of
not more than five full years next following the date of completion of the
commercial or industrial structure.
§ 24-1.9. Commercial or Industrial Structure Subject to All Other
Laws. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.9; Ord. No. 2007-11 § 1]
All commercial or industrial structures subject to the agreements for tax
abatement as provided herein shall be subject to all applicable Federal,
State and local laws and regulations, including, but not limited to pollution
control, worker safety, discrimination in employment, zoning, planning and
building code requirements.
§ 24-1.10. Municipality Valuation Affected. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.10;
Ord. No. 2007-11 § 1]
That percentage which the payment in lieu of taxes for tax abated property
bears to the property tax which would have been paid had an abatement not
been granted for said property under the agreement shall be applied to the
valuation of the property to be included in the valuation of the municipality
for determining equalization for County tax apportionment and school aid
during the term of the tax abatement agreements covering such properties,
and at the termination of such an agreement for a property the reduced
valuation procedure required under this section shall no longer apply.
§ 24-1.11. Abatement Applied to All Property Taxes. [Ord. No. 98-54
§ 21.11; Ord. No. 2007-11 § 1]
The abatement of real property taxes provided by the Township pursuant to
this section shall apply to property taxes levied for municipal purposes, fire
district purposes, school purposes, County government purposes and for
the purposes of funding any other property tax exemptions or abatements
on properties located in the designated areas.
§ 24-1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-1.12
AO:681
§ 24-1.12. Township Clerk's Duties. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.12; Ord.
No. 2007-11 § 1]
Within 30 days after the execution of a property tax abatement agreement
as provided hereunder, the Township Clerk shall forward a copy of the
agreement to the Director, Division of Local Government Services,
Department of Community Affairs.
§ 24-1.13. Change in Status. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.13; Ord. No.
2007-11 § 1]
§ 24-1.14. Assessed Value of Property Under Abatement or
Exemption. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.14; Ord. No. 2007-11 § 1]
The Assessor shall determine, on October 1 of the year following the date
of the completion of an improvement, conversion or construction, the true
taxable value thereof. Except for property subject to tax agreement, the
amount of tax to be paid for the first full tax year following completion shall
be based on the assessed valuation of the property for the previous year,
minus the amount of the abatement, if any, allowed pursuant to this section,
plus any portion of the assessed valuation of the improvement, conversion
or construction not allowed an exemption pursuant to this section. Subject
to the provisions of the adopting ordinance, the property shall continue to
be treated in the appropriate manner for each of the five full tax years
subsequent to the original determination by the Assessor.
a. If during any tax year prior to the termination of the tax agreement, the
property owner ceases to operate or disposes of the property, or fails to
meet the conditions for qualifying, then the tax which would have
otherwise been payable for each tax year shall become due and payable
from the property owner as if no exemption and abatement had been
granted. The Governing Body of the municipality shall notify the
property owner and Tax Collector forthwith and the Tax Collector shall
within 15 days thereof notify the owner of the property of the amount of
taxes due.
However, with respect to the disposal of the property, where it is
determined that the new owner of the property will continue to use
the property pursuant to the conditions which qualified the property, no
tax shall be due, the exemption and abatement shall continue, and the
agreement shall remain in effect.
b. At the termination of a tax agreement, a commercial or industrial
structure shall be subject to all applicable real property taxes as
provided by State law and regulation and local ordinance; but nothing
herein shall prohibit a commercial or industrial structure, at the
termination of an agreement, from qualifying for and receiving the full
benefits of any other tax preferences provided by law.
§ 24-1.12 LAKEWOOD CODE § 24-1.15
AO:682
§ 24-1.15. Subsequent Improvements and Exemptions. [Ord. No.
98-54 § 21.15; Ord. No. 2007-11 § 1]
Any additional improvement, conversion or construction, completed on a
property granted a previous exemption or abatement pursuant to this
section during the period in which such previous exemption or abatement is
in effect, shall be qualified for an exemption, or exemption and abatement,
just as if such property had not received a previous exemption or
abatement. In such case, the additional improvement, conversion or
construction shall be added to the assessed valuation as it was prior to that
improvement, conversion or construction for the purpose of determining the
assessed valuation of the property from which any additional abatement is
to be subtracted.
§ 24-1.16. Tax Delinquency. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.16; Ord. No.
2007-11 § 1]
No exemption or abatement shall be granted, or tax agreement entered
into, pursuant to this section with respect to any property for which taxes
are delinquent or remain unpaid, or for which penalties for nonpayment of
taxes are due.
§ 24-1.17. Applications, Forms, Records. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.17;
Ord. No. 2007-11 § 1]
No exemption or abatement shall be granted pursuant to this section except
upon written application filed with the Township Tax Assessor and approved
by the Assessor and municipal governing body. Every application shall be
on a form prescribed by the Director of the Division of Taxation in the
Department of the Treasury, and provided for the use of claimants by the
Township of Lakewood, and shall be filed with the Assessor within 30 days,
including Saturdays and Sundays, following completion of the improvement,
conversion or construction. Every application for exemption or abatement,
which is filed within the time specified, may be approved and allowed by
the Governing Body to the degree that the application is consistent with the
provisions of the adopting ordinance or the tax agreement, provided that
the improvement, conversion or construction for which the application is
made qualified as an improvement, conversion or construction pursuant to
the provisions of this section and the tax agreement, if any. The granting of
an exemption or abatement, or tax agreement shall be recorded and made
a permanent part of the official tax records of the Township, which record
shall contain a notice of the termination date thereof.
§ 24-1.18. Notice to Taxpayers. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.18; Ord. No.
2007-11 § 1]
The Township Tax Collector shall include a notice describing the exemption
program or exemption and abatement program provided for by this section
in the mailing of annual property bills to each owner of property located in
the areas in which exemptions, or exemptions and abatements are allowed
§ 24-1.15 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-1.18
AO:683
pursuant to this section during the first year following adoption of the
section.
§ 24-1.19. Report to DCA, Treasury. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.19; Ord.
No. 2007-11 § 1]
The municipal governing body shall report, on or before October 1 of
each year, to the Director of the Division of Local Government Services in
the Department of Community Affairs and to the Director of the Division
of Taxation in the Department of the Treasury the total amount of real
property taxes exempted and the total amount abated in the municipality in
the current tax year for each of the following:
§ 24-1.20. Prior Exemptions. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.20; Ord. No.
2007-11 § 1]
Unless preempted by, or otherwise not in compliance with New Jersey State
Tax Laws or Statutes, no exemption or abatement granted by any prior
ordinances or law shall be affected or terminated by this section, but shall
remain in effect for the time and under the terms granted as if the ordinance
had not been superseded or repealed.
§ 24-1.21. Severability. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.21; Ord. No. 2007-11
§ 1]
If any subsection, part, phrase or provision of this section or the application
thereof to any person, commercial or industrial structure or circumstances,
be adjudged invalid by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment
shall be confined in its application to the subsection, part, phrase, provision
or application directly involved in the controversy in which such judgment
shall have been rendered and shall not affect or impair the validity of
the remainder of this section or the application thereof to other persons,
commercial or industrial structures or circumstances.
§ 24-1.22. Additional Guidelines. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.22; Ord. No.
2007-11 § 1]
a. Improvements or conversions to commercial and/or industrial
structures;
b. Construction of commercial and/or industrial structures under tax
agreements.
In the case of paragraph b above, the report shall state, instead, the total
amount of payments made in lieu of taxes according to each formula utilized
by the municipality, and the difference between that total amount and the total
amount of real property taxes which would have been paid on the commercial
or industrial structure had the tax agreement not been in effect, for the current
tax year.
§ 24-1.18 LAKEWOOD CODE § 24-1.22
AO:684
§ 24-1.23. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 98-54 § 21.23; Ord. No. 2007-11
§ 1]
This section is retroactive to January 18, 1994, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:21-1
et seq., P.L. 1991, c.441. All exemptions and abatements, and all tax
agreements that have been entered into since that date are hereby deemed
by the Township Committee to be valid and are continued under this
section, unless preempted by or otherwise not in compliance with New
Jersey State Tax Laws or Statutes. All exemptions and abatements, and all
tax agreements entered into prior to January 18, 1994 are also continued,
to the extent that all such abatements and exemptions, and all such tax
agreements have not expired or terminated. Exemptions and abatements
granted, and tax agreements entered into subsequent to the effective date
of this section, shall be effective commencing the first full tax year after
approval, and for tax years thereafter.
§ 24-2. HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX.
§ 24-2.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2010-30 § 1]
It is the purpose of this section to implement the provisions of P.L. 2003,
c. 114, which authorizes the governing body of a municipality to adopt an
ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed 3% on
charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or
rooms in a hotel subject to taxation pursuant to subsection (d) of section 3
of P.L. 1966, c. 40 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3) which shall be in addition to any other
tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by
any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
a. Statement of Purpose. The purpose of the inclusion of this subsection is
to specifically define the guidelines for the granting of tax abatement in
order to encourage industrial and commercial growth in a systematic
and orderly fashion in accordance with the Township Master Plan.
Tax abatement may be granted at the discretion of the Township
Committee, which, after weighing all of the pertinent facts, shall make
a decision giving proper weight to those areas which may not properly
develop without the assistance of tax abatement.
b. Additional Criteria.
1. Location. Industrial and commercial structures located in a
designated area as previously set forth in subsection 24-1.2 are
eligible for tax abatement.
2. Time. Applications for tax abatement must be filed with the
Township Tax Assessor within 30 days, including Saturdays and
Sundays, following completion of the improvement, conversion,
alteration or construction. Failure to meet this criterion will result
in automatic denial of the application.
§ 24-1.22 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-2.2
AO:685
§ 24-2.2. Establishment. [Ord. No. 2010-30 § 1]
There is hereby established a Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax in the
Township of Lakewood which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate
of 2% on charges or rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in
the Township of Lakewood of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation
pursuant to subsection (d) of section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 40, N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3
(sales tax). The Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax shall be in addition
to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or
resolution by any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 24-2.3. Exempt Organizations. [Ord. No. 2010-30 § 1]
The Hotel and Motel Room Occupancy Tax authorized herein shall not be
imposed on the rent for an occupancy if the purchaser, user or consumer is
an entity exempt from the tax imposed on an occupancy under the "Sales
and Use Tax Act" pursuant to subsection (a) of section 9 of P.L. 1966, c.30
(C.54:32B-9).
§ 24-2.4. Collection. [Ord. No. 2010-30 § 1]
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c.114:
§ 24-2.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2010-30 § 1]
Any person violating the terms of this section, whether as principal, agent
or employee of another, shall, upon conviction in the Municipal Court of the
a. All taxes imposed by this section shall be paid by the purchaser.
b. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this section.
c. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer, or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
d. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
e. The tax imposed by this section shall be collected on behalf of the
Township by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel
customer. Each person required to collect the tax herein imposed shall
be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or required to be
collected hereunder. Any such person shall have the same right in
respect to collecting the tax from a customer as if the tax were a part of
the rent and payable at the same time; provided that the Chief Financial
Officer of the Township shall be joined as a party in any action or
proceeding brought to collect the tax.
§ 24-2.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 24-2.5
AO:686
Township of Lakewood in the County of Ocean, be subject to the penalties
as provided in Chapter 1, Section 1-5, General Penalty, in the discretion of
the Judge of the Municipal Court of the Township of Lakewood.
§ 24-3. PROCEDURES FOR APPLICATION, APPROVAL AND
ADMINISTRATION OF LONG TERM TAX EXEMPTIONS.
§ 24-3.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2015-16; Ord. No. 2017-23 § 1]
When used in this section, the following terms shall be defined as indicated:
ABATEMENT (OR TAX ABATEMENT OR EXEMPTION OR TAX
EXEMPTION) — Shall mean the exemption of property from real estate
taxes, subject to the payment of an annual service charge in lieu of taxes,
authorized pursuant to the provisions of the Long Term Tax Exemption Law,
(N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq.). Where an abatement or exemption is authorized
pursuant to the provision of the Long Term Tax Exemption Law, real estate
taxes levied on the value of land shall continue to be assessed for the
purpose of general taxation, except as otherwise provided by State statute.
ACT — Shall mean the Long Term Tax Exemption Law (C.40A:20-1 et seq.).
AGREEMENT (OR FINANCIAL AGREEMENT) — Shall mean the contract
entered into between the Township of Lakewood and an entity, pursuant to
the Act.
APPLICATION — Shall mean the information and data required to be
submitted by an entity requesting an abatement or exemption as required
by the Township.
CERTIFIED AUDIT — Shall mean a financial statement or report of the fiscal
operations of a project, including but not limited to revenues and expenses,
which shall be submitted annually pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:20-9(d). The
contents of an audit shall be prepared in a manner consistent with the
current standards of the Financial Accounting Standards Board, shall fully
detail all items required by applicable statutes, and shall be certified as to
its conformance with such standards by a Certified Public Accountant who
is licensed to practice that profession in the State of New Jersey.
CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER — Shall mean the Chief Financial Officer of
the Township of Lakewood.
ENTITY — Shall mean an urban renewal entity meeting the qualifications
set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:20-5.
INDUSTRIAL PROJECT — Shall mean:
A combination of land, improvement and equipment which have been
integrated into a functioning unit intended for the assembling,
processing and manufacturing of finished or partially finished products
from raw materials or fabricated parts but shall not include
warehouses; and
a.
§ 24-2.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-3.1
AO:687
PILOT REVIEW PROFESSIONAL — Shall mean accountants and auditors
that are specifically retained by the Township of Lakewood pursuant to
proposals from such licensed professionals for the purposes of reviewing
long tax exemption applications.
PROJECT — Shall mean the work or undertaking which has as its purpose
the redevelopment of all or any part of a redevelopment area, in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40A:20-3(e).
PRONOUNS. — He or it shall mean the masculine, feminine or neuter
gender, the singular as well as the plural, as proper meaning requires.
PROPERTY — Shall mean the real property and improvements thereon
which existed prior to the execution of a financial agreement.
TAX ASSESSOR — Shall mean the Assessor for the Township of Lakewood.
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Lakewood, New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP COMMITTEE — Shall mean the Township Committee of the
Township of Lakewood, New Jersey.
§ 24-3.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2015-16]
This section sets forth the procedures to be followed by the Township in the
review and consideration of applications for abatement or exemption of real
estate taxes, and the administration of financial agreements authorized by
the Township Committee. This section is intended to apply to residential,
industrial and commercial projects. Should there be any conflicting
provisions in this section with the provisions of the State of New Jersey
Long Term Tax Exemption Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:20-1 et seq., the provision of
the Long Term Tax Exemption Law will be controlling. N.J.S.A. 40A:20-12
shall govern permissible annual service charge amounts and permissible
durations of any long term tax exemption or abatement. However, this
section does not commit or require the Township to approve any application
submitted in accordance herewith. In considering each application, the
Township shall consider, in part, the benefits of the development project
for the Township and the impact of any tax abatement and/or exemption
requested on the budget of the Township.
§ 24-3.3. Application for Exemption. [Ord. No. 2015-16; Ord. No.
2017-23 § 2]
Where the Township Committee determines that the project will
maintain or provide gainful employment within the Township, assist
in the economic development of the Township, maintain or increase
the tax base of the Township and maintain or diversify and expand
commerce within the Township.
b.
a. Form of Application. All applications shall be submitted by an entity
utilizing the application form on file with the Office of the Township
Clerk. The application form may be revised from time to time. An
application shall include but not be limited to: identification of the
property by metes and bounds, tax map block and lots and
§ 24-3.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 24-3.3
AO:688
corresponding street address for which the exemption is sought,
including a survey or plotting from the tax map, the requested duration
of the exemption, the purpose for which the project shall be used, a
detailed description of the improvements to be made to the property,
an estimate of the total project cost or total project unit cost, where
applicable, as defined by the Act, a 10 year projected pro forma for the
project, an estimated schedule for commencement and completion of
construction, a copy of the resolution granting final site plan approval,
and a declaration that the proposed project is located within a
redevelopment area or area appurtenant thereto an Urban Enterprise
Zone, or is for a redevelopment relocation housing project and any
other information which the application may require.
In addition, the application shall set forth the representations of the
entity as to the assessments on the property for land and improvements
as of the date of the filing of the application, the tax levy on the property
for the year in which the application is filed, and the status of all
municipal taxes, fees and charges due and payable to the Township
arising from or imposed on the property. A complete explanation as to
the expected methods and sources of financing the project shall also be
included.
The application shall further contain statements of disclosure in the
form contained in the application as to all parties, including parent
and subsidiary companies having any interest in the property and/or
project, or any other tax exemption or financial agreement then in force
and effect in which any of those parties have any interest, and as to any
other contracts or agreements with the Township in which any of those
parties have any interest, and if so, provide the Federal Identification
Number of each party listed.
The application shall contain the certification of the entity that
contraction of the project has not and will not commence prior to
approval of exemption and execution of financial agreement between
the Township and the entity.
The application shall also include an estimate by the entity as to the
number and type of jobs to be created by the project during the period
of construction and the number and type of permanent jobs to be
created by the project within one year after the completion date. The
application shall contain the affirmative action plan of the entity and a
certification by the entity that such plan complies with the affirmative
action requirements of the Township.
The application shall also include the certification of the entity that the
proposed project meets the requirements of the laws of New Jersey for
exemption. Where a property is required to be declared "in need of
redevelopment" by the Township and a redevelopment plan is required
to be adopted by the Township as a prerequisite to the grant of an
exemption, the entity shall further certify that the proposed project
complies with the redevelopment plan as adopted.
§ 24-3.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-3.3
AO:689
§ 24-3.4. Consideration and Approval. [Ord. No. 2015-16; Ord. No.
2017-23 § 3]
The application shall also include a proposed financial agreement
prepared by the entity, which shall include at minimum the terms and
conditions required by the Act.
Seven copies of an application shall be submitted with all copies
executed in the original by an authorized agent or officer of the entity.
Where the entity is a corporation or company, the signature on the
application shall be certified as to its authenticity and authority by
the submission of a notarized corporate or company resolution, affixed
with the seal of the corporation or company and the signature of the
secretary of the corporation of company, or similar bona fide evidence.
b. Application Fee. No application for abatement or exemption submitted
pursuant to this section shall be accepted unless it is accompanied by
full payment of the required application fee. Such fees shall include a
payment of $5,000.00 specifically earmarked for the retention of the
services of a PILOT Review Professional, and $2,000.00 for each
application requested. The application fee shall be received for
processing the application. Further, the administrative fee for
processing a request for the assignment and assumption of a tax
exemption and financial agreement shall be 2% of the annual service
charge for the current year. Checks shall be certified and payable to the
Township. The application fee shall be nonrefundable.
c. Submission. All applications for abatement or exemption shall be
submitted to the Township Manager either in person or by certified
mail, at his office.
a. Distribution of Application. Upon receipt of any application, the
Township Manager shall forward one copy of the application to the
Executive Director of Economic Development, one copy to the PILOT
Review Professional, one copy to the Tax Assessor, one copy to the Tax
Collector, one copy to the Township Clerk and one copy to the Township
Attorney. The final copy of the application shall be retained by the
Township Manager and shall be placed on permanent file with that
office.
b. Development Review. Upon receipt of an application, the Executive
Director of Economic Development shall conduct a complete review of
the project outlined therein. Such review shall take into consideration
the propriety, accuracy and validity of the description(s), plan(s) and
estimate(s) submitted, the degree to which the project complies with
the Township's development goals as expressed in the master plan,
zoning ordinances, redevelopment plans, the necessity of tax
abatement, and the feasibility of the project.
Based on the review, the Executive Director of Economic Development
shall submit his recommendation to approve or disapprove the
§ 24-3.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 24-3.4
AO:690
application. Such recommendation shall include any changes to the
application that may be deemed necessary by the Executive Director
of Economic Development, as well as set forth the reasons for the
recommendation.
c. Financial Review. Upon receipt of an application the PILOT Review
Professional shall conduct a financial review of the application
including a cost and benefit analysis of the proposed project. In
addition, the PILOT Review Professional shall obtain written
certifications from municipal officials as necessary to review and
substantiate the information contained within the application. Those
certifications shall include the following:
1. Certification of the Tax Assessor as to:
(a) The taxes levied on the real property included within the
project in both the year in which the application was filed and
the immediately preceding year.
(b) The precise identification of all real property included within
the project, including the metes and bounds description, all tax
block and lot designations and corresponding street addresses,
as well as a survey or plotting of the property on the official tax
map.
(c) The owner of record as recorded in the office for each tax lot
included within the project.
(d) The tax assessment for land and improvements then in effect
for each tax lot included within the project.
(e) The total amount assessed on all real property included within
the project in the calendar year immediately preceding its
acquisition by the Township, the Township's agent, the entity
or the entity's agent.
2. Certification of the Tax Collector as to:
(a) The current status of payments due for real estate tax services
charges and/or municipal liens of any type arising from the
property included within the project or from any other
property owned by the entity.
(b) The taxes levied on the real property included within the
project in both the year in which the application was filed and
the immediately preceding year.
(c) The current status of payments due for any financial
agreement then in force and effect which the entity is a party.
§ 24-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-3.4
AO:691
The PILOT Review Professional, Tax Assessor and Tax Collector shall
submit their findings along with the recommendation to the Township
Manager. Such recommendation shall state the basis or reasons
supporting their recommendation.
d. Legal Review. Upon receipt of an application, the Township Attorney
shall conduct a review as to the form and legality of the application. In
addition, the Township Attorney shall obtain written certifications from
municipal officials as necessary to substantiate the information
contained in the application.
At a minimum, such certifications shall include the following:
1. The certifications provided in paragraph c above.
2. Certifications of the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment
identifying whether the use proposed for the project conforms to
the Zoning Ordinance of the Township.
3. Certification of the Secretary of the Planning Board, if applicable,
identifying whether the project is located within a redevelopment
area and/or Urban Enterprise Zone and identifying whether the
project has received final site plan approval from the Planning
Board.
The PILOT Review Professional shall also review any financial
agreements then in force and effect to determine the extent to
which each party to the application is a party to any other
agreements with the Township and whether they are current on
their obligations in those agreements.
Upon receipt of the aforesaid certifications and the review thereof,
the Township Attorney shall make a determination as to the
propriety of the application. Applications shall be deemed proper
in those cases where they are presented in the property form,
satisfy the requirements of this section and all other applicable
statutes and ordinances, and for which no delinquency has been
found with respect to any payments due to the Township.
Where an application is deemed proper, the Township Attorney
shall prepare an ordinance in the form necessary to authorize the
exemption and shall review, revise and modify the form of the
financial agreement, as appropriate.
Where an application is deemed improper or deficient, the
Township Attorney shall prepare a correspondence outlining those
aspects of the application that are deficient and shall forward
the correspondence with the application, the certifications and
the recommendation of the PILOT Review Professional and the
Executive Director of Economic Development to the Township
Committee for consideration.
§ 24-3.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 24-3.4
AO:692
§ 24-3.5. Financial Agreement; Form and Execution. [Ord. No.
2015-16]
e. Township Committee Consideration. Upon receipt of an ordinance to
authorize a financial agreement, the application together with all of the
documents which were submitted by the applicant, the certifications
and review required by this section, the Township Committee shall
place the application on its agenda for consideration. Upon action by
the Township Committee, an ordinance may be adopted, rejected or
returned to Administration for correction, modification or further
information. Notice of the adoption of an ordinance granting exemption
and approving a financial agreement shall be published, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:20-12.
a. Form of Financial Agreement. A financial agreement shall be in the
form appropriate to the nature of the project approved by the Township
Committee. The financial agreements shall at a minimum set forth the
identification of the affected property, the nature and magnitude of the
improvements to be constructed or developed thereon, the service
charges to be paid to the Township and the conditions thereof, the
duration of the exemption and the grounds for termination of the
exemption. The financial agreement shall in all cases provide that any
transfer in the ownership of an entity that is greater than 10% or that
would materially change the terms of the financial agreement shall be
void unless disclosed to the Township in an annual disclosure statement
or in correspondence sent to the Township in advance of an annual
disclosure. The financial agreement shall require the timely submission
of a certified audit of the total project cost and a certified audit of the
fiscal operations of the project, and shall require timely payment of all
municipal taxes, fees and charges arising out of the agreement or in any
way arising out of the property. The financial agreement shall provide
that the failure to comply with the requirement to submit certified
audits, make payment of municipal taxes, fees and charges, or failure to
comply with any material condition of the agreement, shall be grounds
for the Township to terminate the agreement, and/or to exercise such
other remedies as may be provided by statute, municipal ordinance or
the financial agreement.
The financial agreement shall further provide for the reconciliation of
the estimated annual service charges and administrative fees that are
to be paid to the Township, based on the submission of a certified audit.
b. Execution of Financial Agreement. Upon adoption of an ordinance by
the Township Committee authorizing exemption, it shall be the
responsibility of the Township Clerk to insure that the financial
agreement is fully executed. No financial agreement shall be
considered to be in force and effect unless and until it has been signed
by the entity, the Mayor or Deputy Mayor, and dated and certified by the
Township Clerk by his or her signature and affixing the Municipal Seal.
§ 24-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-3.5
AO:693
§ 24-3.6. Period of Construction; Oversight and Charges. [Ord. No.
2015-16]
During the period of construction of a project, the Tax Assessor and the
Construction Code Official shall each be responsible for oversight of the
project as outlined below.
c. Distribution of Executed Financial Agreement. When a financial
agreement has been fully executed, the Township Clerk shall be
responsible for distributing certified copies thereof to the entity, the Tax
Assessor, the Tax Collector, the Construction Code Official and the
Township Attorney. The Township Clerk shall retain one executed copy
which shall be placed on permanent file with this office, where it shall
be available for examination during regular business hours. Further,
the Township Clerk shall forward a certified copy of all ordinances
approving an exemption and the accompanying Financial Agreement to
the Director of the Division of Local Government Services, pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40A:20-2.
a. Permits and Inspections. Upon receipt of an executed financial
agreement, the Construction Code Official shall cause permits to be
issued upon the application of the entity and shall cause inspections of
all work activity to be conducted in the manner provided by applicable
municipal ordinances. The Construction Code Official shall notify the
Township Manager of any failure by the entity to properly apply for
permits, to begin or complete construction within the time frame set
forth in the financial agreement. When permits are issued, the
Construction Code Official shall be responsible for notifying the Tax
Assessor, Tax Collector and the Township Manager of such issuance.
b. Quarterly Report to Assessment. From the date of the execution of a
financial agreement until the issuance of a permanent certificate of
occupancy for the project, the Construction Code Official shall report to
the Tax Assessor each quarter as to the status of permit and
construction activity on the project. Upon the total or partial
completion of construction, the Construction Code Official shall issue a
certificate of occupancy in appropriate form, and shall be responsible
for filing a copy of every certificate with the Tax Assessor, Tax Collector
and the Township Manager.
c. Assessments and Taxes. When a permanent certificate of occupancy is
issued for a project granted exemption pursuant to the Act, the Tax
Assessor shall reflect the improvements and the land thereof, as
authorized, on the Exempt Property List or as otherwise required by
State statute. Further, the Tax Assessor shall exempt the assessment of
all improvements covered by the financial agreement during the period
the exemption remains in effect. Assessments for land shall remain
taxable throughout the term of the exemption, except as otherwise
provided.
§ 24-3.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § 24-3.6
AO:694
At any time that the Tax Assessor causes the assessment of the
improvements or land of a project to be removed, in whole or in part,
from taxable to exempt status, he shall so notify the Tax Collector
in writing so as to insure the commencement and payment of annual
services charges, pursuant to the terms of the financial agreement.
d. Collection and Audit. Upon receipt of an executed financial agreement,
the Division of Revenue Collection shall note within its books of account
a record of the execution of the agreement and the dates provide for
commencement and completion of construction. The Tax Collector shall
thereafter continue to levy taxes and collect payment thereof on the
property until the occurrence of the following:
1. In the event that a certificate of occupancy is issued for the project,
the Tax Collector shall immediately cease to levy or collect taxes on
the portion of the assessed value covered by the certificate of
occupancy and shall instead commence billing the entity the
estimate annual service charge as required by the financial
agreement. Where the financial agreement is authorized pursuant
to the Act, taxes on the value of the land shall continue to be levied
and collected according to the laws of New Jersey, except as
otherwise authorized.
When a certificate of occupancy for a project is issued, in addition
to the steps outlined above, the entity shall submit to the Chief
Financial Officer, Tax Collector and the Township Clerk a copy of
a certified total project cost audit prepared by a certified public
accountant and the independent and qualified architect's
certification required by the Act, within 90 days from the date of
issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
The Chief Financial Officer shall review the certified total project
cost audit and the architect's certification and make a
determination as to the acceptability of the audit. If the audit
is deemed unacceptable it may be performed by the Township's
designed auditor and the cost thereof shall be borne by the entity.
The Township shall bill the entity for the cost of the audit. Once
the audit is accepted, if its findings cause any change in the basis
to be used in the determination of the annual service charge, net
profit or excess profits, the Township shall bill the entity for any
adjustment. The Chief Financial Officer shall also maintain a copy
of an approved certified total project cost audit with the permanent
files of the Department of Finance office.
Upon adoption of an ordinance authorizing amendment to the
financial agreement, the Township shall bill the entity for the cost
of the audit services and for any additional service charges
resulting from an adjustment of the estimate service charges, and
thereafter annual services charges or excess profits, if owed, shall
be billed to the entity. The Township Clerk shall be responsible for
distributing and filing executed copies of the financial agreement,
§ 24-3.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-3.6
AO:695
§ 24-3.7. Administration of Financial Agreement After Construction.
[Ord. No. 2015-16]
After construction of the project is completed and the issuance of a
permanent certificate of occupancy, the entity shall operate the project in
conformance with the terms of the financial agreement. The Department
of Finance shall be responsible for oversight and administration of the
financial agreement during the term of the exemption, in accordance with
the procedures set forth as follows:
as amended, in the same manner as set forth in subsection 24-3.5c
of this section.
2. In the event that the entity fails to commence or complete
construction of the project within the time required by the financial
agreement, fails to make payment of annual service charges as
required by the agreement, or otherwise fails to satisfy a material
condition of the agreement, the Township shall thereupon take
steps necessary to terminate the financial agreement and to advise
the Tax Assessor and the Tax Collector of the actions to be taken
regarding the assessment and collection of real estate taxes. The
Township adopt an ordinance necessary to authorize the
termination of the financial agreement. Upon adoption of such an
ordinance, the Township Clerk shall be responsible for filing and
distributing the ordinance in accordance with the procedures
established by subsection 24-3.5c of this section.
a. Billing and Payment. During the term of an exemption, the Tax Collector
shall bill service charges quarterly. The bills prepared by the
Department of Finance shall reflect the taxes due on the value of all
land included within the project and all service charges, or other fees or
charges due on the improvements, respectively. If authorized by law,
the land upon which housing is constructed, acquired or rehabilitated
by an entity, may be exempt from taxation during the term of the
financial agreement. Irrespective of the date of issuance, any bill for
annual service charges or other municipal charges shall be deemed to
have been issued on the first day of each calendar quarter and to be due
and payable within 30 calendar days thereafter. Where annual service
charges are billed on the basis of estimated or projected figures, any
payments thereof shall be reconciled upon the submission of a certified
audit. In such instance, the entity shall make any additional or required
payments within 90 days after the close of its fiscal year. Any additional
payment by an entity shall be submitted along with a statement by a
certified public accountant, attesting that the additional payment was
the actual amount due based upon the gross revenue or total project
cost as computed in accordance with provision of the act and the
financial agreement.
All payments due to the Township arising out of the financial agreement
which are not paid as of the date due shall be subject to the same
§ 24-3.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 24-3.7
AO:696
charges for penalties and interest as arrears then in effect for
nonpayment of real estate taxes.
The Department of Finance shall accept all payments made pursuant
to an effect and valid financial agreement and shall maintain books
of account as to each agreement. Except as otherwise required by
law, the Department of Finance shall apply payments received for real
estate taxes in the following order: first, amounts due for penalties
and interest on taxes, and then amounts due for the principal of tax
payments. As to payments received for service charges, first, amounts
due for penalties and interest, and then, amounts due for the principal
of service charges directs to the Department of Finance.
In addition to payment of the annual service charge an entity shall
be required to pay an annual administrative fee to the Township. The
requirement to pay an annual administrative fee shall be included as
a covenant in all deeds to a purchaser or transferee of a project or
unit owner thereof. The annual administrative fee shall be 2% of the
annual service charge payable and due on or before February 1st of
each year. In the event of an entity or owner of a property granted
exemption pursuant to the Act does not pay the annual administrative
fee, such delinquency shall be grounds for rescission or termination of
the exemption.
b. Annual Audits. Where required by the Act, other applicable law or by
the financial agreement, an entity shall submit a certified audit
prepared by a certified public accountant of the financial performance
of the project. A certified audit shall be submitted each year within 90
days after the end of the fiscal year of the entity to the Department of
Finance with a simultaneous copy to the Township Clerk for archival
purposes. As part of or in addition to the submission of a certified audit,
the entity shall submit a statement prepared by a certified public
accountant attesting to the net profits and the percentage of excess
profits utilized to maintain reserves authorized pursuant to the
provisions of the Act. The Department of Finance shall review each
audit upon submission and make a determination as to any adjustment
required in the annual service charge, net profit and/or excess profits.
The certified audit shall be submitted to the Chief Financial Officer
for review. If the Chief Financial Officer determines that an audit is
acceptable, it shall be used as the basis for the adjustments of any
taxes, charges or fees outlined in paragraph a of this subsection. If it is
determined that a certified audit is not acceptable, the Department of
Finance shall notify the entity, and the entity shall have responsibility
to cure the deficiencies identified and to submit a corrected or restated
audit. As part of the audit process, in the event that the certified audit
is determined to be unacceptable, the entity shall have responsibility
for the payment of a fee to offset the Township's cost for review of the
certified audit. This fee shall be billed by the Department of Finance as
part of the annual service charge and shall be payable under the same
terms as that charge.
§ 24-3.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-3.7
AO:697
c. Noncompliance. If an entity fails to comply with the requirements for
submission of a certified audit and/or timely payment of real estate
taxes and service charges during the term of the financial agreement,
the Department of Finance shall have responsibility to enforce the
terms of the financial agreement through the following procedure. Such
procedure shall not be the Township's sole remedy, but rather shall be
used in addition to such other remedies as may be provided by the laws
of New Jersey and the terms of the financial agreement.
1. In the case where any payment due to the Township pursuant to a
financial agreement, whether arising from real estate taxes or
service charges is in arrears for a period of six months or more, the
Department of Finance shall notify the entity or responsible party
that unless the total amount due including penalties and interest
and subsequent charges are brought to current status within a
period of 30 days from the date of the notification, the exemption
and financial agreement shall be rescinded. If the entity fails to
comply with such notice, the Department of Finance shall
recommend that to the Township Committee that an ordinance
rescinding the exemption and financial agreement be adopted, and
shall notify the Tax Assessor of the pending action.
Where an exemption and financial agreement is rescinded, the
entity shall have 30 calendar days to seek reinstatement of the
exemption and financial agreement, which shall only be permitted
when all obligations of the entity or person receiving the benefit of
an exemption are satisfied and made current. Upon satisfaction of
all obligations, the Department of Finance shall recommend to the
Township Committee that an ordinance be prepared to reinstate
the exemption and financial agreement for the remainder of its
term.
It shall be the responsibility of the Township Clerk to file and
distribute copies of all ordinances to rescind or reinstate an
exemption and financial agreement.
2. In the event of any nonpayment as outlined in paragraph c1 of this
subsection, in addition to the remedies outlined therein, the entity
by signing the financial agreement agrees that the Township shall
have the same rights to enforce liens and commence foreclosure
proceedings against its project as though the nonpayment were
real estate taxes. The Township may exercise such rights by
following the procedures established by State statue and local
ordinances for the collection of delinquent real estate taxes.
3. Where any certified audit required to be submitted pursuant to a
financial agreement is delinquent for a period of 30 days or more
from the date required to be submitted, the Department of Finance
shall notify the entity that unless the audit submitted in proper
form within 30 days from the date of notification, the exemption
and financial agreement shall be rescinded. If the entity fails to
§ 24-3.7 LAKEWOOD CODE § 24-3.7
AO:698
§ 24-3.8. Tax Exemption Eligibility. [Ord. No. 2015-16]
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, an exemption shall be granted for
the following projects:
§ 24-3.9. Annual Service Charge for Tax Exempt Projects. [Ord. No.
2015-16]
During the terms of an exemption, in lieu of any taxes to be paid on the
project improvements, buildings or land, as authorized by law, an entity
shall make payment to the Township of an annual service charge. The
annual service charge required to be paid by the entity shall be in
accordance with the following:
comply with the notice, the Division of Revenue Collection shall
recommend to the Township Committee that an ordinance
rescinding the exemption and financial agreement, be adopted
which shall cause the project or unit thereof to be assessed
according to the general laws of taxation.
Where an exemption or financial agreement is rescinded the
remaining procedure shall be the same as set forth in paragraph
c1 of this subsection. However, the Township, at its option may
choose not to exercise its right to rescind or terminate, but instead
cause an equivalent audit to be conducted by qualified personnel
under the Township's direction. Where this option is elected, the
Township shall utilize the resulting audit as the basis for billing
as if it had been submitted by the entity. Further, the Township
shall have the right to bill the entity for the cost of conducting
an audit. Exercise of this option by the Township shall not in any
way preclude or waive the right of the Township to terminate an
exemption for any other default.
4. Where an entity or other person fails to comply with any other
material condition of a financial agreement, the Department of
Finance shall notify the Township of the default. The Township shall
thereupon take appropriate steps necessary to declare the
exemption and financial agreement void or take such other legal or
equitable action.
a. Construction or development of a residential project consisting of five
or more units and not exceeding a period of 30 years;
b. Construction or development of an industrial project not to exceed a
period of 30 years; and
c. Construction or development of a commercial project not to exceed a
period of 30 years.
a. The annual service charge for low and moderate income housing
projects shall not be greater than 15% of the annual gross revenues
generated from the operation of such projects.
§ 24-3.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 24-3.9
AO:699
Chapter 25
(RESERVED)
Chapter 26
(RESERVED)
Chapter 27
(RESERVED)
Chapter 28
(RESERVED)
Chapter 29
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
[Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of 1971
Code §§ 19B-1.1 — 19B-5.3 and Ordinance No. 2003-22.]
b. The minimum annual service charge for all other housing projects shall
not be less than 10% of the annual gross revenues generated from the
operation of such projects.
c. The minimum annual service charge for commercial and industrial
projects shall not be less than ten (10%) of the annual gross revenues
generated from the operation of such projects.
d. Where annual gross revenues cannot be reasonably determined
because of the nature of the development, ownership, use of occupancy
of a project, the annual service charge may be calculated on the basis of
the total project cost or total project unit cost. However, the annual
service charge for low and moderate income housing projects shall not
be greater than 2% of the total project cost or total project unit cost.
For all other housing projects the annual service charge shall be not
less than 2% of total project costs or total project unit costs. For
industrial and commercial projects the annual service charge shall not
be less than two (2%) of total project costs or total project unit costs.
However, this section does not commit or require the Township to
approve any application submitted in accordance herewith. In
considering each application, the Township shall consider, in part, the
benefits of the development project for the Township and the impact
of any tax abatement and/or exemption requested on the budget of the
Township.
§ 24-3.9 LAKEWOOD CODE § 29-1
AO:700
§ 29-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT,
PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES.
§ 29-1.1. Statutory Authorization. [Ord. No. 2006-61 § 1]
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Township Committee of the Township of
Lakewood, County of Ocean, State of New Jersey, does ordain as follows.
§ 29-1.2. Findings of Fact. [Ord. No. 2006-61 § 1]
§ 29-1.3. Statement of Purpose. [Ord. No. 2006-61 § 1]
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
a. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Lakewood are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately flood-proofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
a. To protect human life and health;
b. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
c. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located
in areas of special flood hazard;
f. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
g. To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
§ 29-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-1.3
AO:701
§ 29-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses. [Ord. No. 2006-61 § 1]
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
§ 29-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2006-61 § 1]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
APPEAL — Shall mean a request for a review of the local administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — Shall mean a designated AO, AH, or
VO zone on a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with
a 1% annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to
three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path
of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Shall mean the land in the flood
plain within a community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in
any given year.
AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD RELATED EROSION HAZARD — Shall mean
the land within a community which is most likely to be subject to severe
flood related erosion losses. After a detailed evaluation of the special flood
related erosion hazard area will be designated a Zone E on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
h. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
a. Restricting or prohibiting, uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
c. Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 29-1.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 29-2
AO:702
BASE FLOOD — Shall mean the flood having a 1% chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Shall mean any area of the building having its floor subgrade
(below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — Shall mean a wall that is not part of the structural
support of the building and is intended through its design and construction
to collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to
the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA — Shall mean an area of special flood
hazard extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune
along an open coast and any other area subject to high velocity wave action
from storms or seismic sources.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any man-made change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the areas of
special flood hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING — Shall mean a non-basement building (i) built in
the case of a building in an area of special flood hazard to have the top
of the elevated floor or in the case of a building in a coastal high hazard
area to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the
elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of piling, columns
(posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and (ii)
adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the
building during a flood up to the magnitude of the base flood. In an area of
special flood hazard "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by
means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to
facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. In areas of coastal high
hazard "elevated buildings" also includes a building otherwise meeting the
definition of "elevated building" even though the lower area is enclosed by
means of breakaway walls.
EROSION — Shall mean the process of the gradual wearing away of land
masses.
FLOOD OR FLOODING — Shall mean a general and temporary condition of
partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — Shall mean the
official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones
applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — Shall mean the official report provided
in which the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles,
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
b.
§ 29-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-2
AO:703
as well as the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation
of the base flood.
FLOOD-RELATED EROSION — Shall mean the collapse or subsidence of
land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of
undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated
cyclical levels or suddenly caused by unusually high water level in a natural
body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by unanticipated force of
nature, such as a flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly
unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding.
FLOOD-RELATED EROSION AREA OR FLOOD-RELATED EROSION PRONE
AREA — Shall mean a land area adjoining the shore of a lake or other body
of water, which due to the composition of the shore line or bank and high
water levels or wind-driven currents, is likely to suffer flood-related erosion.
FLOOD-RELATED EROSION AREA MANAGEMENT — Shall mean the
operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures
for reducing flood-related erosion damage, including but not limited to
emergency preparedness plans, flood-related erosion control works, and
flood plain management regulations.
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Shall mean zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as a flood plain ordinance, grading
ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police
power. The term describes such State or local regulations, in any
combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood
damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODWAY — Shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than
0.2 foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — Shall mean the highest natural elevation
of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Shall mean any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
a.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
b.
Individually listed on a State inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
c.
§ 29-2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 29-2
AO:704
LOWEST FLOOR — Shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other
than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor provided that
such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Shall mean a structure, transportable in one
or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a flood plain
regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean
a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction
of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of the flood plain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE — Shall mean a continuous or nearly continuous
mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes
immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and
over-topping from high tides and waves from coastal storms. The inland
limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct
change from the relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which is (i) built on a
single chassis; (ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projects; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as
a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational,
camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved State program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
2.
d.
§ 29-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-2
AO:705
REFERENCE FEATURE — Shall mean the receding edge or bluff or eroding
frontal dune, or if such a feature is not present, the normal high water line
or the seaward line of permanent vegetation if a high water line cannot be
identified.
SAND DUNES — Shall mean naturally occurring accumulations of sand in
ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
SETBACK — 60-year setback shall mean a distance equal to 60 times the
average annual long term recession rate at a site, measured from the
reference feature.
30-year setback shall mean a distance equal to 30 times the average annual
long term recession rate at a site, measured from the reference feature.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — (For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. No.
97-348)) shall include substantial improvements and means the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement
was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the
first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site such as
the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings or piers,
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it include
the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or
sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of
the building.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean a walled and roofed building, a manufactured
home, or a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Shall mean damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure
before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Shall mean any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of
which exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start
of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of State or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
a.
§ 29-2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 29-2
AO:706
VARIANCE — Shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this
chapter that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
§ 29-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 29-3.1. Lands to Which This Chapter Applies. [Ord. No. 2006-61
§ 1]
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Lakewood, Ocean County, New Jersey.
§ 29-3.2. Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
[Ord. No. 2006-61 § 1]
The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Lakewood, Community
No. 340378, are identified and defined on the following documents
prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
§ 29-3.3. Penalties for Noncompliance. [Ord. No. 2006-61 § 1]
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or falls to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $200 per day or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or
both, for each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses
involved in the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township
of Lakewood from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent
or remedy any violation.
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic
structure."
b.
a. A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Ocean
County, New Jersey (all jurisdictions)" dated September 29, 2006.
b. Flood Insurance Rate Map for Ocean County, New Jersey (all
jurisdictions) as shown on index and panel(s) 0160, 0167, 0176, 0177,
0178, 0179, 0181, 0182, 0183, 0184, 0186, 0187, 0191, 0193 whose
effective date is September 29, 2006.
The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this
chapter. The Flood Insurance Study and maps are on file at the Lakewood
Township Engineer's Office, 231 Third Street, Lakewood, New Jersey 08731.
§ 29-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-3.4
AO:707
§ 29-3.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. No. 2006-61
§ 1]
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 29-3.5. Interpretation. [Ord. No. 2006-61 § 1]
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 29-3.6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Ord. No. 2006-61 § 1]
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes.
This chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special flood
hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or
flood damages.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Lakewood, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 29-4. DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
§ 29-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit. [Ord. No. 2006-61
§ 1]
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins within any area of special flood hazard established in subsection
29-3.2. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Township of Lakewood and may include, but not be limited
to; plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of
the foregoing.
Specifically, the following information is required:
a. Considered as minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
§ 29-3.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 29-4.1
AO:708
§ 29-4.2. Designation of the Local Administrator. [Ord. No. 2006-61
§ 1]
The Township of Lakewood, Director of Code Enforcement/Zoning, is hereby
appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying
development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 29-4.3. Duties and Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 2006-61 § 1]
Duties of the Township of Lakewood, Director of Code Enforcement/Zoning,
shall include, but not be limited to:
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
flood proofed;
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
flood proofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the flood
proofing criteria in subsection 29-5.2b; and
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
a. Permit Review.
1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
2. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
3. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway, assure that the
encroachment provisions of subsection 29-5.3a are met.
4. Review all development permits in the coastal high hazard area of
the area of special flood hazard to determine if the proposed
development alters sand dunes so as to increase potential flood
damage.
b. Use of Other Base Flood and Floodway Data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with subsection
29-3.2, Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the
Township of Lakewood, Director of Code Enforcement/Zoning, shall
obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a Federal, State or other source, in order
to administer subsections 29-5.2a, Specific Standards, Residential
Construction, and 29-5.2b, Specific Standards, Nonresidential
Construction.
c. Information to be Obtained and Maintained.
§ 29-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-4.3
AO:709
§ 29-4.4. Variance Procedure. [Ord. No. 2006-61 § 1]
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
2. For all new or substantially improved flood proofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the flood proofing certifications required in
subsection 29-4.1c.
3. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
d. Alteration of Watercourses.
1. Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Flood Plain Management Section and
the Land Use Regulation program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood carrying capacity
is not diminished.
e. Interpretation of Firm Boundaries. Make interpretations where needed,
as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood
hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting
the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation as provided in subsection 29-4.4.
a. Appeal Board.
1. The Township Committee shall hear and decide appeals and
requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.
2. The Township Committee shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Township of Lakewood, Director of
Code Enforcement/Zoning, in the enforcement or administration of
this chapter.
3. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Township Committee, or any
taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the Superior Court, as
provided by statute.
§ 29-4.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 29-4.4
AO:710
4. In passing upon such applications, the Township Committee, shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and flood plain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection 29-4.4a4 and the
purposes of this chapter, the Township Committee may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
6. The Township of Lakewood, Director of Code Enforcement/Zoning,
shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical
information, and report any variances to the Federal Insurance
Administration upon request.
b. Conditions for Variances.
§ 29-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-4.4
AO:711
§ 29-5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION.
§ 29-5.1. General Standards. [Ord. No. 2006-61 § 1]
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
(a) through (k) in subsection 29-4.4a4 have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on; or
(d) Victimization of the public as identified in subsection 29-4.4a4,
or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
a. Anchoring.
§ 29-4.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 29-5.1
AO:712
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure.
2. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include,
but are not to be limited to, use of over-the top or frame ties to
ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State
and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
b. Construction Materials and Methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
c. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into flood waters;
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
4. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
d. Subdivision Proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage; and
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed development which contain at least
50 lots or five acres (whichever is less).
§ 29-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-5.1
AO:713
§ 29-5.2. Specific Standards. [Ord. No. 2006-61 § 1]
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in subsection 29-3.2, Basis for Establishing the
Areas of Special Flood Hazard or in subsection 29-4.3b, Use of Other Base
Flood and Floodway Data, the following standards are required:
e. Enclosure Openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of flood waters. Designs
for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings having a total net area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area
subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall
be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, or other covering or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of flood waters.
a. Residential Construction.
1. In AE zones new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation;
2. Require within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth
number specified in feet (at least two feet if no depth number is
specified). And, require adequate drainage paths around structures
on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated
to or above base flood elevation.
b. Nonresidential Construction.
1. In AE zones all new construction and substantial improvement of
any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall
either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the
level of the base flood elevation; or together with the attendant
utilities and sanitary facilities, shall:
2. Require within any AO zone on the municipality's FIRM that all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
§ 29-5.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 29-5.2
AO:714
§ 29-5.3. Floodways. [Ord. No. 2006-61 § 1]
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection
29-3.2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry
debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions
apply:
lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in
feet (at least two feet if no depth number is specified). And, require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood
waters around and away from proposed structures; or
New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the
lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base
flood elevation; or
3. Be flood proofed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
4. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
5. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be provided to
the official as set forth in subsection 29-4.3c2.
c. Manufactured Homes.
1. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
subsection 29-5.1a2.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall be elevated on a
permanent foundation such that the top of the lowest floor is at or
above the base flood elevation.
1. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
2. If subsection 29-5.3a is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with Section 29-5, Provisions for Flood
Hazard Reduction.
3. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
§ 29-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 29-5.3
AO:715
Chapter 30
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
§ 30-1. TITLE. [1971 Code § 20-1]
This chapter shall be known as the "Township of Lakewood Municipal Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control Regulations."
§ 30-2. PURPOSE. [1971 Code § 20-2]
The purpose of this chapter is to control soil erosion and sediment damages
and related environmental damage by requiring adequate provisions for
surface water retention and drainage and for the protection of exposed
soil surfaces in order to promote the safety, public health, convenience and
general welfare of the community.
§ 30-3. RULES APPLYING TO TEXT. [1971 Code § 20-3; New]
For the purpose of this chapter certain rules and word usage apply to the
text as stated in Chapter 1, Section 1-3.
§ 30-4. DEFINITIONS. [1971 Code § 20-4]
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated:
APPLICANT — Shall mean a person, partnership, corporation or public
agency requesting permission to engage in land disturbance activity.
CRITICAL AREA — Shall mean a sediment-producing highly erodible or
severely eroded area.
EROSION — Shall mean detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice and gravity.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — Shall mean a plan which
fully indicates necessary land treatment measures, including a schedule of
the timing for their installation, which will effectively minimize soil erosion
and sedimentation. Such measures shall be in accordance with standards as
adopted by the State Soil Conservation Committee.
EXCAVATION OR CUT — Shall mean any act by which soil or rock is cut
into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated.
FARM CONSERVATION PLAN — Shall mean a plan which provides for the
use of land, within its capabilities and treatment, within practical limits,
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
§ 29-5.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 30-4
AO:716
according to chosen use to prevent further deterioration of soil and water
resources.
LAND — Shall mean any ground, soil, or earth including marshes, swamps,
drainage-ways, and areas not permanently covered by water within the
Township.
LAND DISTURBANCE — Shall mean any activity involving the clearing,
grading, transporting, filling and any other activity which causes land to be
exposed to the danger of erosion.
MULCHING — Shall mean the application of plant residue or other suitable
materials to the land surface to conserve moisture, hold soil in place, and
aid in establishing plant cover.
PERMIT — Shall mean a certificate issued to perform work under this
chapter.
SEDIMENT — Shall mean solid material, both mineral and organic, that is
in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SEDIMENT BASIN — Shall mean a barrier or dam built at suitable locations
to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt or other material.
SITE — Shall mean any plot, parcel or parcels of land.
SOIL — Shall mean all unconsolidated mineral or organic material of any
origin.
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT — Shall mean a governmental subdivision
of this State, which encompasses this Township, organized in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter 24, Title 4, N.J.R.S.
STANDARDS — Shall mean standards for soil erosion and sediment control
in New Jersey as promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee.
STATE SOIL CONSERVATION COMMITTEE — Shall mean an agency of the
State established in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 24, Title 4,
N.J.R.S.
STRIPPING — Shall mean any activity which significantly disturbs
vegetated or otherwise stabilized soil surface including clearing and
grubbing operations.
§ 30-5. PROCEDURE.
§ 30-5.1. Permit Required. [1971 Code § 20-5.1; Ord. No. 2003-27
§ 1]
No land area shall be disturbed by any person within this Township unless
the applicant has submitted to the Department Head of the Department of
Code Enforcement and Zoning or his designee a plan to provide for soil
erosion and sediment control for such land area in accordance with the
Standards, and such plan has been approved, and a valid land disturbance
permit has been issued by the Department Head of the Department of Code
§ 30-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-5.1
AO:717
Enforcement and Zoning or his designee except as exempted by Section
30-7.
§ 30-5.2. Data Required. [1971 Code § 20-5.2; Ord. No. 2003-27 § 2]
The applicant must submit a separate soil erosion and sediment control
plan for each noncontiguous site. The applicant may consult with the Ocean
County Soil Conservation District in the selection of appropriate erosion and
sediment control measures and the development of the plan. The plan shall
contain:
§ 30-5.3. Review and Approval. [1971 Code § 20-5.3; Ord. No.
2003-27 § 3]
a. Location and description of existing natural and man-made features on
and surrounding the site including general topography and soil
characteristics and a copy of the Soil Conservation District soil survey
(where available).
b. Location and description of proposed changes to the site.
c. Measures for soil erosion and sediment control which must meet or
exceed the Standards. The Standards shall be on file at the office of the
local Soil Conservation District, the Township Clerk and the
Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning.
d. A schedule of the sequence of installation of planned erosion and
sediment control measures as related to the progress of the project
including anticipated starting and completion dates.
e. All proposed revisions of data required shall be submitted for approval.
a. Soil erosion and sediment control plans shall be reviewed by the Soil
Specialist or other official designated by resolution of the Township
Committee, and approved when in conformance with the Standards.
b. The Soil Specialist or other designated official may seek the assistance
of the Ocean County Soil Conservation District in the review of such
plans and may deem as approved those plans which have been reviewed
and determined adequate by the District.
c. Review and approval shall be made within a period of 30 days of
submission of a complete application unless, by mutual agreement in
writing between the Township and the applicant, this period is
extended for an additional 30 days. Failure of the Township to make a
decision within such period or such extension thereof shall constitute
certification.
d. The applicant shall be provided with a written notice of such decision by
the Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and
Zoning or his designee. A copy of such decision including name of
applicant, site location by street address and block and lot number, and
§ 30-5.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 30-5.3
AO:718
§ 30-6. PRINCIPLES AND REQUIREMENTS.
§ 30-6.1. General Design Principles. [1971 Code § 20-6.1]
Control measures shall apply to all aspects of the proposed land disturbance
and shall be in operation during all stages of the disturbance activity. The
following principles shall apply to the soil erosion and sediment control
plan:
§ 30-6.2. Maintenance. [1971 Code § 20-6.2]
All necessary soil erosion and sediment control measures installed under
this chapter shall be adequately maintained for one year after completion
of the approved plan or until such measures are permanently stabilized
as determined by the Soil Specialist or other designated official. The Soil
Specialist or other designated official shall give the applicant upon request
a certificate indicating the date on which the measures called for in the
approved plans were completed.
§ 30-6.3. Maintenance Bonds. [1971 Code § 20-6.3]
The applicant shall file and maintain a bond or bonds in form approved
by the Township Attorney with surety acceptable to the Township and
in such amount as determined by the soil specialist or other designated
proposed land use shall be sent to the Ocean County Soil Conservation
District. The Township shall also make available such other information
as may be required by the District.
a. Stripping of vegetation, grading or other soil disturbance shall be done
in a manner which will minimize soil erosion.
b. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected.
c. The extent of the disturbed area and the duration of its exposure shall
be kept within practical limits.
d. Either temporary seeding, mulching or other suitable stabilization
measures shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during
construction or other land disturbance.
e. Drainage provisions shall accommodate increased runoff, resulting
from modified soil and surface conditions, during and after
development or disturbance. Such provisions shall be in addition to all
existing requirements.
f. Water runoff shall be minimized and retained on site whenever possible
to facilitate ground water recharge.
g. Sediment shall be retained on site to the maximum extent feasible.
h. Diversions, sediment basins, and similar required structures shall be
installed prior to any on-site grading or disturbance.
§ 30-5.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-6.3
AO:719
official to insure the faithful performance and maintenance of the work
to be undertaken pursuant to this chapter for a period of one year after
completion of the approved plan or until all necessary soil erosion and
sediment control measures installed under this chapter are permanently
stabilized as determined by the Soil Specialist or other designated official
including an appropriate official of the Ocean County Soil Conservation
District.
§ 30-6.4. Fees. [1971 Code § 20-6.4]
The applicant shall pay to the Township at the same time the application is
submitted a fee of $100 for the first acre or part thereof included in the plan
and $15 for each additional acre. The purpose of this fee is to cover the cost
of enforcing this chapter.
§ 30-6.5. Penalties for Violations; Monetary. [1971 Code § 20-6.5]
If any person violates any of the provisions of this chapter, any standard
promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or fails to comply
with the provisions of a certified plan, the Township or the District may
institute a civil action in the Superior Court for injunctive relief to prohibit
and prevent such violation or violations and the Court may proceed in a
summary manner. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this
chapter, any standard promulgated pursuant to this chapter or fails to
comply with the provisions of a certified plan shall be liable to a penalty
of not less than $25 nor more than $3,000 to be collected in a summary
proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A. 2A:58.1 et
seq.). The Superior Court; the Superior Court, Special Civil Part; and the
Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to enforce the Penalty Enforcement
Law. If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day during which it
continues shall constitute an additional separate and distinct offense.
§ 30-6.6. Stop Orders. [1971 Code § 20-6.6]
§ 30-6.7. Certificate of Occupancy. [1971 Code § 20-6.7]
No Certificate of Occupancy for a project shall be issued by the Township
unless there has been compliance with the provisions of a certified plan for
permanent measures to control soil erosion and sedimentation.
a. The Township or the Ocean County Soil Conservation District may issue
a stop-construction order if the applicant takes no action to comply with
the provisions of the certified plan after receiving written notice of
observed deviation from the certified plan and request to comply
therewith by the Township or Ocean County Soil Conservation District.
b. When a stop-construction order is issued, no further construction
activity may take place until the applicant is in compliance with all
provisions of the certified plan.
§ 30-6.3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 30-7
AO:720
§ 30-7. EXEMPTIONS. [1971 Code § 20-7]
The following activities are specifically exempt from this chapter:
§ 30-8. INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT.
§ 30-8.1. Requirements Enforced. [1971 Code § 20-8.1]
The requirements of this chapter shall be enforced by the Soil Specialist
or other designated official who shall also inspect or require adequate
inspection of the work. If the Soil Specialist or other designated official finds
existing conditions not as stated in the applicant's erosion and sediment
control plan he may refuse to approve further work and may require
necessary erosion and sediment control measures to be promptly installed
and may seek other penalties as provided in subsection 30-6.4.
§ 30-8.2. Certified Plan to be on Site. [1971 Code § 20-8.2]
The applicant shall be required to have a certified plan on site during
construction.
§ 30-8.3. Certificate of Occupancy Withheld. [1971 Code § 20-8.3]
No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued unless there has been
compliance with the provisions of the certified plan for permanent measures
to control soil erosion and sedimentation. A formal report of such
compliance must be filed with the Township agent authorized to issue
Certificates of Occupancy. A copy of this report shall be sent to the Ocean
County Soil Conservation District.
§ 30-9. APPEALS. [1971 Code § 20-9]
Appeals from decisions under this chapter may be made to the Township
Committee in writing within 10 days from the date of such decision. The
appellant shall be entitled to a hearing before the Township Committee
within 30 days from the date of appeal.
Chapter 31
a. Existing Dwellings. Land disturbance associated with existing one and
two family dwellings.
b. Home Gardens. Use of land for gardening primarily for home
consumption.
c. Agricultural Use. Agricultural use of lands when operated in
accordance with a farm conservation plan approved by the local Soil
Conservation District or when it is determined by the local Soil
Conservation District that such use will not cause excessive erosion and
sedimentation.
§ 30-7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 30-9
AO:721
EXCAVATION OF LAND, GRADING
§ 31-1. PURPOSE; WORD USAGE.
§ 31-1.1. Findings. [1971 Code § 6-8.1]
§ 31-1.2. Definitions. [1971 Code § 6-8.2]
As used in this section:
LICENSE — Shall mean permission given upon payment of the required
fees after zoning conditions are met and all necessary exhibits filed, and
upon approval of an application for license to operate the business of or to
remove or excavate top soil, sand, gravel, soil or minerals from any lands
within the Township.
SOIL — Shall mean and include dirt, stone, gravel, sand, humus, clay, loam,
rock or any mixture of any two or more of the above.
TOP SOIL — Shall mean arable soil. Top soil shall contain no stones, clumps
or similar objects larger than one inch in any dimension and shall have a
pH value of not less than 5.8 nor more than 6.5. Top soil shall be a mealy
loam obtained from a field which is comparatively free from large stones,
objectionable weeds or large quantities of root growth. Top soil shall have
a minimum organic content of not less than two and three-quarters (2.75%)
percent by weight. The gradation of the top soil shall be within the following
limits: sand 40% to 80%, silt 10% to 30%, clay 10% to 30%.
§ 31-2. LICENSE.
a. It is the finding of the Township Committee that unregulated and
uncontrolled grading of land, filling, excavation and removal of sand,
gravel or minerals, within the Township, have in many instances caused
and generally tend to cause blighted areas often resulting in abandoned
sand or gravel pits. These pits left in unsafe, unsanitary and obnoxious
conditions by reasons of stagnant water standing therein create a
breeding place for insects, dangerous conditions for children, damage
to roads, depreciation of surrounding property values and smoke or
dust or other air or water pollution. These conditions have made it
necessary to license and regulate the operations concerning
excavation, sale or removal of soil, top soil, sand, gravel or other
mineral deposits from lands within the Township.
b. The Township Committee further determines that the cost of
enforcement of the regulation and licensing including inspections,
determination of ownership, engineering costs for review of surveys
and establishment of grades, as well as other incidental expenses
necessary in connection with the enforcement require that a substantial
portion of the expenses be borne by the owners or operators of the
excavations or business operated.
§ 30-9 LAKEWOOD CODE § 31-2.1
AO:722
§ 31-2.1. License Required. [1971 Code § 6-8.3]
No person shall excavate soil, including top soil, whether for sale or for use
other than on the premises from which the soil shall be taken, except in
connection with construction or alteration of a building being erected on the
premises for which a building permit has been issued and the excavation
and grading is incidental thereto, without first having obtained site approval
and a license approved by the Township Committee. The license shall be
conspicuously posted and displayed at the entrance to the premises. This
provision is not intended to provide for licensing of any excavation or soil
removal which is not permitted by the zoning ordinances of the Township
or not permitted as an existing nonconforming use or as the result of a
subsequently granted variance.
No license shall be issued for any premises that will in any manner interfere
with any natural stream, alter its course or encroach on any flood plain
or marshland. A license shall also not be issued where the premises
substantially alter, change or interfere with any natural watershed or
natural surface watercourse or detrimentally interfere or affect the natural
drainage or create burdensome traffic conditions or are in any manner
inimical to the public safety, health and welfare.
§ 31-2.2. Application for License. [1971 Code § 6-8.4]
Any person desiring to make application shall request a conference with
the Township Committee for the purpose of ascertaining the feasibility of
the proposal to remove soil. At such time sketches or preliminary drawings
shall be made available if necessary for such purpose. Before the issuance
of a license, the applicant shall make application on a form provided by the
Township Clerk. The data in the application or accompanying documents
shall contain the following:
a. The name and address of the owner or owners of the tract involved and
the name and address of the applicant, if a different person is involved.
The signature of the owner and contractor performing the work shall be
affixed to the application.
b. A map of the entire premises of the owner, including the premises for
which the license is sought showing the existing topographical contour
lines of the land involved and abutting lands and roads, the proposed
topographical contour grades which will result from the intended soil
removal and the location of any streams or other bodies of water near
the premises with area to be graded shown in sections of three acres
and numbered consecutively indicating order of sections to be graded.
c. The tax block and lot number of the property involved.
d. A description of any processing of the soil which will be done on the
premises including description of equipment and plans of such
processing equipment and facilities.
§ 31-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-2.2
AO:723
§ 31-2.3. Application Fees. [1971 Code § 6-8.5]
Each application for removal of soil or top soil shall be accompanied by a
deposit of $100 plus one ($1.00) dollar for each 1,000 cubic yards or part
thereof, which shall be used to cover the cost of examining the application,
hearings or other processing. In the event an application is denied the fee
deposited shall be returned after fees incurred by the Township Engineer in
the course of processing the application are deducted.
§ 31-2.4. Engineering and Inspection Reports Required. [1971 Code
§ 6-8.6; Ord. No. 2003-21 § 1]
The application and fee shall be filed with the Township Clerk and the
application shall promptly be referred to the Township Engineer and the
Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning
for investigation, report and recommendation. The Township Engineer and
the Department Head of the Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning
shall make a report concerning the application to the Township Committee
indicating specifically whether or not the proposed operation will result in
any sharp declivities, pits or depressions, soil erosion or fertility problems,
drainage or sewerage problems or dangerous or unhealthful conditions and
recommend conditions or limitations, if any, regarding the following:
e. The name and address of the person who will do the work of grading
and removing the soil.
f. The number of cubic yards to be removed pursuant to the license.
g. Routes to and from the proposed site to be used in transporting soil
removed.
h. Period for which the license is sought.
a. Areas shown on map, if any, where excavation should not be permitted
because of adverse effects on abutting property or roads.
b. Changes, if any, in permitted contours and slopes to be accomplished by
proposed removal.
c. Maximum area from which top soil may be stripped before replacement
to permit soil removal with consideration being given to the number of
cubic yards to be removed and the duration of the requested permit.
d. Amount of bond to be required to insure the operation of the soil
removal and replacement of top soil in accordance herewith, on a form
to be furnished by the Township.
e. Capacity of public roads to be used for ingress and egress to withstand
damage from proposed operation.
f. Quantity and quality of top soil and the amount to be retained for
recovering.
§ 31-2.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § 31-2.4
AO:724
§ 31-2.5. Issuance of License. [1971 Code § 6-8.7; Ord. No. 2003-21
§ 2]
After receiving the report, the Township Committee shall grant or deny the
license, including any renewal, in the order of date of filing after giving
consideration to the Engineer's and Department of Code Enforcement and
Zoning reports. These reports shall be incorporated in the record by
reference, the evidence produced at the hearing and the effect of such
license on the public health, safety and general welfare. The following shall
also be taken into consideration when granting a license:
§ 31-2.6. Bond Required. [1971 Code § 6-8.8]
Before any work is done for which a license is required and during the
period covered by a license, the applicant shall file and maintain a bond
in form supplied by the Township Committee with surety acceptable and
in such amount as determined by the Township Committee to insure the
faithful performance of the work to be undertaken pursuant to the
conditions of the license and the terms thereof.
§ 31-3. OPERATION PROCEDURES, REGULATIONS. [1971 Code
§ 6-8.9]
No soil shall be removed nor shall any operation be conducted so as to
violate any of the following conditions after a license is granted:
g. Any other recommended considerations or conditions to protect the
public welfare or adjoining properties or roads and particularly noise,
vibration, dust, pollution of air and water.
a. Soil erosion by wind and water.
b. Drainage or sewage problems.
c. Soil fertility.
d. Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting roads and lands.
e. Land values and uses.
f. Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the Township.
If the Township Committee finds that the license, if granted, will not have an
adverse effect on the above considerations, the license shall be issued. Licenses
may be issued with reasonable conditions designed to meet the Engineer and
Inspection Department recommendations made under subsection 31-2.4.
No license shall be issued for any premises if the issuance of the license
will create road damage, dust conditions, burdensome traffic conditions or is
otherwise inimical to the public safety, health or welfare.
§ 31-2.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 31-3
AO:725
a. The removal of any top soil is prohibited except by license. All top soil
on premises shall be temporarily stored on the premises inside a fenced
area during operations and after grading is completed, respread on the
premises to a depth of not less than four inches.
b. Not more than three acres shall be excavated at one time, enclosed with
a snow fence, including area used for storage of topsoil, properly
leveled off, cleared of debris and graded to conform with the contour
lines and grades approved by the Township Committee.
c. No person shall bury any old lumber, building materials, debris, cut or
dead trees, stumps, brush, trash, junk or other similar waste on any
premises for which a license has been issued or proposed, excepting the
vegetation existing on the premises licensed, which shall be deposited
in a specific area designated on the map of the entire premises and
approved by the Township.
d. The area excavated shall be graded and covered with four inches of top
soil and seeded with perennial grass not later than June 15 or October
1, whichever date is sooner. If sufficient top soil for four inches cover is
not available from the premises then a cover crop as prescribed by the
Township Engineer shall be spread on the premises. Thereafter the
snow fence may be removed.
e. The removal shall be completed within a period of three months from
the date of commencement of work or as otherwise provided in the
license due to extended nature of operation. If adverse weather or
working conditions persist, the time period involved may be extended
on application to the Township Committee. The Township Engineer
shall be notified in advance at least one week by the contractor of the
date of commencement of and of the expected date of completion of
work.
f. All excavation of soil or other materials for which a license is required
under this chapter must be made in such manner as to fit into and be in
conformity with the general established grade of the adjacent roads and
the surrounding area which grade shall be established by the Township
Engineer so as to not present drainage or other problems that may
result from improper grade and shall not cause ponding of water or
cause soil erosion detrimental to the Township properties on the
surrounding lands or would render the subject property dangerous or in
unsightly condition as to deteriorate the values of surrounding
properties or subsequently useless for any permitted use in the zone in
which the land is situated.
g. Soil removed shall not be deposited or in any way thrown or placed
upon adjoining property or public roads.
h. All operations shall be conducted in strict accordance with any state
law, other ordinances of the Township and the terms of the application
as modified by the license as granted.
§ 31-3 LAKEWOOD CODE § 31-3
AO:726
§ 31-4. INSPECTIONS. [1971 Code § 6-8.10; Ord. No. 2003-21 § 3]
Each operation shall be inspected by the Department of Code Enforcement
and Zoning and the Township Engineer at least once each month and a
written report made of the inspection. The licensee shall pay the cost of
reinspection not exceeding $20 per acre. The above fee shall be required
due to violations found in the course of regular inspections.
§ 31-5. ENFORCEMENT; REVOCATION OF LICENSE. [1971 Code
§ 6-8.11; Ord. No. 2003-21 § 4]
After reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard before the Township
Committee, the license of any person may be revoked or suspended for a
period as the Township Committee may determine for any violation of the
terms hereof or the terms and conditions of any license granted hereunder.
The Department of Code Enforcement and Zoning shall be charged with the
enforcement of this chapter.
Chapter 32
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
i. The operation shall be so conducted as not to constitute a nuisance to
adjoining owners and in no event shall any sharp declivities, pits or
depressions be created.
j. Upon completion of an operation or of excavation from an area
delineated under subsection 31-2.4c, the area shall be properly leveled
off, cleared of debris and graded to conform to the contours and grades
as approved by the Township Committee.
k. No slope along the perimeter of any excavated area shall exceed one
foot vertical to five feet horizontal.
l. Hours of operation shall be limited from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.,
Mondays through Saturdays, inclusive.
m. The failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall invalidate
a license immediately and constitute reasons for denial of any license.
n. No storage, stockpiling, mixing or processing of any soil, sand, gravel,
stone, mineral deposits or any one or combination of them shall be
permitted on any premise within the Township not licensed under this
section and no person shall construe a license to cover any other area
or parcel of land other than the area, lot or parcel as described in the
license.
o. The operation shall be so conducted as not to constitute a nuisance to
adjoining property owners. The license shall not permit any child upon
the licensed premises, or do anything to permit or cause the licensed
premises to be or continue as an attractive nuisance to children, and in
no event shall any sharp declivities, pits or depressions be created.
§ 31-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-1
AO:727
§ 32-1. IMPROPER DISPOSAL OF WASTE.
§ 32-1.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2005-90 § 1]
To prohibit the spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than
stormwater to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) operated
by the Township of Lakewood, so as to protect public health, safety and
welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 32-1.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2005-90 § 2]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of
Lakewood or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting
and conveying stormwater. MS4's do not include combined sewer systems,
which are sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at
all times and to collect and transport stormwater from streets and other
sources.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 32-1.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2005-90 § 3; Ord. No.
2012-2 § 1]
a. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township
of Lakewood is prohibited.
b. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater in
such a manner as to cause the discharge of pollutants to the municipal
separate storm sewer system is also prohibited.
c. Pumping sub-surface water from basement or crawl spaces in buildings
including, but not limited to, foundation drains, interior sump pumps
etc., onto the street, sidewalk, public way, etc., shall be prohibited. All
§ 32-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 32-1.3
AO:728
§ 32-1.4. Exceptions to Prohibition. [Ord. No. 2005-4 § 4; Ord. No.
2012-2 § 2]
§ 32-1.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2005-90 § 5]
This ordinance shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer and/or
the Police Department of the Township of Lakewood.
§ 32-1.6. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2005-90 § 6]
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
section, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
such drainage waters shall be dispersed as per the current National
Standard Plumbing Code figure 12.1.5A. Such discharge of water shall
not pose a nuisance to neighboring properties. All violations and
penalties incurred shall be the responsibility of the owner of said
property as per the Uniform Construction Code.
a. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
b. Air-conditioning condensate (excluding contact and non-contact cooling
water).
c. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff).
d. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows.
e. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges.
f. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water.
g. Flows from firefighting activities.
h. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
1. Beach maintenance equipment immediately following their use for
their intended purposes; and
2. Equipment used in the application of salt and de-icing materials
immediately following salt and de-icing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded.
Rinsing equipment, as noted in the above situation, is limited to
exterior, undercarriage and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
§ 32-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-1.6
AO:729
$1,000 and/or incarceration in the County jail for up to 90 days for each and
every violation.
§ 32-2. ILLICIT CONNECTIONS.
§ 32-2.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2005-91 § 1]
To prohibit illicit connections to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by the Township of Lakewood, so as to protect public
health, safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to
comply.
§ 32-2.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2005-91 § 2]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this chapter clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Shall mean waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Shall mean any physical or nonphysical
connection that discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Lakewood, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit
other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES
Permit Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are
not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall mean nondomestic waste, including, but not
limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of
Lakewood or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting
and conveying stormwater. MS4's do not include combined sewer systems,
which are sewer systems that are designed to carry sanitary sewage at
all times and to collect and transport stormwater from streets and other
sources.
§ 32-1.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § 32-2.2
AO:730
NJPDES PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Shall mean water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other than
heat) or finished product. Noncontact cooling water may, however, contain
algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat
exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Shall mean any water which, during
manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from
the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, by-product, or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is
not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than non-contact cooling
water.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 32-2.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2005-91 § 3]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Township of Lakewood any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 32-2.4. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2005-91 § 4]
This chapter shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the
Police Department of the Township of Lakewood.
§ 32-2.5. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2005-91 § 6]
Any person(s) who continues to be in violation of the provisions of this
ordinance, after being duly notified, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed
$1,000 and/or incarceration in the County jail for up to 90 days for each and
every violation.
§ 32-3. PRIVATE STORM DRAIN INLET RETROFITTING.
§ 32-3.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2010-42]
The purpose of this section is to require the retrofitting of existing storm
drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving, repairing,
§ 32-2.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-3.1
AO:731
reconstruction, or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private property,
to prevent the discharge of solids and floatables (such as plastic bottles,
cans, food wrappers and other litter) to the municipal separate storm sewer
system(s) operated by Lakewood Township so as to protect public health,
safety and welfare, and to prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 32-3.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2010-42]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by Lakewood Township
or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STORM DRAIN INLET — Shall mean an opening in a storm drain used to
collect stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet,
curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 32-3.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2010-42]
No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with one
single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing (excluding the
repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top coating or chip
sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot bitumen), reconstructing
or altering any surface that is in direct contact with an existing storm drain
inlet on that property unless the storm drain inlet either:
a. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of solid
and floatable materials; or
b. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in subsection 32-3.4
below prior to the completion of the project.
§ 32-3.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § 32-3.4
AO:732
§ 32-3.4. Design Standard. [Ord. No. 2010-42]
Storm drain inlets identified in subsection 32-3.3 above shall comply with
the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable materials
through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid and
floatable materials" means sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see
subsection 32-3.4c below.
a. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under that grate.
1. The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT) bicycle
safe grade, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the NJDOT Bicycle
Compatible Roadways and Bikeways Planning and Design
Guidelines (April 1996); or
2. A different grate, if each individual clear space in that grate has an
area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or is no greater
than 0.5 inches across the smallest dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates in grate
inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening portion) of the
combination inlets, grates on storm sewer manholes, ditch grates,
trench grates, and grates of spacer bars in slotted drains. Examples
of ground surfaces include surfaces of roads (including bridges),
driveways, parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns,
fields, open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
b. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
(7.0) square inches, or be no greater than two (2.0) inches across the
smallest dimension.
c. This standard does not apply:
1. Where the Municipal Engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could not practicably
be overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that
meet these standards;
2. Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
§ 32-3.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-3.4
AO:733
§ 32-3.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2010-42]
This section shall be enforced by Lakewood Township.
§ 32-3.6. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2010-42]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed a fine up to $500 per offense for each
storm drain inlet that is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
§ 32-4. REFUSE CONTAINERS—DUMPSTERS.
§ 32-4.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2010-43; Ord. No. 2010-59]
The purpose of this section is to require dumpsters and other refuse
containers that are outdoors or exposed to stormwater to be covered at all
times and prohibits the spilling, dumping, leaking, or otherwise discharge of
liquids, semi-liquids or solids from the containers to the municipal separate
storm sewer system(s) operated by the Lakewood Township and/or the
waters of the State so as to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to
prescribe penalties for the failure to comply.
§ 32-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2010-43; Ord. No. 2010-59]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by Lakewood Township
(a) A rectangular space four and five-eighths (4 5/8) inches long
and one and one-half (1 1/2) inches wide (this option does not
apply for outfall netting facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
3. Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one inch spacing between the bars; or
4. Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
§ 32-3.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § 32-4.2
AO:734
or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and conveying
stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this State subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
REFUSE CONTAINER — Shall mean any waste container that a person
controls whether owned, leased, or operated, including dumpsters, trash
cans, garbage pails, and plastic trash bags.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or ground water, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 32-4.3. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. No. 2010-43; Ord. No. 2010-59]
Any person who controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a refuse
container or dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster is
covered at all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or
overflowing.
Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal storm
sewer system(s) operated by the Township of Lakewood.
§ 32-4.4. Exceptions to Prohibition. [Ord. No. 2010-43; Ord. No.
2010-59]
§ 32-4.5. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2010-43; Ord. No. 2010-59]
This section shall be enforced by Lakewood Township.
a. Permitted temporary demolition containers.
b. Litter receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers).
c. Individual homeowner trash and recycling containers.
d. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
e. Large bulky items (e.g., furniture, bound carpet and padding, white
goods placed curbside for pickup).
§ 32-4.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § 32-4.6
AO:735
§ 32-4.6. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2010-43; Ord. No. 2010-59]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed up to $500 per offense plus court
costs.
Chapter 33
(RESERVED)
Chapter 34
(RESERVED)
Chapter 35
(RESERVED)
Appendix
Appendix B
PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES MANUAL
Adopted by Ord. No. 2017-36, updated 8-31-2017
The Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual is included in the on-line
version of the Code.
Board of Health
Chapter BHAO
BOARD OF HEALTH ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Chapter BH1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
The general power to adopt health ordinances is contained in N.J.S.A.
26:3.1 et seq. The penalties that may be provided for a violation of health
provisions are contained in N.J.S.A. 26:3-77.1 and N.J.S.A. 26:3-78. In
addition to the health regulations contained in this Code, the State Sanitary
Code (N.J.S.A. 26:1A-9) promulgated by the State Public Health Council is
enforceable in every municipality in this State.
§ BH1-1. SHORT TITLE, DEFINITION, CONSTRUCTION AND
SEVERABILITY. [New]
§ 32-4.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH1-1
AO:736
§ BH1-2. VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.
§ BH1-2.1. Notice of Violations. [1971 Code § BH1-3.1; New]
§ BH1-2.2. Maximum Penalty. [1971 Code § BH1-3.2; New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of any chapter herein shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $10, nor more than $500
for each offense. Complaint shall be made in the Municipal Court of the
Township or before any other judicial officer having authority under the
laws of the State of New Jersey. The Court shall have the power to impose
any and all additional penalties provided by N.J.S.A. 26:3-77 et seq.
§ BH1-2.3. Separate Violations. [1971 Code § BH1-3.2; New]
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any of the provisions of any chapter adopted by the Board of Health exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
a. This Code shall be cited as the Revised General Ordinances of the Board
of Health of the Township of Lakewood, 1999 and may be cited as the
Board of Health Code, or Revision or Code when referred to herein.
b. The provisions of Chapter 1 of the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Lakewood, 1999, concerning definitions, construction and
severability shall apply to all chapters adopted by the Board of Health.
a. The provisions of the Board of Health chapters shall apply to any
violations on property within the Township. Notice of such violation
shall be served upon the owner, agent, lessee, tenant, occupant or other
proper person, personally, or, when there is an occupied dwelling on the
premises, by leaving same with an adult occupant of such dwelling. The
notice shall clearly define the provision violated and shall give not less
than one day or more than 10 days for the compliance with the
provisions of such section or with the requirements of the Board. The
Sanitary Inspector shall determine whether a notice of violation shall be
issued.
b. Except as otherwise provided, no action shall be brought for violation of
any of the sections of the Board of Health Code until such notice has
been served as hereinabove provided and there has been
noncompliance by the party so served.
c. Notice as required in paragraph a may be dispensed with where there is
immediate and serious danger or imminent peril to the health, safety
and welfare of the public prior to abatement of the peril or danger.
§ BH1-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH1-2.4
AO:737
§ BH1-2.4. Collection of Fees and Penalties. [New]
All fees and penalties collected under any provision of any chapter adopted
by the Board of Health shall be paid to the Treasurer, Township of
Lakewood.
§ BH1-3. DEFINITIONS. [1971 Code § BH1-1]
As used in this Code:
BOARD OF HEALTH — Shall mean the Lakewood Township Board of Health.
BUILDING SEWER — Shall mean and include street laterals to their point
of connection with main street sewer.
EXECUTIVE OFFICER, HEALTH OFFICER OR SANITARY INSPECTOR —
Shall be interchangeable.
MULTIPLE DWELLINGS — Shall mean any house or building or portion
thereof which is rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied or is
occupied as the home or residence of two or more families living
independently of each other provided each unit has kitchen facilities.
NUISANCE — Shall mean any matter, thing, condition or act which is
or may become either detrimental or a menace to the health, safety or
welfare of the inhabitants of the Township or may become an annoyance or
may interfere with the comfort or general well-being of the inhabitants of
the Township. This definition shall not be deemed to exclude the specific
enumeration of nuisances set forth hereinafter.
PERMIT, LICENSE OR CERTIFICATE — Shall mean the written document
issued by the Sanitary Inspector of the Board of Health to a permittee
according to the rules and regulations of the Board of Health and of the
provisions of this Code.
§ BH1-4. GENERAL REGULATIONS.
§ BH1-4.1. Stables.
a. Every owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant of any stall, stable or
compartment in which any horses, cattle, or other farm animals are
kept, shall at all times keep such stalls, stables or compartments and
the drainage yards and appurtenances thereto, in a clean, healthful and
wholesome condition free of all offensive smells.
b. The Sanitary Inspector shall have the authority after written notice to
the owner, agent, lessee, tenant or occupant to require the said party to
remove all manure or excrement from stables and premises where it
may accumulate.
c. Every stable or shelter housing any horses or cattle shall have an
underground and properly covered manure vault, or watertight bin of
sufficient capacity to care for all manure that may accumulate in such
stable or shelter. Such vault or manure bin shall not be within 30 feet of
§ BH1-2.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH1-4.1
AO:738
§ BH1-4.2. Towels in Public Restrooms. [1971 Code § BH1-2.2]
It shall be unlawful to use a common towel for more than one patron
in any tavern, hotel, restaurant, clubhouse, public lavatory, public office,
shop, store, railway or bus station in the Township. A sufficient quantity
of individual towels of a material approved by the Health Officer shall be
provided so that each person shall have a separate towel for his own use.
Roll towel machines may be used if kept clean and sanitary and available at
all times. All used roll towels shall be removed immediately after being used
to the end of the roll.
§ BH1-4.3. Secondhand Sales. [1971 Code § BH1-2.3]
§ BH1-4.4. Polluted Wells. [1971 Code § BH1-2.4]
Whenever the Sanitary Inspector has satisfactory evidence that any well has
become polluted and rendered unsafe for potable use, notice to discontinue
the use of such polluted well shall be sent to the owner, agent, lessee or
party in charge of such well. At the discretion of the Sanitary Inspector,
the owner, agent, lessee or party in charge of the well shall be ordered by
written notice either to correct the condition or to close such well. If the
order is not complied with within the time therein specified, this action shall
be deemed a violation and the Sanitary Inspector shall cause the well to be
closed and filled. The owner, agent, lessee or person in charge shall pay all
expenses to bring the well into compliance.
Whenever any premises has a cistern, well or any other exposed opening
which contains foul or stagnant water, or is abandoned or in a dangerous
any building used for residential or commercial purposes, or within 30
feet to the property line of any adjoining lot, street, alley or public
place. Such stable or shelter shall be properly ventilated.
a. No rummage or garage or yard sale shall be held without permission of
the Sanitary Inspector. No secondhand wearing apparel or bedding
shall be sold in the Township unless previously disinfected or dry
cleaned.
b. No secondhand mattress or used mattress may be sold within the
Township without properly being disinfected. Any secondhand mattress
brought into the Township must be accompanied by a certificate from
the Sanitary Inspector having jurisdiction over the locality from whence
it is brought, certifying to the fact that it has not been subject to any
contamination with infectious or communicable diseases. All
secondhand, used or made-over mattresses shall be so labeled and not
displayed or sold as new.
c. Rummage sales may not be held other than by a bona fide nonprofit
charitable, civic or fraternal organization. No such organization shall be
permitted to hold rummage sales aggregating more than seven days in
any calendar year.
§ BH1-4.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH1-4.4
AO:739
condition, the same shall, upon notification by the Board of Health to the
owner, be filled with ashes or clean earth in the manner provided above.
§ BH1-4.5. Death of an Animal. [1971 Code § BH1-2.5]
§ BH1-4.6. Sanitary Facilities in Public Establishments. [1971 Code
§ BH1-2.6]
Adequate sanitary facilities and accommodations shall be furnished by
every business, industry and public establishment, particularly as set forth
in this subsection.
a. It shall be the duty of every owner of any animal which dies from
accident or disease or is killed for any purpose other than consumption
for food within the Township to give notice of such death to the office of
the Board of Health within two hours of such death. If death takes place
after office hours, the notice shall be given at 10:00 a.m. of the
following day.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to transport within the Township any
such dead animal as is described in this section, without first having
obtained permission in writing from the Sanitary Inspector. No such
permit shall be granted unless there is a written application for the
same signed by the owner of the dead animal.
c. If at any time, in the judgment of the Sanitary Inspector, any dead
animal described in this subsection is a nuisance or offensive and likely
to become dangerous to public health, or if the owner of the animal
shall neglect or fail to apply for and receive a permit under this
subsection, or in case the permit shall be given and the owner shall
neglect or fail to remove the animal within the time specified in the
permit, or within such period of time after the death of the animal, and
if in the judgment of the Sanitary Inspector it is proper to prevent the
animal from becoming a nuisance or offensive and likely to be
dangerous to public health, the Sanitary Inspector shall cause the
removal of the dead animal and hold the owner liable for cost of the
removal of the animal.
d. Any permit granted under this subsection shall set forth the regulations
in respect to such removal or transportation as, in the judgment of the
sanitary inspector, may be necessary and proper to prevent the dead
animal from becoming or being a nuisance or offensive and likely to be
dangerous to public health. The failure to comply with any regulations
shall be considered a forfeiture of the permit and shall subject the
person to liability for the cost of removal.
a. Bathrooms. Dressing rooms, bathrooms and urinals shall be sufficient
in number, ample in size and conveniently located. The rooms shall be
provided with windows to admit direct natural light and shall have
adequate facilities for artificial light. They shall be properly ventilated,
and shall meet all requirements as to sanitary construction and
§ BH1-4.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH1-4.6
AO:740
equipment. They shall be separate from the rooms and compartments
in which products are prepared, stored or handled. Where both sexes
are using the same premises, separate facilities shall be provided.
Modern lavatory accommodations, including running hot and cold
water, soap and towels, shall be provided. These shall be placed near or
in the bathrooms and also at such other places in the establishment as
may be essential to assure cleanliness to all persons handling product.
Toilet soil lines shall be separate from house drainage lines to a point
outside the buildings, and drainage from toilet bowls and urinals shall
not be discharged into a grease catchbasin.
b. Food Sanitation. All persons handling food products shall have properly
located facilities for the purpose of washing their hands as well as
disinfecting any utensils.
c. Plumbing. There shall be an efficient drainage and plumbing system for
all public establishments. All drains and gutters shall be properly
installed with approved traps and vents in accordance with the
plumbing code.
d. Light and Ventilation. All rooms and compartments shall have
necessary lighting by either natural or artificial means to provide a safe
environment. There shall also be sufficient ventilation for all rooms and
compartments to insure a sanitary condition.
e. Water Supply. The water supply shall be ample, clean and potable.
There shall be adequate facilities for its distribution in the
establishment and its protection against contamination and pollution.
Every establishment shall be open for inspection by the Board of Health
as to the source of its water supply, its storage facilities and the
distribution system. Equipment using potable water shall be so
installed as to prevent backsiphonage into the potable water system.
Nonpotable water is permitted only in those parts of official
establishments where no edible produce is handled or prepared,
provided it is only used for limited purposes such as an ammonia
condenser not connected with the potable water supply, in vapor lines
serving inedible product rendering tanks, in connection with equipment
used for hashing and washing inedible products preparatory to tanking
and in sewer lines to move along heavy sewage.
In all cases, nonpotable water lines shall be clearly identified and shall
not be cross-connected with the potable water supply unless installed
in conformity with Chapter 308, Pamphlet Laws of 1942.
f. Inside Construction. The floors, walls, ceilings, partitions, posts, doors
and other parts of all structures shall be of such materials, construction
and finish that it can be readily and thoroughly cleaned. Rooms and
compartments used for edible products shall be separate and distinct
from those used for inedible products.
§ BH1-4.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH1-4.6
AO:741
§ BH1-4.7. Sewer and/or Water Connections. [1971 Code § BH1-2.7]
g. Dust and Odors. The rooms and compartments in which any food
product is prepared or handled shall be free from dust and odors from
dressing and bathrooms, catch basins, hide cellars, casing rooms,
inedible tank and fertilizer rooms and livestock pens.
h. Rat and Vermin Control. Precaution shall be taken to exclude flies, rats,
mice and other vermin from establishments. The use of poisons for any
purpose in rooms or compartments where any unpacked product is
stored or handled is forbidden except under such restrictions and
precautions as prescribed by law. The use of bait poisons in hide cellars,
inedible compartments, outbuildings, or in storerooms containing
canned products shall be lawful provided it has been approved by the
Board of Health. Rat viruses shall not be used in any part of an
establishment or the premises thereof.
i. Dogs and Cats. Dogs and cats shall be excluded from all business,
industrial and public establishments with the following exceptions:
dogs used to guard any business or industrial establishment not
involving the sale, processing or handling of foodstuffs and dogs, cats or
other animals housed in a pet shop or other business engaged in the
sale or harboring of animals as a licensed activity.
a. No drainage from any closets, bathtubs, laundry tubs, kitchen sinks or
similar fixtures shall be permitted to flow upon the ground or be
diverted onto or into any surface, subsurface or drain intended to carry
away the natural flow of surface or rain water. It shall also be unlawful
to permit the flow of water onto or upon any public or private highways.
Any drainage must be conducted through vitrified brick, concrete or
iron pipe not less than four inches in diameter, to a properly
constructed septic system or sewer.
b. All owners of property abutting any street, roadway, highway or public
easement along which a sanitary sewer and/or water main is installed
and in operation in the Township or within 100 feet of the terminus of
the sewer and/or water line are hereby required to connect any
dwellings or other buildings which have sewer and/or water facilities
with the sewer and/or water main in the street, roadway, highway or
public easement abutting the property.
Should any property owner fail or neglect to connect the sewer and/or
water line from the building to the street main he shall be given notice
by the Board of Health that the sewer and/or water connection must be
made within 30 days after the date of receipt of the notice.
c. Whenever a sewer and/or water line is installed in two connecting
streets, so that it proceeds down one street and then makes an angle
turn into an adjoining street, all property situated within 100 feet of the
sewer and/or water line at the corner or intersection wherein it makes
such a turn are hereby required to connect to the sewer and/or water
§ BH1-4.6 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH1-4.7
AO:742
§ BH1-4.8. Certificate of Occupancy. [1971 Code § BH1-2.8]
No person shall occupy any building or premises previously shut down or
condemned by order of the Board of Health or Health Officer without first
obtaining a certificate from the Board of Health or Health Officer certifying
that the building or premises is in proper sanitary condition to permit
occupancy or reoccupancy thereof.
Chapter BH2
ADMINISTRATION
§ BH2-1. CHAPTER TITLE. [1971 Code § BH2-1]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Administrative Code of
the Board of Health of the Township of Lakewood and is herein referred to
as the Code.
§ BH2-2. BOARD OF HEALTH.55
§ BH2-2.1. Establishment of Board. [1971 Code § BH2-2.1]
There shall be a Board of Health as established in Chapter 2 of the Revised
General Ordinances of the Township of Lakewood.
line whether the line proceeds directly in front of their property or not,
as long as the line comes within 100 feet of the property.
d. In the event sewer and/or water lines are installed as set forth above, all
property owners with buildings containing toilets, lavatories or sink
facilities shall hook up the sewer and/or water lines servicing the
facilities to the sewer and/or water lines within 30 days after the date of
completion of the installation for the sewer and/or water lines.
e. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, water and/or sewer
connections are required only in the following circumstances:
1. The Township Board of Health has declared an emergency and/or
determined that failure to hook up would be detrimental to the
health, safety and welfare of the occupants or the general public.
2. The installations are mandated by the Lakewood Municipal Utilities
Authority (MUA) or Ocean County Municipal Utilities Authority
(OCMUA).
3. The sale or transfer of ownership of any premises covered by
paragraphs a through d of this section, for water connections only.
55.Editor's Note: See the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Lakewood Section
2-37, Board of Health.
§ BH1-4.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH2-2.2
AO:743
§ BH2-2.2. Appointment. [1971 Code § BH2-2.2]
The Board of Health shall be appointed by the Township Committee for a
term of four years.
§ BH2-3. ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH COORDINATOR. [1971 Code
§ BH2-3]
a. Job Requirements.
1. Possession of a valid sanitary inspector license issued by the New
Jersey State Department of Health.
2. A minimum of 10 years experience in performing sanitary
inspection work involving the enforcement of relevant public health
laws.
3. A minimum of nine years of full-time paid supervisory experience in
a public health agency with at least three years as principal
sanitary inspector.
4. Thorough knowledge of modern theory, principles and practices of
environmental sanitation and of the laws and regulations
pertaining to public health.
b. Job Duties: Planning, development and evaluation of environmental
health policies and programs; attendance at Municipal Board of Health
meetings; supervision of personnel engaged in the enforcement of
public health laws, regulations and ordinances; inspection and
supervision of water supplies, sewage disposal facilities, retail food
establishments, food processing plants, recreational facilities,
swimming pools, beaches, camps and other environmental services to
ensure compliance with public health laws; evaluation and
recommendations as to local health ordinances and regulations;
determination of local health problems by conducting and analyzing
surveys; development and maintenance of harmonious relations with
governmental and professional civic groups; attendance at the
meetings of such groups and explanation of the purpose, functions and
responsibility of the public Health Department; assistance in the
recruitment and selection of personnel; ordering necessary equipment
to effectively carry out duties; preparation of reports containing
findings, conclusions and recommendations; establishment and
maintenance of public records and files; preparation of correspondence
on environmental matters with agencies or the news media; conducting
health fairs, rabies clinics, various immunization clinics and holding
seminars/workshops for food establishments and their employees;
attending pertinent public health seminars/workshops as a means of
continuous education.
c. Definition. The Environmental Health Coordinator shall be under the
direction of the Board of Health. The Environmental Health Coordinator
shall perform the sanitary inspection work involving the enforcement of
§ BH2-2.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH2-3
AO:744
§ BH2-4. EMERGENCY POWERS OF THE HEALTH OFFICER. [1971
Code § BH2-4]
Whenever the Sanitary Inspector of the Board of Health finds that the
public safety will not permit delay, he may exercise one or more of the
following powers without having to resort to legal proceedings and without
the necessity of giving notice or holding any hearing which would otherwise
be required under any provisions of this Revision.
§ BH2-5. RIGHT OF ENTRY.
§ BH2-5.1. Inspection of Premises.
The Board of Health, its agents and employees shall have the right to
inspect any premises in the Township upon reasonable belief that any
provision of this Revision is being violated, or if the inspection is part of a
regular program of inspection.
§ BH2-5.2. Search Warrant. [1971 Code § BH2-5.2]
If the owner or occupant of any premises refuses to permit entry for the
purpose of inspection, the Board of Health may apply to the Municipal Judge
of the Township for a search warrant. The application shall be based upon
an affidavit setting forth that the inspection is part of a regular program of
inspection or that conditions and circumstances provide a reasonable basis
for believing that a nuisance or unsanitary or unhealthy condition exists
on the premises. If the Judge is satisfied as to the matters set forth in the
affidavit, he shall authorize the issuance of a search warrant permitting
access to and inspection of the premises.
relevant public health laws within the Township. The Environmental
Health Coordinator shall direct all other sanitary inspectors and shall
also do related work as required.
d. Compensation. The salary of the Environmental Health Coordinator
shall be established by the annual Salary Ordinance.
a. Power to Prevent the Sale of Food. The Sanitary Inspector may prohibit
the importation into the Township or sale of any food, drink or other
item intended for human consumption or use from a source suspected
of being infected, contaminated, unsanitary, unhealthy or dangerous.
b. Power to Seize and Destroy Unwholesome Food. The Sanitary Inspector
may order the seizure and destruction of any food, drink or other item
intended for human consumption which is dangerous or likely to cause
sickness or injury to consumers.
§ BH2-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH2-6
AO:745
§ BH2-6. REPORTING OF CONTAMINATED FOOD. [1971 Code
§ BH2-6]
Any person who has reason to believe that food being offered for sale
for human consumption is spoiled, contaminated or otherwise unfit, shall
immediately report such fact to the Board of Health or to one of its officers
or inspectors.
§ BH2-7. POWER OF THE BOARD OF HEALTH TO MAKE RULES
AND REGULATIONS. [1971 Code § BH-2.7]
The Board of Health may, by resolution, make rules and regulations which
interpret or amplify any provision of this Revision. No regulation, however,
shall be inconsistent with, alter or amend any provision of this Revision
and no regulation shall impose any requirement which is in addition to or
greater than the requirements that are expressly or by implication imposed
by any provision of this Revision.
Chapter BH3
NUISANCES
§ BH3-1. PUBLIC HEALTH NUISANCE CODE.
§ BH3-1.1. Title. [1971 Code § BH3-1.2]
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953).
§ BH3-1.2. Purpose. [1971 Code § BH3-1.1]
To regulate certain conditions or acts as nuisances and to prohibit certain
noises or sounds, require proper heating of apartments, prohibit the lease
or rental of certain buildings, prohibit certain actions in or upon public
buildings, conveyances or sidewalks, authorize the inspection of premises
by an enforcing official, provide for the removal or abatement of certain
nuisances and the recovery of expenses incurred by the Board of Health in
removing or abating such nuisances. Penalties for violations of this section
are hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950 and any
follow-up statutes or regulations. A copy of the code is annexed hereto and
made a part thereof.
§ BH3-1.3. Public Record. [1971 Code § BH3-1.3]
Three copies of the Public Health Nuisance Code of New Jersey (1953) have
been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health and
the office of the Township Clerk and will remain on file in such offices for
the use and examination of the public.
§ BH2-6 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH3-1.4
AO:746
§ BH3-1.4. Enforcing Officials. [1971 Code § BH3-1.4]
Enforcing officials shall mean and include regular and special police officers
of the police department of the Township of Lakewood, the plumbing
inspector of the Township, the health officer, the sanitarian or any other
official authorized by the Board of Health to enforce this code and chapter.
§ BH3-2. ABANDONED VEHICLES.56 [1971 Code § BH3-2]
It shall be unlawful to keep inoperable or unlicensed motor vehicles, or
automobile parts, outside of an enclosed building. Such storage constitutes
a menace to health and safety of the surrounding neighborhood; creates an
attractive nuisance to children and creates a place for rodents and insects
to cause deterioration of neighborhoods.
This provision shall not apply to motor vehicles being repaired at a duly
licensed business establishment.
§ BH3-3. ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
The following process shall be used for the abatement of nuisances:
Except as provided in Chapter BH1, whenever a determination is made that
a nuisance exists, notice in writing shall be provided to the owner thereof
to remove or abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein
but not less than five days from the date of service thereof. A duplicate of
the notice shall be left with one or more of the tenants or occupants of the
premises.
For out-of-state owners or if the owner cannot be notified within a
reasonable period of time, such notice shall be left at that place or premises
with the tenant or occupant thereof, or posted on the premises and such
action shall be considered proper notification to the owner, tenant or
occupant thereof.
Whenever a nuisance is found on any public property or on any highway
or any other public premises or place, notice in writing shall be given to
the person in charge thereof to remove or abate the same within such
time as shall be specified therein. If such person fails to comply with such
notice within the time specified, the Board of Health may remove or abate
such nuisance in the same manner as a like condition existing on a private
premises or place.
If the owner, tenant or occupant, upon being notified as provided by this
chapter, shall not comply with such notice within the time specified therein
and fails to remove or abate such nuisance, the Board of Health shall
proceed to abate the nuisance or may cause it to be removed or abated in a
summary manner by such means as the Board shall deem proper.
56.Editor's Note: See also the Revised General Ordinances Section 3-9, Abandoned Motor
Vehicles.
§ BH3-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH3-3
AO:747
The Board of Health may institute an action at law to recover costs incurred
by it in the removal or abatement of any nuisance from any person who shall
have caused or allowed such nuisance to exist, or from any owner, tenant, or
occupant of premises, who, after notice and notification as herein provided
shall fail to remove or abate the nuisance within the time specified in the
notice.
Chapter BH4
PLUMBING CODE
§ BH4-1. ESTABLISHMENT OF CODE. [1971 Code § BH4-1]
A code regulating the installation, maintenance, repair and control of the
plumbing of buildings and the connection thereof with outside sewers,
septic tanks, cesspools or other receptacles, regulating the practice of
plumbing and the issuance of licenses to practice plumbing, is hereby
established pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 275, P.L. of 1948. A copy
of the code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion
of the text thereof herein.
§ BH4-2. TITLE; PUBLIC RECORD. [1971 Code § BH4-2]
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the New Jersey Plumbing Code and Revisions dated
July 1, 1970 and September 29, 1971. Three copies of the code have been
placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of the Board of Health and
the Township Clerk and will remain on file in such offices for the use and
examination of the public.
§ BH4-3. AMENDMENTS TO PLUMBING CODE. [1971 Code
§ BH4-3]
Section 3.4 of the New Jersey Plumbing Code "Standards for plumbing
materials" is hereby amended by the addition of wrought iron pipe
standards for its use according to ASTM A72-63T and F.S. WW-P441b1953.
Section 5.2.1 of the New Jersey Plumbing Code "Types and sizes of traps
and fixture drains" is hereby amended to read as follows: "A trap shall be
of the same nominal size as the fixture to which it is connected. All fixture
traps and closet bends to be concealed shall be of metal."
Section 9.1.1 of the New Jersey Plumbing Code "Soil and waste pipematerial"
is hereby amended by the deletion of the following sentence: "The
use of A.B.S. or P.V.C. plastic pipe is limited to buildings of three stories
or less in height, measured from the lowest finished flooring or floor slab,
unless otherwise approved by the Administrative Authority."
Sections 9.3.1-a and b of the New Jersey Plumbing Code "Fixtures" are
hereby amended by the addition of type 'L' copper or its equivalent as an
approved material.
§ BH3-3 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH4-3
AO:748
Section 8.6.1 of the New Jersey Plumbing Code "Water Service Pipe" is
hereby amended and supplemented to read as follows: "Every building for
human occupancy or habitation shall have a separate water service. If
copper tubing is used, it shall be no lighter than type 'k' or type 'l'."
Section 9.1.5 of the New Jersey Plumbing Code "Soil and waste pipematerial"
is hereby amended by the deletion of the phrase "Or in this code,
whichever is more restrictive."
Section 9.2.3 of the New Jersey Plumbing Code is hereby amended and
supplemented to read as follows: "Pipes passing through foundation walls
shall be sleeved as necessary for passage of piping. Sleeves shall be
standard weight type of sufficient size to permit one-half inch clearance
all around. Sleeves shall be flush with walls. In exterior walls annular
space between sleeves and pipes shall be filled or tightly caulked with coal
tar or asphaltum compound, lead or other approved materials. In all fire
walls the annular space between sleeve and pipes and fire stopped with an
acceptable, noncombustible filler."
Section 6.2.2 of the New Jersey Plumbing Code "Horizontal piping" is
hereby amended and supplemented to read as follows: "Horizontal A.B.S.
or P.V.C. plastic pipe (flexible) shall be supported on continuous metal or
wood strips for entire length. Horizontal A.B.S. or P.V.C. plastic piping (rigid
schedule 40) shall be supported at intervals not to exceed four feet.
Section 3.4 of the New Jersey Plumbing Code "Standards for plumbing
materials" is hereby deleted in its entirety and replaced by Section P.404.1
of the 1970 B.O.C.A. Basic Plumbing Code, three copies of which shall be on
file with the Township Clerk and three copies with the Building Inspector of
the Township.
Section E900 of the Standard Building Code of New Jersey entitled "Soil and
Waste Pipe" and more specifically paragraph 9.1.1 is hereby deleted and
amended and supplemented to read as follow: "9.1.1 Soil and Waste piping
for drainage systems within a building shall be of extra heavy cast iron,
unless the use of service weight cast iron is approved by the Administrative
Authority, galvanized wrought iron, galvanized steel, brass, type M copper,
class D lead, ABS Schedule 40 DWV, acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (P.V.C.).
The pipe and the fittings for each type of pipe shall comply with the
specifications as given in Section E300 Table 3-4."
In addition, Section E1000 of the Standard Building Code of New Jersey
entitled "Storm Drains" and more specifically paragraphs 10.2.1 and 10.2.4
shall be amended and supplemented to read as follows: "10.2.1 Leaders
installed within a building, or run in a vent or pipe shaft, may be of
cast iron, galvanized steel, galvanized wrought iron, cement-lined ferrous
pipe, brass, copper, lead, acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS) or polyvinyl
chloride (PVC) complying with the specifications given in Section E3000
Table 3.4 or as accepted by the Administrative Authority" and "10.2.4
Building storm sewers may be made of vitrified-clay, asbestos, cement,
bituminized fiber, cast iron, brass, copper, coal tar enamel-protected coated
§ BH4-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH4-3
AO:749
and lined wrought iron pipe or steel, acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene (ABS),
polyvinyl chloride (PVC) complying with specifications as given in Table 3.4
or as accepted by the Administrative Authority. Threaded joints shall be
coated and wrapped after inspection."
§ BH4-4. FEES.
In connection with the provisions of this chapter and the code hereby
established and adopted, the following fees shall be charged:
§ BH4-4.1. Master Plumbers. [1971 Code § BH4-4.1]
Every person engaged in the plumbing business in the Township as a
master plumber, except those holding a valid N.J. State Master Plumber's
License, shall appear in person before the examining board established
by the plumbing code adopted by this chapter and submit to examination
by the board in accordance to the rules and regulations thereof. A fee of
$10 shall be paid by each applicant prior to being admitted to taking the
plumbing examination. If such person shall satisfactorily comply with the
requirements of the examining board, a master plumber's license shall be
issued to him upon payment by him of a license fee in the sum of $100.
The master plumber's license shall be renewed annually on January 1 upon
payment to the Township Health Officer of an annual renewal fee of $25.
The license shall expire annually on December 31.
§ BH4-4.2. Permit. [1971 Code § BH4-4.2]
When the plan of any plumbing or drainage system is filed with the
Plumbing Inspector, a fee of $10 shall be paid for a permit to install any
plumbing for one fixture up to six fixtures, and a fee of one ($1.00) dollar
shall be paid for each fixture over six fixtures.
An additional inspection fee of $5 shall be paid for each reinspection of
plumbing work caused by the failure of the licensee or persons working
under his direction and control to comply with the provisions of the code or
provisions of the permit issued.
§ BH4-4.3. Sewer Taps. [1971 Code § BH4-4.3]
Where it shall become necessary for the Plumbing Inspector to inspect any
service connecting the sewer of any house or other building into the street
sewer, or septic tank, the application shall be specified at the time that a
permit is applied for, and a fee in the sum of $5 shall be paid before the
permit shall be issued.
No plastic pipe shall be used for water services connections to or in any
building in the Township.
§ BH4-3 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH4-4.4
AO:750
§ BH4-4.4. Fees for Service Pipes. [1971 Code § BH4-4.4]
Where it shall be necessary for a water service pipe to be installed or
replaced a permit shall be required. There shall be no fee for the permit,
but inspection upon completion must be obtained by the one responsible for
making the installation or to whom the permit is issued.
§ BH4-4.5. Replacement of Plumbing Fixtures. [1971 Code
§ BH4-4.5]
For the replacement of a plumbing fixture, or fixtures, a permit shall be
obtained. No fee shall be charged for the permit, but inspection upon
completion shall be obtained by the one responsible for making the
installation or to whom the permit is issued.
§ BH4-4.6. Fees for Domestic Hot Water Heaters. [1971 Code
§ 4-4.6]
Where it shall be necessary to install or replace any domestic hot water
heater or domestic water heating device, a permit shall be obtained. No fee
shall be charged for the permit, but inspection upon completion shall be
obtained by the one responsible for making the installation or to whom the
permit is issued.
§ BH4-4.7. Penalties. [1971 Code § BH4-4.7]
Violation of BH4-4.4 through BH4-4.6 above shall be punished by a fine of
not less than $25 or more than $200 for each offense.
§ BH4-5. INSTALLATION OF GAS APPLIANCES AND GAS PIPING.
§ BH4-5.1. Permit Fees. [1971 Code § BH4-5.1]
a. A permit must be obtained for any installation or replacement of gas
piping for residential or commercial use, except for installation of an
appliance to gas piping previously installed by a plumber, public utility
or dealer in such appliances. In the event that installation of the
appliance requires additional piping or replacement of piping, then
such permit must be obtained.
b. The permit shall be issued by the Plumbing Inspector on behalf of the
Board of Health to a plumber qualified as hereinafter set forth upon
payment of a fee of $5 for a piping system containing one to six gas
outlets with the additional fee of fifty ($.50) cents per outlet for all
outlets in excess of six outlets.
The permit fee shall entitle the permittee to an inspection of the
installation upon completion without additional charge. Should the
installation be incomplete or not made according to the standards for
such installation then a reinspection shall be required. An additional fee
of $5 shall be paid for each reinspection.
§ BH4-4.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH4-5.2
AO:751
§ BH4-5.2. Rules and Regulations as to Installation of Gas
Appliances and Gas Piping. [1971 Code § BH4-5.2]
§ BH4-5.3. Standards Established. [1971 Code § BH4-5.3]
a. No permit shall be issued for installation of gas piping except to a
master plumber.
b. Plans and specifications of proposed gas piping installations must be
presented together with the application for a permit for gas piping
installation. The plans and specifications shall show a drawing diagram
of the layout of the entire installation including the size of gas piping,
length of pipe, the location of connections to the main, location of all
shutoffs, all risers, traps and the location of connection to appliances.
The specifications shall include a statement of the kind of pipe and
connections to be used, the type of valves, gauges, controls or other
devices used to regulate pressure or flow of gas in the system and the
pressures at source and at all control points throughout the system, and
such other requirements as may be set forth in the standards
additionally required in this chapter.
c. No gas installation hereinafter installed nor gas installation which is
replaced in whole or part or to which an addition is made shall
hereinafter be installed, replaced or added without a permit and no
such system or installation shall be placed in use without first obtaining
a certification of approval from the Plumbing Inspector of the Township.
d. A gas piping installation is hereby defined to mean the installation of
gas piping from the outlet side of the gas meter of a metered public
utility system or from the gas tank meter of a bottled gas tank system to
the connection of the gas appliance or if no gas appliance to the
terminus of the gas line.
a. All gas piping installation, including replacement of or addition to
existing piping installations shall hereinafter be installed according to
the standards set forth in "American Standards for Installation of Gas
Appliances and Gas Piping (1964)" as approved by the American
Standards Association Incorporated September 18, 1964; the standards
being set forth in that certain code of standards numbered,
Z21.30-1964.
b. The code Z21.30-1964 American Standards for Installation of Gas
Appliances and Gas Piping is hereby adopted by reference thereto by
annexation of a copy of the code to this chapter and by inclusion herein
by reference thereto pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 275 of the
Public Laws of 1918.
A copy of this code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without
the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
c. Three copies of the code Z21.30-1964 American Standards for
Installation of Gas Appliances and Gas Piping similarly marked have
§ BH4-5.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH4-5.3
AO:752
Chapter BH5
FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINE CODE
§ BH5-1. ESTABLISHMENT OF CODE. [1971 Code § BH5-1]
A code regulating the use, operation and maintenance of food and beverage
vending machines and licensure thereof; prohibiting the sale or possession
with intent to sell through vending machines of adulterated or misbranded
foods or drinks; authorizing inspection of vending machines and operations
connected therewith; and fixing penalties for violations thereof is hereby
established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950. A copy of the code is
annexed hereto and made a part hereof without the inclusion of the text
thereof herein.
§ BH5-2. TITLE OF CODE. [1971 Code § BH5-2]
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New
Jersey (1961).
§ BH5-3. PUBLIC RECORD. [1971 Code § BH5-3]
Three copies of the Food and Beverage Vending Machine Code of New
Jersey (1961) have been placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of the
Board of Health and Township Clerk and will remain on file in those offices
for the use and examination of the public.
§ BH5-4. HEALTH AUTHORITY. [1971 Code § 5-4]
The code is amended in Section 1.1Q to add the following:
"Q. 'Health Authority' as defined herein, for enforcement purposes, also
shall mean and include regular and special patrolmen and superior officers
of the Police Department of the Township, the Building Inspector or official
of the Township, the Plumbing Inspector of the Township, the Health Officer,
the Secretary of the Board of Health or any other official authorized by the
Board of Health to enforce this code and chapter."
§ BH5-5. LICENSE FEE. [1971 Code § BH5-5]
The annual license fee to engage in the business which is the subject matter
of this chapter shall be set forth in Chapter 4, General Licensing, of the
Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Lakewood.
Chapter BH6
been placed on file in the office of the Township Clerk and will remain
on file in such office for the use and examination of the public.
§ BH4-5.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH5-5
AO:753
RETAIL FOOD ESTABLISHMENT CODE
§ BH6-1. ESTABLISHMENT OF CODE. [1971 Code § BH6-1]
A code regulating retail food establishments and fixing penalties is hereby
established pursuant to Chapter 188, Laws of 1950. A copy of the code is
annexed hereto and made a part hereof by reference.
§ BH6-2. TITLE. [1971 Code § BH6-2]
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey
(1965).
§ BH6-3. PUBLIC RECORD. [1971 Code § BH6-3]
Three copies of the Retail Food Establishment Code of New Jersey (1965)
have been placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of the Board of
Health and the Township Clerk and will remain on file in those offices for
the use and examination of the public.
§ BH6-4. PERMIT.
§ BH6-4.1. Required. [1971 Code § BH6-4.1]
No person shall operate a retail food handling establishment unless a permit
or approval of an existing permit to operate same shall have been issued by
the Board of Health. Such permit or approval of an existing permit shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in such establishment.
§ BH6-4.2. Expiration. [1971 Code BH6-4.2]
Permits issued or approved under the provisions of this chapter shall expire
annually on June 30th of each year and application for renewal thereof
shall be submitted simultaneously with application for mercantile license
annually.
§ BH6-4.3. Regulations. [1971 Code § BH6-4.3]
a. A person conducting an itinerant retail food handling establishment
shall secure a permit or if such person is the holder of a permit,
certificate or license issued by the Board of Health of another
jurisdiction, the certificate, permit or license may be approved by the
Board of Health and there shall be no fee charged for such approval.
b. A permit or approval of a permit may be suspended or revoked for a
violation by the holder of any provision of this chapter or code after an
opportunity for a hearing by the Board of Health or its authorized
representative.
§ BH5-5 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH6-4.3
AO:754
Chapter BH7
COIN-OPERATED DRY CLEANING ESTABLISHMENTS CODE
§ BH7-1. ESTABLISHMENT OF CODE. [1971 Code § BH7-1]
A code regulating the use, operation and maintenance of coin-operated dry
cleaning establishments and licensure thereof; authorizing inspection of
dry cleaning establishments and operations connected therewith; and fixing
penalties for violations thereof is hereby established pursuant to Chapter
188, Laws of 1950. A copy of the code is annexed hereto and made a part
hereof without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ BH7-2. TITLE OF CODE. [1971 Code § BH7-2]
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the Coin-Operated Dry Cleaning Establishment Code of
New Jersey (1962).
§ BH7-3. PUBLIC RECORD. [1971 Code § BH7-3]
Three copies of the Coin-Operated Dry Cleaning Establishment Code of New
Jersey (1962) have been placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of the
Board of Health and the Township Clerk and will remain on file in those
offices for the use and examination of the public.
§ BH7-4. HEALTH AUTHORITY. [1971 Code § BH7-4]
The code is amended in Section 1.1G to add the following:
"G. 'Health Authority', as defined herein, for enforcement purposes, also
shall mean and include regular and special patrolmen and superior officers
of the Police Department of the Township, the Building Inspector or official
of the Township, the Plumbing Inspector of the Township, the Health Officer,
the Secretary of the Board of Health or any other official authorized by the
Board of Health to enforce this code and chapter."
Chapter BH8
WEED CONTROL CODE
§ BH8-1. ESTABLISHMENT OF CODE. [1971 Code § BH8-1]
A code declaring ragweed and poison ivy to be a nuisance, providing for
removal or abatement thereof and recovery of expenses incurred by the
Board of Health in removing or abating such nuisance and prescribing
penalties for violations, is hereby established pursuant to Chapter 188,
c. A permit or approval of a permit issued by another Board of Health is
not transferable.
§ BH6-4.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH8-1
AO:755
Laws of 1950. A copy of the code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ BH8-2. TITLE OF CODE. [1971 Code § BH8-2]
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the Weed Control Code of New Jersey (1953).
§ BH8-3. PUBLIC RECORD. [1971 Code § BH8-3]
Three copies of the Weed Control Code of New Jersey (1953) have been
placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of the Board of Health and
the Township Clerk and will remain on file in those offices for the use and
examination of the public.
§ BH8-4. ENFORCEMENT. [1971 Code § BH8-4]
The code is amended in Section 4.1 to read as follows:
"4.1 The provision of this code shall be enforced by members of the Police
Department of the Township of Lakewood, the Building Inspector or Official
of said Township, the Plumbing Inspector of the Township, the Health
Officer, the Secretary of the Board of Health and any other official
authorized by the Board of Health to enforce this code and chapter."
Chapter BH9
SMOKE CONTROL CODE
§ BH9-1. ESTABLISHMENT OF CODE. [1971 Code § BH9-1]
A code regulating the emission of smoke from fuel-burning equipment,
internal combustion engines, open fires, stacks or chimneys, and providing
for the inspection of fuel-burning equipment, is hereby established pursuant
to the Public Health and Sanitation Codes Adoption by Reference Act, (L
1950 c 188). A copy of the code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof
without the inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ BH9-2. TITLE OF CODE. [1971 Code § BH9-2]
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the Smoke Control Code of New Jersey (1953).
§ BH9-3. PUBLIC RECORD. [1971 Code § BH9-3]
Three copies of the Smoke Control Code of New Jersey (1953) have been
placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of the Board of Health and
the Township Clerk and will remain on file in those offices for the use and
examination of the public.
§ BH8-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH9-4
AO:756
§ BH9-4. ENFORCING AUTHORITY. [1971 Code BH9-4]
The enforcing authority for the Smoke Control Code shall be the Board of
Health of the Township and such other persons and officials as may be duly
appointed by the Board.
Chapter BH10
MAINTENANCE OF SWINE CODE
§ BH10-1. ESTABLISHMENT OF CODE. [1971 Code § BH10-1]
A code regulating premises on which swine are maintained; establishing
minimum standards governing the location and maintenance of such
premises; authorizing inspections of such premises; declaring and defining
certain acts or conditions on such premises as nuisances; declaring and
fixing penalties for violations thereof is hereby adopted pursuant to Chapter
188, P.L. (N.J.S.A. 26-3-69 to 69.6). A copy of the code is annexed hereto and
made a part hereof without inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ BH10-2. TITLE OF CODE. [1971 Code § BH10-2]
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the Maintenance of Swine Code of New Jersey (1956).
§ BH10-3. PUBLIC RECORD. [1971 Code § BH10-3]
Three copies of the Maintenance of Swine Code of New Jersey (1957) have
been placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health and
will remain on file for the use and examination of the public.
§ BH10-4. PERMIT REQUIRED. [1971 Code § BH10-4]
No person shall maintain swine, as defined in the code, on premises within
the boundaries of the Township until a valid permit has been issued by the
Board of Health.
§ BH10-5. DENIAL AND SUSPENSION OF PERMITS. [1971 Code
§ BH10-5]
Permits required by this chapter or code may be denied or suspended by
the Board of Health for failure to comply with this chapter or code. This
Board of Health shall afford the person whose permit to maintain swine on
premises has been denied or suspended an opportunity to be heard in public
hearing; and following this to be informed of the Board's decision within two
weeks thereafter.
§ BH10-6. PERMIT FEE. [1971 Code § BH10-6]
The fee for a permit to maintain swine on premises shall be $25 for each 10
swine or portion thereof.
§ BH9-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH10-7
AO:757
§ BH10-7. EXPIRATION OF PERMITS. [ 1971 Code § BH10-7]
Permits issued for the maintenance of swine on premises shall expire
annually on May 30th of each year and application for renewal thereof shall
be submitted together with the required fee prior to May 1st of each year.
Chapter BH11
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM CODE
§ BH11-1. CODE ESTABLISHED. [1971 Code § BH11-1]
A code regulating the location, construction, use, maintenance and method
of emptying or cleaning individual sewage disposal systems, the issuance
of permits to locate, construct, empty or clean the systems, and fixing
penalties for the violation thereof is hereby adopted pursuant to Chapter
188, P.L. 1950 (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 69.6). A copy of the code is annexed
hereto and made a part hereof without inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ BH11-2. TITLE OF CODE. [1971 Code § BH11-2]
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New
Jersey (1953).
§ BH11-3. PUBLIC RECORD. [1971 Code § BH11-3]
Three copies of the Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New Jersey
(1953) have been placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of the Board
of Health and the Township Clerk and will remain on file for the use and
examination of the public.
§ BH11-4. PERMITS.
§ BH11-4.1. Permit Required. [1971 Code § BH11-4.1]
No person shall locate, construct or alter any individual sewage disposal
system until a permit for the location, construction or alteration of the
sewage disposal system shall have been issued by the Board of Health.
§ BH11-4.2. Issuance of Permit. [1971 Code § BH11-4.2]
The Board of Health may issue a permit if an application for the same
is accompanied by a certificate made by an engineer licensed to practice
professional engineering in New Jersey stating that the design of the
individual sewage disposal system as proposed is in compliance with the
code.
§ BH11-5. OPERATION OF NEW SYSTEM.
§ BH10-7 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH11-5.1
AO:758
§ BH11-5.1. Certificate Required. [1971 Code § BH11-5.1]
New individual disposal systems shall not be placed in operation, nor shall
new dwellings or buildings or additions thereto be sold or occupied, which
must rely on such a system for sewage disposal, until the Board of Health
shall have issued a certificate indicating that the disposal system has been
located and constructed in compliance with the terms of the permit issued
and the requirements of the aforesaid code. Issuance of such certificate
shall not be required for alterations to an existing individual sewage
disposal system.
§ BH11-5.2. Issuance of Certificate. [1971 Code § BH11-5.2]
The Board of Health may issue such a certificate if an engineer licensed
to practice professional engineering in New Jersey submits a statement in
writing signed by him to the Board of Health that the disposal system has
been located and constructed in accordance with the terms of the permit
issued and the requirements of the aforesaid code.
§ BH11-6. EMPTYING OR CLEANING SEPTIC TANKS.
§ BH11-6.1. License Required. [1971 Code § BH11-6.1]
Persons shall not engage in the business of emptying or cleaning septic
tanks, cesspools, privies or any place used for the reception or storage of
human excrement who do not hold a license to engage in such business
issued by the Board of Health. Such licenses shall be valid for a period of
one year from the date of issuance but may be renewed by the Board of
Health. The license may be revoked for failure of the licensee to comply with
the provisions of this code or any rule or ordinance of the Board of Health.
§ BH11-6.2. Permit Required. [1971 Code § BH11-6.2]
The contents of any septic tank, cesspool, privy or other receptacle
containing human excrement shall not be removed until a permit for such
removal has been obtained from the Board of Health.
§ BH11-7. HEARING ON DENIAL OF LICENSE PERMIT. [1971 Code
§ BH11-7]
In case any license or permit or certification required by this chapter is
denied by the Board of Health, a hearing shall be held thereon before the
Board within 15 days after request therefor is made by the applicant and
upon such hearing the Board of Health shall affirm, alter or rescind its
previous determination and take action accordingly within 15 days after the
date of such hearing.
§ BH11-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH11-8
AO:759
§ BH11-8. VIOLATIONS OF CODE; STOP ORDER. [1971 Code
§ BH11-8]
The Board of Health may order all further work in and about any individual
sewage disposal system, which is being erected or installed in violation of
the code, to be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be necessary
to remedy such violation, and, thereafter, the work continued without any
violation of any of the provisions of the code, and after issuance of any such
order and the service of a copy thereof upon any person connected with
or working in and about the erection or installation of any such disposal
system, or any part thereof, no further work shall be done thereon except
as aforesaid.
§ BH11-9. FEES AND CHARGES. [1971 Code § BH11-9]
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
§ BH11-10. WASTE DISPOSAL. [1971 Code § BH11-10]
Septic trucks containing waste from areas outside of the Township shall be
prohibited from dumping the waste at any Township operated landfill within
the boundaries of the Township.
Chapter BH12
WATER SUPPLY CODE
§ BH12-1. CODE ESTABLISHED. [1971 Code § BH12-1]
A code regulating the location, construction, alteration, use and supervision
of individual and semipublic water supplies, requiring certain permits,
a. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct an individual
sewage disposal system - $20.
b. For the issuance of a permit to repair an individual sewage disposal
system - $10.
c. For a requested inspection and report on the condition of an existing
individual sewage disposal system - $10.
d. If the request is for an inspection and report of an individual sewage
disposal system and a water supply system pursuant to Chapter
BH12-10, the fee for both inspections and reports shall not exceed $15.
e. For each reinspection of an individual sewage disposal system, or part
thereof, a reinspection fee of $5.
f. For the issuance or renewal of a license to a person or a corporation
engaged in the business of cleaning or emptying receptacles for the
reception and storage of human excrement or other putrescible matter
$10 for each vehicle or conveyance.
§ BH11-8 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH12-1
AO:760
providing for the inspection of such supplies, the fixing of fees and
prescribing penalties for violations is hereby adopted pursuant to Chapter
188, P.L. 1950 (N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 69.6). A copy of the code is annexed
hereto and made a part hereof without inclusion of the text thereof herein.
§ BH12-2. TITLE OF CODE. [1971 Code § BH12-21]
The code established and adopted by this chapter is described and
commonly known as the Individual and Semipublic Water Supply Code of
New Jersey (1966).
§ BH12-3. PUBLIC RECORD. [1971 Code § BH12-3]
Three copies of the Individual and Semipublic Water Supply Code of New
Jersey (1966) have been placed on file in the offices of the Secretary of the
Board of Health and the Township Clerk and will remain on file for the use
and examination of the public.
§ BH12-4. PERMIT REQUIRED. [1971 Code § BH12-4]
No person shall locate, construct or alter any water supply until a permit for
the location, construction or alteration of the water supply shall have been
issued by the Board of Health.
§ BH12-5. ISSUANCE OF PERMIT. [1971 Code § BH12-5]
The Board of Health may issue a permit if an application for the same
is accompanied by a certificate made by an engineer licensed to practice
professional engineering in New Jersey stating that the design of the water
supply as proposed is in compliance with the code.
§ BH12-6. CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE REQUIRED. [1971 Code
§ BH12-6]
New water supplies shall not be placed in operation, nor shall new dwellings
or buildings or additions thereto be sold or occupied, which must rely
on such a supply for water, until the Board of Health shall have issued
a certificate indicating that the water supply has been located and
constructed in compliance with the terms of the permit issued and the
requirements of the aforesaid code. Issuance of such certificate shall not be
required for alteration to an existing water supply.
§ BH12-7. ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE. [1971 Code § BH12-7]
The Board of Health may issue such a certificate if an engineer licensed
to practice professional engineering in New Jersey submits a statement in
writing signed by him to the Board of Health that the water supply has been
located and constructed in accordance with the terms of the permit and the
requirements of the code.
§ BH12-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH12-8
AO:761
§ BH12-8. HEARING ON DENIAL OF PERMIT OR CERTIFICATE.
[1971 Code § BH12-8]
In the event any permit or certification required by this chapter is denied
by the Board of Health, a hearing shall be held thereon before the Board
within 15 days after request therefor is made by the applicant and upon
such hearing the Board of Health shall affirm, alter or rescind its previous
determination and take action accordingly within 15 days after the date of
such hearing.
§ BH12-9. VIOLATIONS; STOP ORDER. [1971 Code § BH12-9]
The Board of Health may order that all further work be stopped on any
water supply installation in violation of the code. Any such work necessary
to remedy such violation shall be allowed. After the issuance of any such
order and the service of a copy thereof upon any person connected with the
installation of any such water supply, no further work shall be done thereon
except as aforesaid.
§ BH12-10. FEES AND CHARGES. [1971 Code § BH12-10]
The following fees and charges are herewith established:
Chapter BH13
BUILDINGS
§ BH13-1. DEFINITIONS. [1971 Code § BH13-1]
As used in this chapter:
a. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to locate and
construct a water supply - no charge.
b. For the filing of an application and plans for a permit to alter an existing
water supply - no charge.
c. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct a new well or water
supply system - $10.
d. For the issuance of a permit to alter an existing well or water supply
system - $5.
e. For a requested inspection and report of an existing well or water
supply system - $10.
f. For an inspection and report of an individual sewage disposal system
pursuant to Section BH11-9 and an inspection of a well or water supply
system the combined fee shall be $15.
g. For each reinspection of a well or water supply system, or part thereof,
an inspection fee of $5 shall be charged.
§ BH12-8 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH13-1
AO:762
DWELLING — Shall mean any building or structure used or occupied for
human habitation or occupancy, or intended to be so used.
EXTERMINATION — Shall mean the control and elimination of infestation
by eliminating harboring places, removing or making inaccessible any food,
dirt, waste or other materials that may stimulate said infestation, and
shall mean pest control by poisoning, spraying, trapping, fumigation by a
licensed fumigator or any other recognized, legal, effective pest elimination
procedure.
INFESTATION — Shall mean the presence of household pest cockroaches,
vermin, harmful insects, rodent nesting places and conditions for nesting.
OCCUPANT — Shall mean the tenant, lessee or other person or persons in
actual possession of and living in the dwelling.
OWNER — Shall mean any person, firm, corporation or entity holding title
to a dwelling or any executor, executrix, administrator, trustee, guardian or
agent of the owner.
PLUMBING — Shall mean gas pipes and provided gas burning equipment,
heaters and tanks or boiler for hot water, waste pipes, water pipes, water
closets, sinks, lavatories, furnaces for steam heat and other heating
appliances, bathtubs, catchbasins, drains, vents and any other provided
fixtures together with connections to the water, sewer or gas lines.
PROVIDED — Shall mean furnished, supplied, paid for or under the control
of the owner.
§ BH13-2. RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER AND OCCUPANT.
§ BH13-2.1. Responsibility of Owner for Maintenance. [1971 Code
§ BH13-2.1]
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner:
a. To maintain every dwelling and every part thereof, including the roof,
walls, floors, carpeting, ceilings, attics, cellars, halls, stairs, stairways,
porches, plumbing, provided heating plants and provided fixtures and
equipment for heating water, including chimneys and smoke pipes,
doors, windows, foundations and rubbish containers in a state of sound
repair and in a clean and sanitary condition.
b. To maintain such dwelling in such a manner so as to avoid excessive
heat loss caused by lack of or improper maintenance of the doors,
windows, walls, roofs or other parts of the building. All roofs, sidewalls,
doors, windows, and other outside surfaces shall be kept in a rainproof
and weathertight condition, so as to prevent dampness or excessive
cold air from entering the premises. Any broken exterior surfaces or
holes in same must be repaired within a reasonable time not to exceed
30 days.
c. To refrain from shutting off, or causing to have discontinued or
disconnected provided utilities for any occupied dwelling, except where
§ BH13-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH13-2.1
AO:763
such interruption of utility service is necessary while in the actual
process of making repairs or during temporary emergencies for which
repairs are being arranged.
d. To maintain the basement or cellar dry and ventilated. The walls and
floors of such basement or cellar below ground level shall be paved with
brick, cement, tile or asphalt, or with some other impervious material.
The sidewalls and ceilings of every basement or cellar shall be kept free
from dampness. Cellar floors shall be drained to an outlet permanently.
e. To maintain sidewalls and ceilings of such dwelling unit and every
habitable room, hall, closet and compartment clean and sufficiently
plastered, painted or papered, so that the same may have clean, smooth
and washable surfaces.
f. To maintain the flooring of the halls, stairs and landings clean and free
from filth, ashes, garbage, rubbish, refuse, junk, soil, water, wood,
paper and other material of a putrefactive or combustible nature and
free from fire and accident hazards.
g. To maintain the porches, stairways, landings, steps, floors, fire escapes,
courts, yards, alleys, areaways, passageways and all surrounding
exterior surfaces of any dwelling free from any accumulation of filth,
ashes, garbage, refuse, junk, paper, wood, soil matter, waste matter,
drainage and other material of a combustible or putrefactive nature.
Such places shall at all times be kept free from fire and accident
hazards.
h. In every dwelling occupied by more than three families, in which the
owner does not reside therein, to provide a janitor, caretaker,
housekeeper or other person designated by the owner, who shall at all
times keep the court, yard, alley, areaway, sidewalks and other exterior
surfaces clean and free from any accumulation of waste material.
Garbage and all waste material shall be removed from such dwelling
premises at regular intervals and at the convenience and according to
the collection schedule of the garbage removal agency of the Township.
i. To maintain and keep chimneys, smokestacks, smokepipes and flues,
and provided heating equipment of such dwelling free from defect and
in such condition as to prevent coal or illuminating gas, soot, smoke or
noxious fumes or odors from entering such dwelling, dwelling unit or
habitable rooms, or any dwelling or dwelling unit adjacent thereto.
j. To make and maintain the dwelling reasonably vermin and rodent proof
and to exterminate the same.
k. To keep and maintain structurally sound and free from any defects the
exterior of the dwelling and the masonry walls, clapboards, sheathing,
shingles, exterior studs, main cornices, foundation wall, wood sills,
corner posts, wood plates, supporting rafters, roofing boards and
covering; the stoops and porches, flooring, railings, stair treads; the
risers, posts, handrails, balustrades and newels; windows, sash, frames,
§ BH13-2.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH13-2.1
AO:764
§ BH13-2.2. Responsibility of Occupant for Maintenance. [1971
Code § BH13-2.2]
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the occupant:
sills, stools and apron; the door and door frame; the fire escapes,
flooring, railings, ladders, passageways, weights, chains, basket and
stairs; and the joists and crossbeams of any dwelling and parts thereof
of frame construction and any part or parts subject to erosion and
deterioration shall be kept well painted and free from such
deterioration. Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound and
free from any defects.
l. No room in any dwelling shall be used for sleeping quarters unless it
complies with the following regulations: Every sleeping room for one
person shall have at least 70 square feet floor space and for more than
one person at least 50 square feet per person. At least 1/2 of the floor
area of every sleeping room shall have a ceiling height of at least seven
feet. The floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is
less that five feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in
computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of
determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
m. To provide in every room and hall in every dwelling a window or
skylight, opening directly to the outside. The total area of such window
or skylight, shall not be less than 10% of the floor area of such room. All
windows and skylights shall be enclosed with glass and shall be
provided with suitable hardware and sashcord and made to open to the
extent of 5% of the floor area. Every dwelling, habitable room and hall
shall be equipped with a safe artificial lighting service, and all electrical
wiring, outlets and fixtures thereof shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Code. In
the absence of natural ventilation, every habitable room shall be
ventilated by mechanical means. No habitable room shall be lighted by
gas lamps or kerosene lamps.
n. To provide the occupant of every dwelling with adequate and tight
fitting window and door screens to cover all outside doors and windows
and to maintain the same at all times in good and serviceable condition.
The screens shall be constructed and maintained so as to prevent the
entry of flies, mosquitoes and other disease bearing insects.
o. To maintain all crawl spaces, or open area under dwellings in a clean,
trash free, vermin and rodent free condition, free of trash and debris,
such as might tend to create an unsanitary, unsightly, unhealthy or
hazardous condition.
p. To see that no room used for occupancy is heated by a portable
kerosene, gas or oil stove or heater.
a. To keep the dwelling in a clean and sanitary condition.
§ BH13-2.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH13-2.2
AO:765
§ BH13-3. JOINT AND SEPARATE RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER
AND OCCUPANT. [1971 Code § BH13-3]
The duties and obligations of the owner and occupant shall be separate
and distinct, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to relieve the
owner or the occupant of any requirement or duty herein set forth.
§ BH13-4. APPLIANCES IN SLEEPING ROOMS. [1971 Code
§ BH13-4]
No owner or occupant of a dwelling shall install or maintain any gas
appliance, kerosene lamp or kerosene stove in any room used for sleeping
purposes.
§ BH13-5. NOTICE; INSPECTION.
§ BH13-5.1. Notice to Correct Violation. [1971 Code § BH13-5.1]
The Sanitary Inspector shall notify in writing, by mail or personal service,
the owner or occupant, as the case may be, of the existence of a condition
which constitutes a violation of this chapter and such notice shall:
b. To place all garbage and refuse in proper, legal containers.
c. To eliminate all vermin infestation in the dwelling by prompt and proper
extermination.
d. To refrain from willfully or maliciously damaging or permitting any
member of his family to damage any part or portion of the dwelling.
e. To refrain from using any fuel which, by its combustion, may cause
excessive smoke and the rapid discoloration of the sidewalls and
ceilings of any dwelling.
f. To maintain in a clean and sanitary condition plumbing fixtures.
g. To see that no room in any dwelling is used for sleeping purposes unless
it complies with the following regulations: Every sleeping room for one
person shall have at least 70 square feet floor space and for more than
one person at least 50 square feet per person. At least 1/2 of the floor
area of every sleeping room shall have a ceiling height of at least seven
feet. The floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling height is
less than five feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in
computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of
determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
a. Designate the dwelling or part thereof complained of.
b. Contain a statement of the violation existing in the dwelling.
c. Specify a reasonable time not to exceed 10 days in which the notice
shall be complied with and the violation abated, corrected or
eliminated. However, where it appears that by reason of the existing
§ BH13-2.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH13-5.1
AO:766
§ BH13-5.2. Inspection of Buildings by Request. [1971 Code
§ BH13-5.2]
§ BH13-6. BUILDINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION. [1971
Code § BH13-6]
Whenever it shall be determined by the Sanitary Inspector that any building
or part thereof is unfit for human habitation, and notice of such
determination shall have been affixed conspicuously on the building, and
personally served upon the owner, agent or lessee, requiring all persons
therein to vacate such building or part thereof, for the reasons to be stated
therein, such building, or part thereof, shall within 10 days thereafter be
vacated. In case of special emergency, in the judgment of the Sanitary
Inspector, the building may be vacated within a shorter time span.
No building closed for violation of this section shall reopen without a new
certificate of occupancy, which shall be issued only after a Board of Health
certificate is obtained showing said building to have been inspected and
found fit for occupancy.
§ BH13-7. HEAT IN BUILDINGS. [1971 Code § BH13-7]
It shall be the duty of every person who shall have contracted or
undertaken, or shall be bound, to heat or to furnish heat for any building
or portion thereof, occupied as a home or place or residence of one or
more persons, or as a business establishment where one or more persons
are employed, to heat or to furnish heat for every occupied room in such
building or portion thereof, so that a minimum temperature of 70 degrees
violation there is an immediate danger to life, health or safety of any
occupant, the owner or occupant, as the case may be, may be required
to abate or repair the condition complained of within a period of time
less than 10 days.
The notice to an owner shall be sent or delivered to the last known address;
however, if upon diligent search the address of the owner cannot be
ascertained, such notice shall be posted upon the dwelling. In the case of the
occupant, notice shall be sent to or delivered at the dwelling of the occupant.
a. Whenever an owner, occupant, prospective purchaser or mortgagee
shall apply to the Board of Health for an inspection of any building, the
Sanitary Inspector, or his agent, shall upon the payment of $5 for each
building, to be paid by such applicant, make an inspection and issue a
certificate or report any health violation existing on such inspected
premises.
b. Such inspection and report shall cover only such matters as are within
the power, authority or jurisdiction of the Board of Health.
c. All fees collected for inspections and report shall be forthwith
transmitted to the office of the Township Treasurer.
§ BH13-5.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH13-7
AO:767
Fahrenheit may be maintained at all times. This section shall not apply to
the buildings or portions thereof used and occupied for trades, businesses
or occupations where such higher or lower temperatures are essential for
the operation of said trade, business or occupation.
For the purpose of this section, wherever a building is heated by means of a
furnace, boiler or apparatus under the control of the owner, agent or lessee
in the absence of a contract or agreement to the contrary, such person shall
be deemed to have contracted, undertaken or bound himself to furnish heat
in accordance with the provisions of this section.
The term "at all such times" as used in this section, unless otherwise
provided by a contract or agreement, shall include the time between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., in a building or portion thereof occupied
as a home or place of residence, and during the usual working hours
maintained and established in a building or portion thereof, occupied as a
business establishment, each day whenever the outer temperature shall fall
below 60 degrees Fahrenheit. In a building or portion thereof occupied as a
home or place of residence or sleeping room, the heat between 11:00 p.m.
and 6:00 a.m., shall be at least 65 degrees Fahrenheit.
The terms "contract" as used in this section shall be taken to mean and
include a written, verbal or implied contract, lease or letting, and the
presence of heating outlets, radiators, risers or returns in any hall or
apartment, or subdivision of a house, shall be prima facie evidence of an
implied contract.
§ BH13-8. REPAIR OF FURNACE. [1971 Code § BH13-8]
Whenever a building is heated by means of a furnace, boiler or apparatus
under the control of the owner, agent or lessee, and in the event that such
furnace, boiler or apparatus becomes defective it shall be the duty of the
owner, agent or lessee to properly repair the same.
§ BH13-9. ROOF DRAINAGE. [1971 Code § BH13-9]
The owner, lessor, tenant, lessee or agent of any building or part thereof,
except dwellings, used in any degree for occupation by human beings for
business purposes, shall keep the roofs, gutters and every part of the same
and the sidewalls of such buildings so that the same shall not leak. All rain
water shall be drained and conveyed from such roofs, gutters or sidewalls in
such manner as to prevent the drippings of water upon the ground or upon
any portion of the structure or in the yard adjacent thereto.
§ BH13-10. WATER. [1971 Code § BH13-10]
No premises shall be rented, let, leased or occupied by any person unless
such shall have a plentiful supply of pure water suitable for domestic
purposes. No premises, home, apartment, studio apartment or lodging shall
be leased to or rented for the use of more than one person unless hot water
§ BH13-7 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH13-10
AO:768
of 120 degrees Fahrenheit at the tap shall be provided for bath and kitchen
use.
§ BH13-11. PRIVIES FORBIDDEN. [1971 Code § BH13-11]
Pursuant to the powers vested in this Board of Health by N.J.S. 26:3-33, no
sewerage disposal system shall be permitted on any lands or premises in the
Township other than a sewerage disposal system connecting with an outside
sewer or septic tank and no outhouse or privies shall be permitted in the
Township.
Chapter BH14
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
[Editor's Note: See also Chapter 21, Solid Waste Management in the
Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Lakewood.]
§ BH14-1. through §BH14-4. (RESERVED)57
§ BH14-5. COLLECTION REGULATIONS.
§ BH14-5.1. (Reserved)58
§ BH14-5.2. Collection Regulations. [1971 Code § BH14-5; Ord. No.
97-54; Ord. No. 97-57; Ord. No. 97-59; Ord. No. 2005-41 § 6]
a. All garbage and refuse shall be kept in the 95 or 65 gallon containers
supplied by the Township.
If determined by Public Works that a larger container is needed, it will
be supplied by the Township and placed on a concrete pad that will be
supplied and installed by the user in a location that is accessible and
acceptable.
b. All Municipal Solid Waste (hereinafter referred to as "MSW") to be
collected by the Township shall be placed at the curbline in receptacles
as above described. They shall be set at the curbline approximately four
feet from any obstruction (trees, mailboxes, telephone poles, guy wires,
another container, etc.). No cars shall be parked in front of containers.
Such MSW shall be collected once weekly on a day scheduled by the
Township.
57.Editor's Note: BH14-1 through BH14-4 pertaining to licensing of garbage and refuse
collection businesses, previously codified herein and containing portions of 1971 Code §§
BH14-1 through BH14-4, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2005-41.
58.Editor's Note: Former subsection BH14-5.1, Vehicle Specifications, previously codified
herein and containing portions of 1971 Code § BH14-5.1, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 2005-41.
§ BH13-10 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH14-5.2
AO:769
c. All MSW shall be thoroughly and completely drained of water and other
fluids, wrapped securely in plastic garbage bags, and placed in
appropriate receptacles as hereinbefore described.
d. All recyclables shall be collected in accordance with the statutory
requirements of N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq., also known as the "Solid Waste
Management Act"; Section 21-3 of the Revised General Ordinances of
the Township of Lakewood; administrative regulation, and as directed
by the Department of Public Works.
e. No person shall mix any fish, eggs, poultry, dog or cat carcass, or any
animal carcasses, manure, ashes, building materials and other refuse
with MSW to be collected by the Township.
f. The Township shall not be required to collect garbage or trash from any
slaughterhouse, poultry dealer, butcher or other establishment where it
is determined by the Board of Health either that more frequent
collections are required or that the placing of garbage or trash on the
sidewalk area near the curb for collection would be detrimental to
health, welfare and safety.
g. No loose garbage, grass or other refuse shall be swept or placed in
roadways.
h. No rubbish, leaves or other waste matter shall be burned in roadways.
i. Downtown Area.
1. The term "downtown area" as it appears in this section shall consist
of that area in the Township of Lakewood delineated by the
following boundaries:
Fifth Street to the North; Hurley Avenue to the South; Madison
Avenue to the West; and New Jersey Central Railroad Tracks to the
East.
2. In the downtown area, notwithstanding the type of receptacle
utilized for MSW containment, no MSW shall be placed on the
sidewalk area near the curb earlier than 6:00 a.m. nor later than
9:30 a.m. on the regular collection date scheduled by the Township.
3. In all residential zones, MSW contained in acceptable receptacles
as described in paragraphs a and b hereinabove shall not be placed
in the curb area for pickup before 6:00 p.m. of the day prior to the
regular scheduled day for pickup by the Township.
4. In the downtown area, MSW collection will occur daily, Monday
through Friday, weather conditions permitting, between the hours
of 9:30 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. All MSW containers are to be removed
from curbside immediately following MSW collection.
j. In all residential zones, all empty garbage cans and other receptacles,
including those receptacles utilized for the containment of recyclables,
§ BH14-5.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH14-5.2
AO:770
shall be removed from the sidewalk area near the curb on the same
day as collected. In addition to the above, at all single family homes, all
empty garbage cans and other receptacles, including those receptacles
utilized for the containment of recyclables, shall be placed back on the
property at least behind the front yard setback.
k. It shall be unlawful for any person, excepting an employee of the
Township in the discharge of his duties, or an authorized garbage and
waste collector, to collect, pick up, rake or in any way disturb the
garbage or other refuse material of whatsoever nature deposited in any
receptacle laid or placed on any street or public place.
l. Receptacles that are badly broken or otherwise fail to meet the
requirements of this section or of any other of the regulations which
may be promulgated by the Township may be classified as rubbish and
may be collected as such by the Township.
m. The Department of Public Works shall collect MSW only from
residential uses having less than four dwelling units and from those
uses within the boundaries of the downtown area set forth in paragraph
i1 hereinabove or by approval of the Township Committee.
n. Unless otherwise specified herein, the Department of Public Works is
authorized to establish schedules for the collection of MSW, including
garbage, trash, bulky waste and recyclables.
Items scheduled for bulk pickup may not be placed at curbside for
pickup earlier than the Saturday or Sunday before the scheduled
pickup. Bulk items shall be neatly set at curbside in accordance with
the Schedule attached hereto as Schedule A. All items scheduled for
bulk pickup must be generated by or from the residences at which the
bulk pickup is located. No construction or demolition materials will be
picked up.
The containers may not be placed at curbside for pickup earlier than
5:00 p.m. the day before the scheduled pickup and the containers must
be removed no later than 6:00 p.m. on the evening of the pickup.
The Township provided containers must be placed away from and out
of sight of the street and may not be placed in the front yards of homes
when not scheduled for pickup.
Recycling materials shall be put at curbside no earlier than 5:00 p.m.
on the day before the pickup and recycling containers must be removed
no later than 6:00 p.m. on the evening of the scheduled pickup.
The recycling containers must be placed away from and out of sight of
the street and may not be placed in the front yards of homes when not
scheduled for pickup.
o. The Board of Health may promulgate additional rules and regulations in
order to insure the effective operation of the collection and storage of
§ BH14-5.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH14-5.2
AO:771
§ BH14-6. through §BH14-7. (RESERVED)59
§ BH14-8. EXCEPTIONS TO REGULATIONS. [1971 Code § BH14-8]
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to tree surgeons or gardeners
removing the debris resulting from operations of their trade; or to building
or plumbing contractors removing debris arising out of construction
operations; unless said debris is removed by private refuse collectors in
which event the provisions of this chapter shall apply.
§ BH14-9. (RESERVED)60
Chapter BH15
POULTRY KILLING AND DRESSING
§ BH15-1. PERMITS. [1971 Code § BH15-1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to slaughter poultry or cattle in the
Township without first having obtained from the Sanitary Inspector a permit
for such purpose. Such permit shall expire at the end of one year from the
date of issuance thereof.
garbage and trash and to insure the maintenance of proper sanitary and
health conditions throughout the Township.
p. In those instances where a household located within the Township
discovers a need for an additional Township issued refuse container for
municipal garbage collection, separate and apart from the original
Township issued refuse container issued at no cost to all households
located within the Township, the resident(s) shall notify the Public
Works Department of the need and, upon receipt of a forty-five ($45.00)
dollar refundable deposit, the Public Works Department may thereafter
issue the additional refuse container to the resident(s). Said fee shall
serve as a deposit for the use of the additional refuse container and
shall be refunded in full to the resident(s) upon the return of the
additional refuse container to the Township. In the event the additional
refuse container shall be lost or damaged, not due to the fault of the
Township, the deposit shall be retained by the Township.
It shall be the responsibility of the Department of Public Works to
maintain any and all records relating to the distribution/collection of
the additional refuse containers. Any and all refunds of the deposit shall
be issued through the Finance Department.
59.Editor's Note: Former Sections BH14-6, Disposal in Landfill and BH14-7, Suspension of
License, previously codified herein and containing portions of 1971 Code §§ BH14-6 and
BH14-7, were repealed in their entirety by Ordinance No. 2005-41.
60.Editor's Note: Former Section BH14-9, Landfill Fees, previously codified herein was
repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2005-41.
§ BH14-5.2 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH15-2
AO:772
§ BH15-2. SANITARY REGULATIONS.
Poultry killing and dressing establishments shall conform to the following
regulations.
§ BH15-2.1. Floors. [1971 Code § BH15-2.1]
Floors of all rooms shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned,
shall be smooth, shall be kept clean and in good repair, and shall be
impervious to moisture.
§ BH15-2.2. Walls and Ceilings. [1971 Code § BH15-2.2]
Walls and ceilings of all rooms shall be kept clean and in good repair.
Walls and ceilings of rooms in which food is handled, processed, stored or
prepared, or utensils are washed, shall have a smooth washable surface.
§ BH15-2.3. Doors and Windows. [1971 Code § BH15-2.3]
When flies are prevalent, all openings into the outer air shall be effectively
screened and doors shall be self-closing, unless other effective means are
provided to prevent the entrance of flies.
§ BH15-2.4. Lighting. [1971 Code § BH15-2.4]
All rooms shall be adequately lighted.
§ BH15-2.5. Ventilation. [1971 Code § BH15-.2.5]
All rooms shall be adequately ventilated; the ventilation shall not however,
cause obnoxious odors outside the buildings.
§ BH15-2.6. Toilet Facilities. [1971 Code § BH15-2.6]
Every such establishment shall be provided with adequate toilet facilities,
conveniently located and conforming with the regulations of the Board of
Health Code. Bathrooms shall be separate and apart from any room in
which food is handled, stored, processed or prepared or any room where
utensils are washed and stored.
The doors of all bathrooms shall be self-closing. Bathrooms shall be kept
in clean condition, in good repair and well lighted and ventilated.
Handwashing signs shall be posted in each bathroom used by employees.
§ BH15-2.7. Lavatory Facilities. [1971 Code § BH15-2.7]
Adequate handwashing facilities, including hot and cold running water
under pressure, soap, and individual towels shall be provided adjacent to all
bathrooms and in any other location where the nature of the work requires
frequent use of such facilities. The use of a common towel is prohibited.
No employee shall resume work after using the bathroom or handling any
§ BH15-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH15-2.7
AO:773
contaminated product without first washing his hands and arms thoroughly
with clean water and soap.
§ BH15-2.8. Water Supply. [1971 Code § BH15-2.8]
Running water under pressure shall be easily accessible to all rooms in
which food is prepared or utensils are washed and shall be adequate and
of approved sanitary quality. Running hot and cold water, under pressure,
shall be easily accessible to all rooms in which foods are prepared or stored,
and utensils are washed. Water for sterilizing tools and utensils shall be
maintained at 180 degrees F. The water supply shall be of a potable quality
and adequate in quantity. All coolers for drinking water shall be of an
approved type and shall be kept from contamination.
§ BH15-2.9. Plumbing and Disposal of Waste. [1971 Code
§ BH15-2.9]
All waste shall be disposed of daily and all inedible products and trash
shall be kept in tight, nonabsorbent and easily washable receptacles which
are covered with close fitting lids pending removal. Inedible offal resulting
from the operation of such establishment shall be handled so as to prevent
a nuisance, disagreeable odors or contamination to edible products. All
plumbing shall be so arranged, designed, installed and maintained as to
prevent contamination of the water supply, food or equipment.
§ BH15-2.10. Construction and Location of Utensils and Equipment.
[1971 Code § BH15-2.10]
All utensils and all display cases and show windows, counters, shelves,
tables, refrigerators, sinks and other equipment or utensils used in
connection with the operation of such establishment shall be so constructed
and located as to be easily cleaned, shall be free of crevices and inaccessible
places which may harbor vermin and shall be kept in good repair. Utensils
which are cadmium plated or in which cadmium or lead is part of the metal
are prohibited. Only solder of low lead content may be used for jointing.
All equipment used in such establishment shall be constructed of metal or
other impervious materials and shall be kept clean and in good repair.
§ BH15-2.11. Cleaning and Bactericidal Treatment of Equipment
and Utensils. [1971 Code § BH15-2.11]
Adequate facilities for washing and cleaning equipment shall be provided.
All equipment shall be kept clean and free from dust, dirt, insects and other
contaminating material. All utensils and equipment used in preparation,
processing, transportation or cooking of food shall be thoroughly cleaned
and subjected to an approved bactericidal process immediately following
the day's operation.
§ BH15-2.7 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH15-2.12
AO:774
§ BH15-2.12. Storage and Handling of Utensils and Equipment.
[1971 Code § BH15-2-12]
After bactericidal treatment, utensils shall be stored in a clean dry place
protected from flies, dust or other contamination, and utensils shall be
handled in such a manner as to minimize the opportunities for
contamination. Single-service packaging, containers and lining paper shall
be manufactured, packaged, stored and transported under sanitary
conditions and purchased only in sanitary containers and shall be stored
therein in a clean, dry place until used, and shall be handled in a sanitary
manner.
§ BH15-2.13. Refrigeration. [1971 Code § BH15-2.13]
All perishable foods shall be kept at or below 50 degrees F except when
being processed. Temperature and procedures which are necessary for
cooling and freezing of poultry in accordance with sound commercial
practice shall be maintained in the coolers and freezers, and ice chilling
temperatures and procedures shall also be in accordance with sound
commercial practice.
§ BH15-2.14. Wholesomeness of Food. [1971 Code § BH15-2.14]
All foods shall be clean, wholesome, free from spoilage and so prepared as
to be safe for human consumption.
§ BH15-2.15. Operation. [1971 Code § BH15-2.15]
All food shall be stored, transported, displayed and served, so as to be
protected from dust, flies, vermin, depredation and pollution by spoilage,
rodents, handling droplet infection, overhead leakage and other
contamination. No animals or fowl shall be kept or allowed in any room
where utensils are washed or in which food is prepared, stored or served.
All means necessary for the elimination of flies, roaches and rodents shall
be used.
§ BH15-2.16. Cleanliness of Employees. [1971 Code § BH15-2.16]
All employees shall wear clean outer garments and shall keep their hands
and fingernails clean at all times while engaged in handling food, utensils
or equipment. Employees shall not expectorate or use tobacco where food
is prepared, handled or stored.
§ BH15-2.17. Health of Food Handlers. [1971 Code § BH15-2.17]
No person who is affected with any disease in a communicable or
contagious form or is a carrier of any disease shall work in any food
establishment and no food establishment shall employ any such person or
any person suspected of being affected with any disease in a communicable
or contagious form or of being a carrier of any disease. If the operator
§ BH15-2.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH15-2.17
AO:775
suspects that any employee has contracted any disease he shall immediately
notify the Sanitary Inspector.
§ BH15-2.18. Buildings and Premises Generally. [1971 Code
§ BH15-2.18]
A building housing a food processing establishment shall be so constructed
as to provide ample space and area for the operation of such establishments
and so designed as to protect food during processing. The surroundings of
such establishments shall be kept clean and free of rubbish.
Chapter BH16
NOISE REGULATIONS
§ BH16-1. PURPOSE. [1971 Code § BH16-1]
Excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise within the Township of
Lakewood is a condition which is detrimental to public health, comfort,
convenience, safety, and welfare of the residents of the Township of
Lakewood.
The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions
hereinafter contained and enacted, is declared as a matter of legislative
determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the
provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in
pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public
health, comfort, convenience, safety, and welfare and the peace and quiet of
the Township of Lakewood and its inhabitants.
§ BH16-2. DEFINITIONS. [1971 Code § BH16-2]
AMBIENT NOISE — Shall mean the underlying noise base at a given point
or area in the community upon which is superimposed noise from more
or less identifiable sources which can vary in intensity or duration during
different portions of the day.
APPROVED MEASURING EQUIPMENT PURSUANT TO THIS CHAPTER —
Shall mean such sound measuring devices as shall meet or exceed the
requirements set forth in a publication of the American National Standard
Institute, sometimes known as its abbreviated title, A.N.S.I., New York, New
York, entitled "Specifications for General Purposes for Sound Level Meters."
NOISE — Shall mean sound radiating into air of sufficient duration and
intensity or pressure as to be within the dynamic measuring capability of
sound measuring instruments.
PERSON — Shall include the singular and the plural and shall also mean
and include any person, firm, corporation, association, club, partnership,
society or any other form of association or organization.
§ BH15-2.17 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH16-2
AO:776
SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT — Shall mean any machine or device
for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. "Sound
amplifying equipment" as used herein shall not be construed as including
standard automobile radios when used and heard only by occupants of the
vehicle in which installed or warning devices on other vehicles used only for
traffic safety purposes.
SOUND LEVEL METER — Shall mean an instrument for the measurement
of sound or its equivalent meeting the requirements of American National
Standards, S1.4-1961.
SOUND MEASUREMENT — Shall mean the measurement of sound at a
given point, except when weather conditions may be such as to create a bias
in the data. Example of such conditions are wind in excess of 20 miles per
hour regardless of the windscreen used, rain, sleet, snow, hail, thunder, or
ambient noise of such volume and duration that make the identification of
the noise to be measured impossible or unreliable.
SOUND TRUCK — Shall mean any motor vehicle, or horse-drawn vehicle,
having mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound amplifying
equipment.
WEIGHTING NET WORKS — Shall mean for the purpose of making sound
level measurements in accordance with the standard provided in this
chapter, the weighting net works on the sound level meter shall be set to the
"A" weighting position. However, in addition to the "A" weighting readings,
"B" and "C" weighted readings may be submitted where eventually useful
and proper.
WINDSCREEN — Shall mean any windscreen to reduce or eliminate effect
on the measuring instrument of wind noise which shall be used with the
sound level meter for all measurements.
§ BH16-3. CREATION OF LOUD OR UNNECESSARY NOISES
PROHIBITED. [1971 Code § BH16-3]
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made
any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noise which
either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others, within the limits of the Township.
In any zone of the Township, noise shall be measured from the point of
annoyance to the source where a noise originates. The sound level radiated
over a measurable period of time shall not exceed 60 decibels between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. or 55 decibels between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m., as measured on the "A" weighted scale by a sound level
meter in decibels RE:0.0002 microbar.
If the "A" scale is exceeded, an octave band analysis may be made at the
discretion of the enforcing officer making the investigation. If the noise is a
pure tone an octave band analyzer must be used.
§ BH16-2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH16-3
AO:777
When an octave band analyzer is used, the following sound pressure level
in decibels RE:0.002 microbar shall not be exceeded:
Frequency Band Sound Pressure Level
Cycles per second* 11:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. 7:00 a.m.-11:00 p.m.
20-75 74 79
75-150 69 74
150-300 59 64
300-600 52 57
600-1200 46 51
1200-2400 40 45
2400-2800 34 39
4800-9600 32 37
*Hertz is the international unit for cycles per second.
§ BH16-4. TEST FOR UNLAWFUL NOISE. [1971 Code § BH16-4]
The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation
of this chapter exists shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
a. The volume of the noise.
b. The intensity of the noise.
c. Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual.
d. Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural.
e. The volume and intensity of the background noises, if any.
f. The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities.
g. The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates.
h. The density of inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates.
i. The time of the day or night the noise occurs.
j. The duration of the noise.
k. Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant.
l. Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial
activity.
§ BH16-3 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH16-4
AO:778
§ BH16-5. ADDITIONAL NOISE PROHIBITIONS.
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, and
unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter. Said enumeration shall not
be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
§ BH16-5.1. Horns; Signaling Devices. [1971 Code § BH16:5.1]
The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, truck or other vehicle on any street or public place, except
as a warning pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S. 39:3-69.
§ BH16-5.2. Radios, Stereos, Compact Disc Players, Phonographs,
etc. [1971 Code § BH16-5.2]
The use or operation of any radio, television, receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, compact disc player, or other machine or device
for the production of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet
and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants shall be unlawful. The operation
of any such device as described above between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet
from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima
facie evidence of a violation of this subsection.
§ BH16-5.3. Sound Reproducing Devices. [1971 Code § BH16-5.3]
The use of any receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker,
sound amplifier, or other machine or device for the production of sound
which is cast upon the public streets for the purposes of commercial
advertising and/or political purposes.
§ BH16-5.4. Animals; Birds. [1971 Code § BH16-5.4]
The keeping of any animal or bird which causes frequent or long continued
noise and shall disturb the comfort or repose of persons residing in the
vicinity.
Sound measurement for determining violations of this chapter shall be
measured from the point of annoyance on the property of complainant or
along any point of complainant's building line nearest to the source of noise
complained of or at any point along the property line of the source or on any
public walkway or highway or other public place within the Township whereat
the noise is apparent.
In the event the source of noise is less than 10 feet distant from the point
of annoyance, the lower or nighttime decibel volume shall be used during the
daytime hours in the center of the room wherein the complaint originates, if
indoors, with one window open.
The sound measurements shall be determined by the average of not less than
three readings taken at intervals of not less than two minutes apart.
§ BH16-4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH16-5.5
AO:779
§ BH16-5.5. Exhausts. [1971 Code § BH16-5.5]
The discharge of the exhaust of internal combustion engines or motor
vehicles except through a muffler or other device designed to prevent loud
or explosive noises therefrom.
§ BH16-5.6. Loading and Unloading. [1971 Code § BH16-5.6]
The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or
unloading of any article or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates
and containers.
§ BH16-5.7. Construction or Repairing Buildings. [1971 Code
§ BH16-5.7]
The construction, demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Where the public health
and safety requires such noise level, and then only with a permit from the
Building Inspector, not to exceed three days while the emergency continues,
such construction shall be allowed. The permit may be renewed for a period
of three days or less while the emergency continues.
§ BH16-5.8. Blowers; Fans; Pumps. [1971 Code § BH16-5.8]
The use of any blower, fan or pump or engine or motor in connection
therewith including, by an example and not by way of limitation, air
conditioning systems, compression devices and pool filter systems, if such
systems create loud, penetrating or continuous noises that disturb the
comfort or repose of persons residing in the vicinity.
§ BH16-5.9. Yelling, Shouting. [1971 Code § BH16-5.9]
Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing particularly between the
hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any other time so as to annoy
or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any
dwelling or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity.
§ BH16-5.10. Schools; Courts; Churches; Hospitals. [1971 Code
§ BH16-5.10]
The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school,
institution of learning, church or court while the same are in use, or
adjacent to any hospital which unreasonably interferes with the workings of
such institution, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets
indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court zone.
§ BH16-5.11. Hawkers; Peddlers. [1971 Code § BH16-5.11]
The shouting of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace
and quiet of the neighborhood.
§ BH16-5.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH16-5.12
AO:780
§ BH16-5.12. Defect in Vehicle or Load. [1971 Code § BH16-5.12]
The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded
or in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding or
rattling or other excessive noise.
§ BH16-6. EXCEPTIONS. [1971 Code § BH16-6]
It being recognized that certain customarily excepted noises and noises of
an emergency nature are necessary, the following shall not be covered by
this chapter:
The ringing of church bells in connection with religious observances.
The operation of motor vehicles except as otherwise set forth herein.
Necessary construction or demolition noises during daytime hours between
7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
Noises made by necessary emergency repairs.
Sirens, horns or whistles of emergency vehicles or police or fire officials in
the performance of their duties.
Outdoor celebrations, social events, parades, dances, concerts or athletic
events authorized by the Township Committee or Board of Education or
conducted in connection with the recreational program of the Township
or Board of Education. Any civic association, club or organized group of
citizens may apply to the Township Committee or Board of Education for a
special permit to conduct outdoor dances, sport or social activities wherein
noise may exceed the time limits or sound limitations herein except that in
no event shall 60 decibels be exceeded nor shall such event be conducted in
violation of the terms expressly set forth in such permit.
Landing and takeoff of aircraft from a licensed runway or airport. However,
such landing and takeoff shall not include cruising or hovering over an area
for such duration of time or on such number of occasions during any 24 hour
period as to permit measurement showing excessive noise level outside the
bounds of the airport property as to be in violation of this chapter when
measured on three occasions in any 12 hour period from any one measuring
point.
Cruising or hovering aircraft such as are presently engaged in pilot training
or parachute center sport jumping, testing, or other parachuting or sky
diving activities in and about the vicinity of Lakewood Airport or elsewhere
within the airspace over the Township shall in no event other than landing
and takeoff exceed 70 decibels when measured on the "A" Weighted Scale
by a sound level meter in decibels. This 70 decibels exception shall apply,
however, only to aircraft engaged in activities herein described and shall be
in addition to the landing and takeoff exception herein.
§ BH16-5.12 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH16-7
AO:781
§ BH16-7. ENFORCEMENT. [1971 Code § BH16-7]
This chapter shall be enforceable by all law enforcement personnel
employed by the State of New Jersey, County of Ocean and/or the Township
of Lakewood including, but not limited to Police Officers, Special Officers,
Code Enforcement Officers, Health Inspectors and the like.
§ BH16-8. ADDITIONAL REMEDY, INJUNCTIVE RELIEF. [1971 Code
§ BH16-8]
The operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or
machinery in violation of any provision hereof and which causes annoyance
or which endangers the comfort, repose, health or peace of residents in the
area shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be
subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued
by a court of competent jurisdiction.
Chapter BH17
COMMUNICABLE DISEASE CONTROL: NURSING HOMES,
HOMES FOR SHELTERED CARE
§ BH17-1. EMPLOYEES.
§ BH17-1.1. Communicable Disease Control. [1971 Code § BH17-1]
No person who is affected with any disease in a communicable form or is a
carrier of such disease shall work in any nursing home. No nursing home
shall employ any such person or any person suspected of being affected with
any disease in a communicable form or of being a carrier of such disease. If
the administrator reasonably believes that any employee has contracted any
disease in a communicable form or has become a carrier of such a disease,
he shall exclude the employee from the nursing home and notify the local
Health Officer immediately.
§ BH17-1.2. Employee's Personnel Record. [1971 Code § BH17-1]
A separate personnel record shall be kept current on each employee and
maintained for one year after discharge. It shall include the following
essential information and be available for use by the Health Officer.
a. The Health Officer who has reason to believe that a person is ill or
infected with a communicable disease may order such person to submit
to a medical examination and, if necessary, furnish specimens for
examination in a laboratory approved by the State Department of
Health.
b. Persons who at any time have had typhoid or paratyphoid fever shall not
be employed in a nursing home until it has been definitely determined
by appropriate tests that such persons are not typhoid or paratyphoid
carriers.
§ BH16-7 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH17-1.2
AO:782
§ BH17-2. PATIENTS.
§ BH17-2.1. Communicable Disease Control. [1971 Code
§ BH17-2.1]
No person who is affected with any disease in a communicable form or is
a carrier of such disease shall be a patient in any nursing home, and no
nursing home shall have as a patient any such persons or persons suspected
of being affected with any disease in a communicable form or of being a
carrier of such disease. If the administrator suspects that any patient has
contracted any disease in a communicable form or has become a carrier of
such disease he shall notify the Health Officer immediately.
§ BH17-2.2. Physical Examination of Patient. [1971 Code
§ BH17-2.2]
Every patient shall have a physical examination by a licensed physician,
including a chest x-ray, within 60 days prior to being admitted. The
physician shall complete the history and physical examination record and
certify in writing that the patient has been examined and is free of
communicable disease. It shall be the duty of the administrator to maintain
this information in the patient's record and make this information available
upon request of the Health Officer.
§ BH17-3. VIOLATIONS; PENALTY. [1971 Code § BH17-3; New]
Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable by a
penalty as stated in Chapter BH1.
a. Name and address of employee.
b. Social security number.
c. Date of birth.
d. Date of employment.
e. Name and address of nearest kin.
f. Job description.
g. Hours of work.
h. Date of last physical examination and name of doctor.
i. Date of discharge or resignation.
j. Reason for discharge or resignation.
k. Date of last tuberculin test and result.
l. Date of last chest x-ray and reading.
§ BH17-1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH17-3
AO:783
Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall be deemed a separate
and distinct offense.
Chapter BH18
MOBILE FOOD RETAIL SALES AND SERVICE UNITS
§ BH18-1. REGULATIONS, INSPECTIONS, PERMITS.
Mobile food units shall comply with the following specifications.
§ BH18-1.1. Potable Water Supply Tank. [1971 Code § BH18-1.1]
A potable water supply tank, minimum capacity of 30 gallons heated
electrically or otherwise, and tilted toward a capped drain cock, shall be
provided. The water inlet pipe shall be of removable flexible copper or other
tubing approved by the Township Board of Health, with nozzle for hose
connection capped when not being used. A hose for connection to potable
water supply shall be provided and shall be equipped with an approved
vacuum breaker and check valve.
§ BH18-1.2. Sinks. [1971 Code § BH18-1.2]
The following sinks shall be provided:
§ BH18-1.3. Waste Tank. [1971 Code § BH18-1.3]
A suitable waste tank with an adequate method of gauging the contents and
having a capacity at least equal to the capacity of the water supply tank,
shall be provided and shall be tilted toward a drain cock. It shall be emptied
and flushed into a sanitary sewer or septic system as often as necessary in
a sanitary manner in order to maintain sanitary conditions.
§ BH18-1.4. Refrigerated Box. [1971 Code § BH18-1.4]
A mechanical refrigerated box that shall maintain a temperature of 45
degrees Fahrenheit or below and equipped with indicating thermometer
shall be provided for various ingredients carried, with metal racks or
platforms provided to store ingredients.
a. A seamless three compartment sink, supplied with running hot and cold
water, which shall have a swivel faucet. It shall be large enough to
accommodate the largest piece of equipment to be cleaned therein.
b. A hand-wash sink, seamless, with running hot and cold water, soap and
single service individual towels or mechanical hand dryer.
§ BH17-3 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH18-1.5
AO:784
§ BH18-1.5. Floors. [1971 Code § BH18-1.5]
Floors shall be of metal or similar approved material and properly sloped to
provide proper drainage. Junctures of floor, wall and adjoining fixtures shall
be watertight and covered.
§ BH18-1.6. Refuse Container. [1971 Code § BH18-1.6]
A refuse container with cover must be available for deposit of papers and
other solid wastes by customers and operators and must be so constructed
and designed and placed so that it can be readily used, cleaned and kept
clean and located where it will not create a nuisance.
§ BH18-1.7. Lights. [1971 Code § BH18-1.7]
Mobile units operating after dark shall be well lighted with at least 30 footcandles
of light intensity on all working surfaces.
§ BH18-1.8. Posted Notices. [1971 Codes § BH18-1.8]
Notice shall be posted in the service area of the mobile unit with
instructions as to proper handling of food materials and containers, proper
cleansing of equipment, utensils and appurtenances and proper waste
disposal.
§ BH18-1.9. Uniforms. [1971 Code § BH18-1.9]
Persons handling food shall be clothed in clean, washable uniforms.
§ BH18-1.10. Serving Windows. [1971 Code § BH18-1.10]
Serving windows shall be glassed or screened and shall be kept closed at all
times except when being used to serve customers.
§ BH18-1.11. Hose. [1971 Code § BH18-1.11]
A hose and hose connection equipped with a vacuum breaker shall be
provided for supplying water to the mobile unit as well as a method of
handling the hose for draining to prevent contamination.
§ BH18-1.12. Waste Removal. [1971 Code § BH18-1.12]
Suitable covered storage facilities or containers shall be provided for all
refuse and waste which must be removed daily.
§ BH18-1.13. Construction Material. [1971 Code § BH18-1.13]
Every mobile unit shall be constructed of such acceptable material as
to enable it to be readily cleaned and equipment shall be installed in
such a manner that the unit can be kept clean and food will not become
contaminated. The unit or equipment shall be provided with a tight fitting
cover where required.
§ BH18-1.5 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH18-1.14
AO:785
§ BH18-1.14. Water Temperature. [1971 Code § BH8-1.14]
The water supply shall be adequate, of a safe sanitary quality and derived
from an approved source. Cold water and hot water (of a temperature not
less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit under pressure) shall be provided in all
processing and washing areas.
§ BH18-1.15. Cleaning. [1971 Code § BH18-1.15]
All residues shall be removed from equipment after use each day and
product contact surfaces shall be sanitized just prior to use each day.
Interior surfaces contacted by foods shall be completely disassembled daily
for cleaning; however, installations and methods used for cleaning
equipment without disassembling same, may be utilized by approval of the
Township Board of Health.
§ BH18-1.16. Storage. [1971 Code § BH18-1.16]
After cleaning and sanitizing, all product contact surfaces of equipment
and all utensils shall be so stored and handled as to be protected from
contamination.
§ BH18-1.17. Requirements Waived for Mobile Units. [1971 Code
§ BH18-1.17]
The requirements of subsections BH18-1.1, BH18-1.3, BH18-1.5, BH18-1.11
and BH18-1.14 may be waived in whole or part by the Board of Health in
such instances where mobile units operating in the Township have a fixed
base within the Township from which they operate and from which the food
is prepared for distribution. The mobile unit operating from the fixed base
must meet all requirements of local, county and state sanitary regulations
other than those of this section that may be modified upon application to
the Board of Health for good cause shown.
§ BH18-1.18. Separate from Household Facilities. [1971 Code
§ BH18-1.18]
The fixed base or home base of the facility shall be separate and apart from
normal household facilities if it is permitted that the home base be in a
residence.
§ BH18-1.19. Size. [1971 Code § BH18-1.19]
Mobile units permitted under this home base provision shall be of such
size as not to allow room for the installation of the items required in
subsections BH18-1.1, BH18-1.3, BH18-1.5, BH18-1.11 and BH18-1.14 or
shall distribute such food products that the provisions of these subsections
would be inapplicable due to the nature of the food product distributed.
§ BH18-1.14 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH18-1.20
AO:786
§ BH18-1.20. Special Permit. [1971 Code § BH18-1.20]
Prior to the operation of the mobile unit, the operator shall apply to the
Board of Health in order to obtain a special permit to operate under the
provisions of this section and in order to submit to an inspection of the
home base facilities. The inspection may be made prior to the issuance of
the permit and at any time after the permit is issued while the permit is in
effect.
§ BH18-2. VIOLATIONS; PENALTY. [1971 Code § BH18-2; New]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter BH1, Section BH1-2.
Chapter BH19
SWIMMING POOL CODE
§ BH19-1. ESTABLISHMENT OF CODE. [1971 Code § BH19-1]
There is hereby adopted, pursuant to N.J.S. 26:3-69.1 et seq., that certain
Public Health and Sanitary Code of New Jersey, known as Swimming Pool
Code of New Jersey, 1970 revision.
A copy of the code is annexed hereto and made a part hereof without
inclusion of text thereof herein.
§ BH19-2. PUBLIC RECORD. [1971 Code § BH19-2]
Three copies of the Swimming Pool Code of New Jersey, 1970 have been
placed on file in the office of the Secretary of the Board of Health of the
Township of Lakewood and will remain on file in the office for the use and
examination of the public.
§ BH19-3. PERMITS.
§ BH19-3.1. Permit Required. [1971 Code § BH19-3.1]
No person shall locate, construct, alter or operate a public swimming
pool until permits therefor shall have been issued by the Board of Health
pursuant to provisions of this chapter.
Permits issued for the operation of a swimming pool pursuant to this
chapter shall expire annually on June 30 of each year and application for
renewal thereof shall be submitted together with the required fee prior to
June 15 of each year.
Permits required by this chapter may be denied or suspended by the Board
of Health for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any
other Code provisions. The Board of Health shall afford the person whose
§ BH18-1.20 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH19-3.1
AO:787
permit to locate and construct, alter or operate has been denied or
suspended an opportunity to be heard in public hearing, and following the
hearing, to be informed of the Board's decision as otherwise provided in the
Swimming Pool Code.
§ BH19-3.2. Fees and Charges. [1971 Code § BH19-3.2]
The following fees and charges shall be established:
§ BH19-4. VIOLATIONS; PENALTY. [1971 Code § BH19-4; New]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter or the Swimming Pool Code adopted hereby shall, upon conviction
thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter BH1, Section BH1-2.
Chapter BH20
PACKING AND LABELING OF MEAT, FOWL OR FISH
OFFERED FOR RETAIL SALE
§ BH20-1. DEFINITIONS. [1971 Code § BH20-1]
FOOD DEALER — Shall mean and include every person, agent, servant or
employee, engaged in the business of selling food described herein at retail
for human consumption, either on or off the premises where sold.
PREPACKAGED — Shall mean packaged prior to and on the premises where
the contents are sold or are offered for sale at retail; but it shall not
include packaged meat or poultry that is cut to order for a particular retail
customer.
§ BH20-2. PACKAGE REQUIREMENTS. [1971 Code § BH20-2]
No food dealer in the Township shall sell or offer for sale, at retail, any
sealed, prepackaged, unprocessed or untreated fresh or frozen cut meat,
fowl, or fish unless the package is colorless and transparent on all sides,
exclusive of labeling which shall not exceed five square inches of one side
of the package, or in which fresh or frozen cut meat, fowl or fish is layered
or shingled, making the entire contents of the package not wholly visible;
except that the bottom of such package may contain or consist of a grid
of opaque supporting or absorbent material, provided that the openings in
such grid permit at least 70% of the bottom of the contents of such package
to be visible. This section shall not apply to meat commonly designated or
known as chopped meat, ground meat, or cold cuts.
a. For issuance of a permit to locate and construct a public swimming
pool, $50.
b. For the issuance of a permit to alter a public swimming pool, $25.
c. For the issuance of renewal of a permit to operate a public swimming
pool, $10.
§ BH19-3.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH20-3
AO:788
§ BH20-3. PROHIBITIONS. [1971 Code § BH20-3]
No food dealer shall sell, or offer for sale at retail any package in which
meat, fowl or fish is layered or shingled, thereby obscuring part of its
contents, except where the package is colorless and transparent on all sides
so that at least 50% of the entire contents of the package shall be visible.
The package material shall not be so layered, overlapped or sealed so as to
obliterate the clarity of the transparency of such package.
§ BH20-4. PACKAGES TO BE DATED. [1971 Code § BH20-4]
The package of fresh or frozen cut meat, fowl, or fish shall be stamped, or
shall have printed prominently on the face of the label, the date when the
package should be removed from sale by removal from the shelf or display
case.
§ BH20-5. ENFORCEMENT. [1971 Code § BH20-5]
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Department of
Inspections. However, any officer or person may sign a complaint or be a
complaining witness on a summons or order to show cause regarding any
alleged violation thereof.
Chapter BH21
WELL HEAD PROTECTION
§ BH21-1. WELL HEAD PROTECTION.
§ BH21-1.1. Statement of Findings. [Ord. No. 2017-26]
The Governing Body of Lakewood Township finds that:
a. The ground water underlying this municipality is a major source of
existing and future water supplies, including drinking water. The
ground water underlying this municipality, the Kirkwood-Cohansey
geological formation, is identified by the NJDEP Water Supply
Administration as a deficit/critical water supply planning area
(Planning Area 15 and 16).
b. The ground water aquifers are integrally connected with, are recharged
by, and flow into the surface waters, lakes and streams, which also
constitute a major source of water for drinking, commercial and
industrial needs.
c. Accidental spills and discharges of toxic and hazardous materials may
threaten the quality of these ground water supplies and related water
sources.
§ BH20-3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH21-1.1
AO:789
§ BH21-1.2. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2017-26]
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, safety and
welfare through the regulation of the land use and the storage, handling,
use and/or production of hazardous substances and hazardous wastes
within areas of land surrounding each public community and non-transient
non-community well, known as Well Head Protection Areas (WHPAs). This
chapter provides for the protection of the groundwater resources
underlying the municipality to ensure a supply of safe and healthful drinking
water for the present and future generations of local residents, employees
and the general public in this municipality, as well as users of these water
supplies outside this municipality. WHPAs are the delineated areas where
contaminants move through the ground and can be withdrawn in water
taken from wells. The purpose of the restrictions contained in this chapter
is to prevent the migration of potential pollutants from areas within a WHPA
into groundwater that is withdrawn from a public community and nontransient
non-community wells.
§ BH21-1.3. Statutory Authority. [Ord. No. 2017-26]
The municipality of Lakewood Township is empowered to regulate these
activities under the provisions of the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A 40:55D-1 et seq., which authorizes each municipality to plan and
regulate land use to secure a safe and adequate drinking water supply for
its residents. Under provisions of the Underground Storage of Hazardous
Substances Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1D et seq., Lakewood Township may adopt,
with State approval, a municipal ordinance that is more stringent than
N.J.A.C. 7:14B but is obligated to ensure the provisions of the ordinance are
not carried out in a manner that is inconsistent with N.J.A.C. 7:14B. The
Board of Health of this municipality has autonomous power granted by the
State Legislature to develop this ordinance to protect public health, safety
and welfare, as set forth in the New Jersey Local Boards of Health Law,
d. Contaminated water from any source is a detriment to the health,
welfare and comfort of the residents of this municipality, and other
users of these water resources.
e. Ground water is vulnerable to contamination from certain uses of or
activities on land, and once contaminated, ground water, in general, is
difficult and expensive to clean. If ground water becomes very
contaminated, it may be necessary to locate alternative sources of
drinking water.
f. In the interest of safeguarding drinking water sources, protecting the
health of the public and protecting the economic interest of the
community in its drinking water supply, it is prudent to prevent
contamination of ground water by regulating or prohibiting certain land
uses or activities and restricting the proximity of certain materials to
sources of water supplies, such as public wells.
§ BH21-1.1 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH21-1.3
AO:790
N.J.S.A. 26:3-1 et seq., and the New Jersey County Environmental Health
Act, N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-21 et seq.
§ BH21-1.4. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2017-26]
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment and the Board of Health, acting jointly and in consultation, with
all of the powers delegated, assigned, or assumed by them according to
statute and ordinance.
APPLICANT — Person applying to the Board of Health, Planning Board,
Board of Adjustment or the Construction Office and proposing to engage in
an activity that is regulated by the provisions of this chapter, that would be
located within a regulated well head protection area.
AQUIFER — A formation, group of formations, or part of a formation that
contains sufficient saturated permeable rock, sand, or gravel which is
capable of storing and transmitting usable quantities of water to wells and
springs.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — Performance or design
standards established to minimize the risk of contaminating ground water
or surface waters while managing the use, manufacture, handling or
storage of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes.
CONTAMINATION — The presence of any harmful or deleterious
substances in the water supply.
DEVELOPMENT — The carrying out of any construction, reconstruction,
alteration of surface or structure or change of land use or intensity of use.
DISCHARGE — Any intentional or unintentional action or omission, unless
pursuant to and in compliance with the conditions of a valid and effective
Federal or State Permit, resulting in the releasing, spilling, pumping,
pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping of a hazardous substance into the
waters or lands of the State or into waters outside the jurisdiction of the
State when damage may result to the lands, waters or natural resources
within the jurisdiction of the State.
GROUND WATER — Water contained in interconnected pores of a saturated
zone in the ground, also known as well water. A saturated zone is a volume
of ground in which the voids in the rock or soil are filled with water at a
pressure greater than atmospheric.
HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE — Any substance designated under 40 CFR
116 pursuant to Section 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972 [Clean Water Act] (Public Law 92-500; 33 U.S.C. 1251
et seq.), the Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.ll et
seq., or "hazardous pollutant" as defined by the New Jersey Water Pollution
Control Act (N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.). Substances listed include petroleum,
petroleum products, pesticides, solvents, sewage and sewage sludge and
other substances.
§ BH21-1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH21-1.4
AO:791
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any solid waste that is defined or identified as
a hazardous waste pursuant to the Solid Waste Management Act, N.J.S.A.
13:1E et seq., N.J.A.C. 7:26-8, or 40 CFR Part 261.
MAXIMUM CONTAMINANT LEVEL (MCL) — Maximum permissible level of
a contaminant in water measured at the point of entry to the distribution
system or at the free-flowing outlet of ultimate user of a public water system
or other water system to which state primary drinking water regulations
apply. Any contaminant added to the water under circumstances controlled
by the user, except a contaminant resulting from corrosion of piping and
plumbing caused by water quality, is excluded from this definition. (New
Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act N.J.A.C. 7:10)
NJDEP — New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
PERSON — Any individual, public or private corporation, company,
partnership, firm, association, owner or operator, political subdivision of
this State, and any State, Federal or interstate agency or an agent or
employee thereof.
POLLUTED WATER — Drinking water exceeding a Federal and/or State
maximum contaminant level (MCL).
POTENTIAL POLLUTANT SOURCE (PPS) — An activity or land use which
may contribute to contamination to a source of drinking water. For the
purposes of this chapter Potential Pollutant Sources are defined in
subsection BH21-1.7.
PUBLIC COMMUNITY WELL — A public water supply well which serves
at least 15 service connections used by year-round residents or regularly
serves at least 25 year-round residents, or as defined pursuant to the NJ
Safe Drinking Water Act Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:10.
PUBLIC NON-COMMUNITY WATER SYSTEM — A public water system that
is not a public community water system and is either a "public non-transient
non-community water system" or a "public transient non-community water
system" as defined in this section, or as defined pursuant to the NJ Safe
Drinking Water Act Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:10.
PUBLIC NON-TRANSIENT NON-COMMUNITY WELL — A non-community
public water supply well that is not a public community well and that
regularly serves at least 25 of the same persons for more than six months
in any given calendar year, or as defined pursuant to the NJ Safe Drinking
Water Act Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:10.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — A system for the provision to the public of water
for human consumption through pipes or other constructed conveyances,
if such system has at least 15 service connections or regularly serves an
average of at least 25 individuals daily for at least 60 days out of the
year. Such term includes any collection, treatment, storage and distribution
facilities under control of the operator of such system and used primarily
in connection with such system, and any collection or pretreatment storage
facilities not under such control which are used primarily in connection
with such system. A public water system is either a "public community
§ BH21-1.4 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH21-1.4
AO:792
water system" or a "public non-community water system" as defined in this
section, or as defined pursuant to the NJ Safe Drinking Water Act Rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:10.
SOLE SOURCE AQUIFER — Any drinking water aquifer upon which more
than 50% of a population group depends and for which there is no
practicable or affordable alternate water supply, as certified by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency.
TIER 1 WELL HEAD PROTECTION AREA — The area, described in plan
view around a well, from which ground water is reasonably likely to flow
to the well within two years. It extends from the well to the boundary
established to represent the two-year time of travel. (See maps referenced
under subsection BH21-1.5.)
TIER 2 WELL HEAD PROTECTION AREA — The area, described in plan
view around a well, from which groundwater is reasonably likely to flow to
the well within five years. It extends from the perimeter of Tier 1 to the
boundary representing the five-year time of travel. (See maps referenced
under subsection BH21-1.5.)
TIER 3 WELL HEAD PROTECTION AREA — The area, described in plan
view around a well, from which groundwater is reasonably likely to flow to
the well within 12 years. It extends from the perimeter of Tier 2 to the outer
boundary representing the twelve-year time of travel. (See maps referenced
under Section BH21-1.5.)
TIME OF TRAVEL (TOT) — The average time that a volume of water will
take to travel in the saturated zone from a given point to a pumping
WELL HEAD — The well borehole and appurtenant equipment.
WELL HEAD PROTECTION AREA (WHPA) — An area described in plan view
around a well, from which ground water is reasonably likely to flow to the
well and through which ground water pollution, if it occurs, is reasonably
likely to pose a significant threat to the water quality of a well.
§ BH21-1.5. Establishment of Well Head Protection Areas and
Maps. [Ord. No. 2017-26]
a. Well Head Protection Area Maps:
1. The delineations of Well Head Protection Areas for public
community wells and public non-transient non-community wells,
which were published by the New Jersey Geological and Water
Survey of the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection,
as amended and supplemented, are incorporated herein and made
a part of this chapter. The Department of Environmental Protection
will periodically update the WHPA maps and these maps, published
by the New Jersey Geological and Water Survey, will be available at
the web-site: www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/geodata. The most recent
WHPA maps available through the New Jersey Geological and
Water Survey should replace the maps adopted by reference in this
chapter. A map of the Well Head Protection Areas located within
§ BH21-1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH21-1.5
AO:793
§ BH21-1.6. Regulation of Well Head Protection Areas for Public
Wells. [Ord. No. 2017-26]
Lakewood Township is included as part of this chapter, is appended
as Figure 1, and is adopted as of the effective date of this chapter.
Maps of the municipality on which these delineations have been
overlain shall be on file and maintained by the offices of the Clerk
of Lakewood Township, and of the Construction Office of Lakewood
Township.
2. Well Head Protection Areas, as shown on the maps described in
subsection BH21-1.5a1, or as periodically updated and delineated
by the Department of Environmental Protection and published by
the New Jersey Geological Survey shall be considered to be
superimposed over any other established zoning district. Land in a
Well Head Protection Area may be used for any purpose permitted
in the underlying district, subject to the additional restrictions
presented herein.
b. Assignment of Restrictions within Well Head Protection Areas:
Properties located wholly or partially within a Well Head Protection
Area shall be governed by the restrictions applicable to the most
restrictive Well Head Protection Area Tier, if partially within one or
more Tiers.
c. Inclusion of Well Head Protection Area Zoning into Master Plan: The
municipal Master Plan provides the legal basis for zoning and land use
regulation at the local level. The technical foundation for local well
head protection in this municipality shall be incorporated into the
Master Plan. A technical report on the need for well head protection in
Lakewood Township shall be adopted as part of the Master Plan
[N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28b(11)]. The technical report shall include the
following information:
1. A statement setting forth the rationale and need to protect the
public water supply through a program of well head protection for
public community wells and public non-transient non-community
wells.
2. Reference to the method used to delineate the Well Head
Protection Areas according to the "tiered" level of protection for
public community wells and public non-transient non-community
wells based upon the time of travel of ground water, as developed
by the New Jersey Geological and Water Survey.
a. The Administrative Authority for administering the provisions of this
chapter shall be the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment and the
Board of Health of Lakewood Township acting jointly and in
consultation.
§ BH21-1.5 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH21-1.6
AO:794
§ BH21-1.7. Potential Pollutant Sources Listed. [Ord. No. 2017-26]
The following are Major and Minor Potential Pollutant Sources subject to
the requirements of this chapter. These listings are consistent with the New
Jersey Safe Drinking Water Act regulations [N.J.A.C. 7:10-11.4(a)4]. The
Administrative Authority of Lakewood Township may determine whether
b. Any applicant for a permit requesting a change in land use or activity,
which is subject to review under the provisions of the Municipal Land
Use Law and other pertinent regulations of Lakewood Township, and
which is located wholly or partially within a delineated WHPA, as
defined in subsection BH21-1.5, that involves a Potential Pollutant
Source, as defined in subsection BH21-1.7, shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
c. Any applicant for a permit requesting a change in land use or activity,
which is subject to the requirements of this chapter, shall file an
Operations and Contingency Plan, as required by subsection BH21-1.9,
with the Administrative Authority. No permit that allows a change in
land use or activity, which is subject to the requirements of this chapter,
shall be granted unless an Operations and Contingency Plan for the
proposed change has been approved by the Administrative Authority.
Any plan approved by the Administrative Authority shall be kept on file
in the office of the Clerk of Lakewood Township, and shall be available
to the public for inspection.
d. Any change in land use or activity that introduces a Major or Minor
Potential Pollutant Source, as defined in subsection BH21-1.7, shall be
prohibited within a Tier 1 WHPA.
e. Any change in land use or activity that introduces a Major PPS, as
defined in subsection BH21-1.7, shall be prohibited within a Tier 2
WHPA.
f. Unless otherwise prohibited pursuant to subsection BH21-1.6d or e
above, any change in land use or activity that involves any Major or
Minor PPS, as defined in Section BH21-1.7, within any WHPA, shall
comply with the Best Management Practice Standards, as defined in
subsection BH21-1.8.
g. This chapter is supplementary to other laws and ordinance in this
municipality. Where this chapter or any portion thereof imposes a
greater restriction than is imposed by other regulations, the provisions
of this chapter shall supersede. These Rules and Regulations shall in no
way affect the limitations or requirements applicable in the underlying
municipal land use and zoning districts.
h. The use limitations noted herein shall be considered as limitations
stipulated in the permitted list of uses in each zone. The activities
regulated herein shall be considered limitations accessory to permitted
uses in each zone.
§ BH21-1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH21-1.7
AO:795
a proposed change in land use or activity is a Major or Minor Potential
Pollutant Source.
§ BH21-1.8. Best Management Practice Performance Standards.
[Ord. No. 2017-26]
a. Major Potential Pollutant Sources may include the types of facilities and
land uses listed in Appendix A.61
b. Minor Potential Pollutant Sources may include the types of facilities and
land uses listed in Appendix B.62
c. Conditions:
1. Any sanitary sewer lines, industrial waste lines and storm water
lines are prohibited within 50 feet of a well. Any such line within
100 feet of a well shall be constructed of completely watertight
construction (that is steel, reinforced concrete, cast iron, PVC or
other suitable material).
2. Manhole and/or connections to a sanitary sewer system are
prohibited within 100 feet of a regulated well.
3. Dry wells dedicated to roof runoff and serving residential
properties or commercial or industrial properties not listed in
Appendix A are permitted in any Tier but may be located no closer
than 100 feet to a regulated well.
4. Aboveground heating oil storage tanks, 2,000 gallons or less, shall
be permitted in any tier subject to approval by the approving
authority of containment provisions in accordance with subsection
BH21-1.8 herein and shall be located no closer than 100 feet to a
regulated well. The new aboveground tank and containment
measures as specified herein shall be exempt from impervious
coverage requirements for the zone. The aboveground containment
measures shall be no larger than required to contain a spill of the
contents of an aboveground tank. The aboveground tank is
permitted within any side or rear yard but shall conform to the
minimum setback requirement for accessory structures. The
aboveground tank shall also include fencing or landscaping
sufficient to provide a screen of the proposed aboveground tank
and containment apparatus from adjacent properties.
5. An aboveground fuel storage tank for emergency electrical
generators with maximum fuel storage capacity of 2,000 gallons
shall be permitted in any tier subject to approval by the approving
authority of containment provisions in accordance with subsection
BH21-1.8 herein and shall be located no closer than 100 feet to a
public community or public non-transient non-community well.
61.Editor's Note: Appendix A may be found as an attachment to this chapter.
62.Editor's Note: Appendix B may be found as an attachment to this chapter.
§ BH21-1.7 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH21-1.8
AO:796
a. Any applicant proposing any change in land use or activity that involves
any Major or Minor PPS, as defined in subsection BH21-1.7, which
would be located either wholly or partially within any WHPA shall
demonstrate that they have applied for all required State permits or
control documents. No final approvals under the authority of the
Municipal Land Use Law shall be issued until all required State permits
or control documents are issued final. Underground storage tanks
regulated at N.J.A.C. 7:14B shall be operated in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 7:14B.
b. Unless otherwise prohibited pursuant to this chapter, any activity that
involves any Major or Minor PPS, which would be located either wholly
or partially within any WHPA, shall comply with and operate in a
manner consistent with the following Best Management Practices:
1. All portions or areas of a facility in which hazardous substances or
hazardous wastes are stored, processed, manufactured or
transferred outdoors, shall be designed so that the discharges of
hazardous substances will be prevented from overflowing,
draining, or leaching into the ground water or surface waters.
2. Outdoor storage, dispensing, loading, manufacturing or processing
areas of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes must be
protected from precipitation, stormwater flows and the 1% (i.e.
100-year) flood event.
3. Wherever hazardous substances are stored, processed,
manufactured or transferred outdoors, the design features shall
include secondary containment and/or diversionary structures
which may include but not be limited to:
(a) Containers, dikes, berms or retaining walls sufficiently
impermeable to contain spilled hazardous substances, for the
duration of a spill event.
(b) Curbing.
(c) Gutter, culverts and other drainage systems.
(d) Weirs, booms and other barriers.
(e) Lined diversion ponds, lined lagoons and lined retention
basins, holding tanks, sumps, slop tanks and other collecting
systems.
(f) Drip pans.
4. Secondary containment and/or diversionary systems, structure or
equipment shall meet the following standards:
(a) The system shall block all routes by which spilled hazardous
substances could be expected to flow, migrate, or escape into
the ground water or surface waters.
§ BH21-1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § BH21-1.8
AO:797
§ BH21-1.9. Operations and Contingency Plan. [Ord. No. 2017-26]
(b) The system shall have sufficient capacity to contain or divert
the largest probable single discharge that could occur within
the containment area, plus an additional capacity to
compensate for any anticipated normal accumulation of
rainwater.
(c) In order to prevent the discharge of hazardous substances into
ground water, all components of the system shall be made of or
lined with impermeable materials sufficient to contain the
substance for the duration of a spill event. Such material or
liner must be maintained in an impermeable condition.
(d) No manufacturing area, processing area, transfer area, dike
storage area, or other storage area, or secondary containment/
diversion system appurtenant thereto shall drain into a
watercourse, or into a ditch, sewer, pipe or storm drain that
leads directly or indirectly into a surface or subsurface
disposal area, unless provision has been made to intercept and
treat any spilled hazardous substances in an NJDEP approved
industrial wastewater treatment or pre-treatment facility, or
other NJDEP approved facility.
(e) Catchment basins, lagoons and other containment areas that
may contain hazardous substances shall not be located in a
manner that would subject them the 1% (i.e. 100- year) flood.
5. Stormwater shall be managed so as to prevent contamination of
ground water, and in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations of the State of New Jersey, and of Lakewood Township.
a. Any applicant proposing any change in land use or activity that involves
any PPS, as defined in subsection BH21-1.7 that would be located either
wholly or partially within any WHPA shall submit an Operations and
Contingency Plan to the Administrative Authority. This Operations and
Contingency Plan shall inform the Administrative Authority about the
following aspects of the proposal:
1. Types of PPS proposed for the site;
2. Types and quantities of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes
that may be used or stored on site;
3. Means to be employed to contain or restrict the spillage or
migration of hazardous substances or hazardous wastes from the
site into ground water;
4. Means to be used to contain or remediate accidental spillage of
such materials;
§ BH21-1.8 LAKEWOOD CODE § BH21-1.9
AO:798
§ BH21-1.10. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2017-26]
A prompt investigation shall be made by the appropriate personnel of the
Construction or Engineering Office of Lakewood Township, of any person
or entity believed to be in violation hereof. If, upon inspection, a condition
which is in violation of this chapter is discovered, a civil action in the Special
Part of the Superior Court, or in the Superior Court, if the primary relief
sought is injunctive or if penalties may exceed the jurisdictional limit of
the Special Civil Part, by the filing and serving of appropriate process.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preclude a municipality's right,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3A-25, to initiate legal proceedings hereunder in
Municipal Court. The violation of any section or subsection of this chapter
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense independent of the violation
of any other section or subsection, or of any order issued pursuant to
this chapter. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense.
Disposition of Legislation
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION
§ DL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION
The Ordinance Disposition List for Supplementation of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Lakewood is a listing of the ordinances
adopted by the Township and included in the codification. "Special" denotes
an ordinance that has not been codified. The Unified Development
Ordinance adopted on July 14, 2005 superseded the prior Zoning, Land
Subdivision, Site Plan, Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment and
similar development regulation ordinances. The Land Development
Regulations are now codified in a separate volume.
5. Means to notify Administrative Authority about any accidental
spillage of such materials;
6. Demonstration that the proposed use and/or activity is not
prohibited by this chapter or that it would employ, to the maximum
extent possible, best management practices as set forth in
subsection BH21-1.8, to protect ground water quality in the WHPA
and minimize the risk of potential ground water contamination.
b. The Administrative Authority shall review, and shall approve or reject
any Operations and Contingency Plan prior to approving or denying the
application for a land use change or activity.
c. Any Operations and Contingency Plan submitted shall be available for
public review and comment.
§ BH21-1.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:799
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
99-30 6/24/99 Cable Telecommunications
Franchise (Ch. 22)
99-54 9/23/99 Purchase Property (Special)
99-55 10/7/99 Change Street Name, Eli Court
to Waterview Drive (Special)
99-56 Not Adopted
99-57 10/21/99 Transportation Board (§ 2-56)
99-58 Not Adopted
99-59 10/21/99 Sale of Property (Special)
99-60 11/4/99 Sale of Property (Special)
99-61 Not Adopted
99-62 11/18/99 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
99-63 11/18/99 Lease Agreement (Special)
99-64 12/30/99 Appropriation (Special)
99-65 12/9/99 Convey Property to the Municipal
Utilities Authority (Special)
99-66 12/30/99 Amend Cable Franchise (Sections
22-14 and 22-19)
99-67 12/30/99 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
99-68 12/30/99 Sale of Property (Special)
99-69 12/30/99 Purchase Property (Special)
99-70 12/30/99 Licensed Towing Operator
Requirements (§ 4-6)
99-71 12/30/99 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
99-72 12/30/99 Amend Zoning Map
2000-1 1/27/00 Police Department-off-duty fees
(§ 2-20)
2000-2 1/27/00 Confidential Aide to the Mayor
(§ 2-27)
2000-3 1/27/00 Sale of Property (Special)
2000-4 1/27/00 Sale of Property (Special)
2000-5 2/24/00 Vacate Roads (Special)
2000-6 Not Adopted
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:800
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2000-7 3/9/00 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
2000-8 3/9/00 Lease Agreement (Special)
2000-9 3/9/00 Sale of Property (Special)
2000-10 3/9/00 Parking Prohibited at All Times
(§ 11-13)
2000-11 3/30/00 Sale of Property (Special)
2000-12 3/30/00 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
2000-13 3/30/00 Alcoholic Beverage Controllicense
fees (§ 6-3)
2000-14 4/6/00 Redevelopment Plan (Special)
2000-15 4/27/00 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
2000-16 4/27/00 Salaries (Special)
2000-17 4/27/00 Sale of Property (Special)
2000-18 4/27/00 Sale of Property (Special)
2000-19 4/27/00 Sale of Property (Special)
2000-20 4/27/00 Sale of Property (Special)
2000-21 4/27/00 Returned Check Fee (§ 2-76)
2000-22 4/27/00 Deed Easement (Special)
2000-23 4/27/00 Sale of Property (Special)
2000-24 4/27/00 Deed Easement (Special)
2000-25 4/27/00 Sale of Property (Special)
2000-26 5/11/00 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
2000-27 5/11/00 Purchase Property (Special)
2000-28 5/11/00 Amend Division of Purchasing
(§ 2-10)
2000-29 5/11/00 Speed Limits (§ 11-29)
2000-30 5/11/00 Purchase Property (Special)
2000-31 5/11/00 Land Use and Development-
Wireless Telecommunication
Towers and Antennas
2000-32 5/25/00 Parking Prohibited at All Times
(§ 11-13)
2000-33 Not Adopted
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:801
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2000-34 6/1/00 Fee for Copy of Master Plan
(§ 2-76)
2000-35 6/1/00 Redevelopment Plan (Special)
2000-36 6/22/00 Sale of Property (Special)
2000-37 6/22/00 Sale of Property (Special)
2000-38 6/22/00 No Stopping or Standing Certain
Times (§ 11-10.1)
2000-39 6/22/00 Payment of Taxes and
Assessments Required for
Development Applications
(§ 2-80)
2000-40 6/22/00 Zoning
2000-41 Tax Abatement (Special)
2000-42 7/20/00 Salaries (Special)
2000-43 7/6/00 Rental Housing-inspections
(15-2)
2000-44 7/20/00 Vacate Street (Special)
2000-45 7/20/00 Vacate Street (Special)
2000-46 7/20/00 Sale of Property (Special)
2000-47 7/20/00 Sale of Property (Special)
2000-48 7/20/00 Purchase Property (Special)
2000-49 Tabled
2000-50 Tabled
2000-51 7/20/00 Transfer Property to Municipal
Utilities Authority (Special)
2000-52 7/20/00 Bond Ordinance (Special)
2000-53 8/3/00 Adopting a Revision and
Codification of Township
Ordinances (Adopting Ordinance)
2000-54 8/24/00 Appropriation (Special)
2000-55 8/3/00 Sale of Property (Special)
2000-56 8/3/00 Sale of Property (Special)
2000-57 8/24/00 Salaries (Special)
2000-58 8/24/00 Convey Easement (Special)
2000-59 8/24/00 Zoning
2000-60 9/7/00 Amend Transient Merchants,
Peddlers and Hawkers (§ 4-3)
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:802
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2000-61 9/7/00 Amend Licensed Towing
Operator Requirements (§ 4-6)
2000-62 9/7/00 Salary (Special)
2000-63 9/7/00 Sale of Property (Special)
2000-64 9/7/00 Vacate Road (Special)
2000-65 Not Passed
2000-66 Land Use
2000-67 9/28/00 Sale of Property (Special)
2000-68 9/28/00 Amend Construction Permit fees
(§ 12-2)
2000-69 Salary (Special)
2000-70 Execution of Deed (Special)
2000-71 10/26/00 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
2000-72 10/26/00 Sale of Property (Special)
2000-73 11/30/00 Purchased of Property (Special)
2000-74 11/30/00 Purchase of Property (Special)
2000-75 11/30/00 Amends Licensing Fee Schedule
(§ 4-2.6)
2001-1 1/25/01 Lease Agreement (Special)
2001-2 1/25/01 Grant of Easement (Special)
2001-3 1/25/01 Purchase of Property (Special)
2001-4 1/25/01 Purchase of Property (Special)
2001-5 1/25/01 Salary (Special)
2001-6 1/25/01 Salary (Special)
2001-7 Tabled
2001-8 2/8/01 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
2001-9 2/22/01 Parking Prohibited Certain Hours
on Certain Streets (§ 11-14)
2001-10 2/22/01 Parking Prohibited During State
of Emergency—Snow (§ 11-7.3)
2001-11 Not Passed
2001-12 3/1/01 Land Use
2001-13 3/1/01 Land Use
2001-14 3/1/01 Left Turn Prohibitions (§ 11-23)
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:803
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2001-15 3/1/01 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
2001-16 4/5/01 Purchase of Property (Special)
2001-17 4/26/01 Salaries (Special)
2001-18 5/3/01 Appropriation (Special)
2001-19 5/3/01 Appropriation (Special)
2001-20 6/7/01 Sale of Property (Special)
2001-21 Not Adopted
2001-22 5/24/01 Purchase of Land (Special)
2001-23 5/24/01 Lease Agreement (Special)
2001-24 5/24/01 Lease Agreement (Special)
2001-25 6/7/01 Salaries (Special)
2001-26 6/7/01 Salaries (Special)
2001-27 6/7/01 Purchase of Property
2001-28 6/7/01 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
2001-29 6/7/01 Amend Licensed Towing
Operators Requirements
(§§ 4-6.5, 4-6.8)
2001-30 6/28/01 Salaries (Special)
2001-31 6/28/01 Salaries (Special)
2001-32 6/28/01 Add Possession or Consumption
of Alcoholic Beverages by
Underage Persons on Private
Property (§ 3-4.7)
2001-33 7/19/01 Bond
2001-34 7/19/01 Sale of Property (Special)
2001-35 7/19/01 Amend Recreational Area Fees
(§ 8-10)
2001-36 7/19/01 Salaries (Special)
2001-37 7/19/01 Adopt and Enact the Revised
General Ordinance of the Board
of Health (Board of Health)
2001-38 Not Adopted
2001-39 7/19/01 Appropriations
2001-40 7/19/01 Sale of Property
2001-41 8/2/01 Zoning
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:804
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2001-42 8/2/01 Zoning
2001-43 8/2/01 Zoning
2001-44 8/2/01 Zoning
2001-45 8/2/01 Zoning
2001-46 8/2/01 Zoning
2001-47 Not Adopted
2001-48 8/2/01 Zoning
2001-49 8/2/01 Zoning
2001-50 8/2/01 Zoning
2001-51 8/2/01 Zoning
2001-52 8/2/01 Zoning
2001-53 8/2/01 Zoning
2001-54 8/2/01 Zoning
2001-55 8/2/01 Amend Department of Economic
Development (§ 2-22)
2001-56 8/2/01 Amend Industrial Commission
(§ 2-38.3)
2001-57 8/2/01 Salaries (Special)
2001-58 8/2/01 Acquisition of Property (Special)
2001-59 8/23/01 Zoning
2001-60 Tabled
2001-61 8/23/01 Sale of Property (Special)
2001-62 8/23/01 Sale of Property (Special)
2001-63 Carried
2001-64 9/6/01 Transfer of Property (Special)
2001-65 9/20/01 Parking Prohibited at All Times
(§ 11-13)
2001-66 9/6/01 Add Waiver of permit fees for
construction to promote
accessibility by disabled persons
(§ 12-2.17)
2001-67 9/6/01 Salaries (Special)
2001-68 10/11/01 Amend Evacuations in Public
Streets (§ 20-1.16) and Sidewalk
Construction and Removal
(§§ 20-2.1, 20-2.4)
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:805
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2001-69 Carried
2001-70 9/6/01 Review by Environmental
Commission of Development
Applications (§ 2-48.13)
2001-71 9/6/01 Salary (Special)
2001-72 9/20/01 Salary (Special)
2001-73 9/20/01 Amend Taxicab Medallion Fees
(§ 9-5.2)
2001-74 11/29/01 Zoning
2001-75 10/11/01 Purchase of Property (Special)
2001-76 10/25/01 Reappropriation (Special)
2001-77 10/25/01 Traffic Regulations—Shenandoah
Village Apartment Complex
(§ 11-37.3k)
2001-78 10/25/01 Sale of Property
2001-79 10/25/01 Amend Mercantile Licensing
Fees (§ 4-2.6)
2001-80 10/25/01 Amend Mercantile Licensing
Fees (§ 4-2.6)
2001-81 10/25/01 Sale of Property (Special)
2001-82 10/25/01 Vacate Street (Special)
2001-83 10/25/01 Vacate Street (Special)
2001-84 10/25/01 Zoning
2001-85 11/29/01 Tax Abatement (Special)
2001-86 11/29/01 Renew Cable Franchise (Ch. 22)
2001-87 11/29/01 Temporary Easement (Special)
2001-88 11/29/01 Sale of Property
2001-89 Tabled
2001-90 Tabled
2001-91 11/29/01 Vacate Street (Special)
2001-92 11/29/01 Tax Abatement (Special)
2001-93 11/29/01 Vacate Street (Special)
2001-94 11/29/01 Vacate Right-of-Way (Special)
2001-95 11/29/01 Sale of Property (Special)
2001-96 12/27/01 Purchase of Property (Special)
2001-97 12/27/01 Sale of Property (Special)
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:806
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2001-98 12/27/01 Sale of Property (Special)
2001-99 12/27/01 Fees for use of Community
Center (§ 2-76.7)
2001-100 12/27/01 Zoning
2001-101 12/27/01 Zoning
2001-102 12/27/01 Sale of Property
2001-103 12/27/01 Establish Department of
Community Development Block
Grants (§ 2-23)
2001-104 12/27/01 Adopt Franklin Street
Redevelopment Plan (Special)
2001-105 12/27/01 Vacate Street (Special)
2001-106 1/10/02 No Stopping or Standing
(§ 11-10.1)
2001-107 1/10/02 Sale of Property (Special)
2001-108 1/10/02 Sale of Property (Special)
2001-109 1/10/02 Salaries (Special)
2002-01 1/31/02 Sale of Property (Special)
2002-02 2/7/02 Sale of Property (Special)
2002-03 2/7/02 Sale of Property (Special)
2002-04 2/28/02 Vacate Street (Special)
2002-05 2/28/02 Convey Easement (Special)
2002-06 2/28/02 Sale of Property (Special)
2002-07 Not Received
2002-08 2/28/02 Tax Abatement (Special)
2002-09 3/21/02 Exchange of Land (Special)
2002-10 3/21/02 Conveyance of Property (Special)
2002-11 4/11/02 Tax Abatement (Special)
2002-12 4/11/02 Not Adopted
2002-13 4/11/02 Tax Abatement (Special)
2002-14 4/11/02 Salaries (Special)
2002-15 4/25/02 Vacate Road (Special)
2002-16 4/25/02 Private Sale of Land (Special)
2002-17 Not Adopted
2002-18 5/30/02 Parking Prohibited at All Times
(§ 11-13)
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:807
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2002-19 5/30/02 Salaries (Special)
2002-20 6/6/02 Salaries (Special)
2002-21 6/6/02 Vacate Street (Special)
2002-22 6/6/02 Establish Township Conflict
Prosecutor (§ 2-6.4)
2002-23 6/27/02 Sale of Property (Special)
2002-24 6/27/02 Tax Abatement (Special)
2002-25 6/27/02 Zoning
2002-26 6/27/02 Tax Abatement (Special)
2002-27 6/27/02 Zoning
2002-28 7/11/02 Add Emergency Purchase
Procedures (§ 2-10.4)
2002-29 7/25/02 Option to Purchase Agreement
(Special)
2002-30 7/25/02 Lease Agreement (Special)
2002-31 7/25/02 Bond (Special)
2002-32 8/8/02 Parking Prohibited at All Times;
Time Limit Parking; Handicapped
Parking (§§ 11-13; 11-11,
11-35.1)
2002-33 8/22/02 Parking Prohibited at All Times
(§ 11-13)
2002-34 8/22/02 Mechanical Subcode Fees
(§ 12-2.11)
2002-35 8/22/02 Amend Airport Utility (§ 2-51)
2002-36 10/3/02 Amend Police
Department—Personnel
(§§ 2-20.3, 2-20.4, 2-20.6, 2-20.7,
2-20.8, 2-20.9)
2002-37 10/3/02 Sale of Property (Special)
2002-38 10/3/02 Sale and Conveyance of Property
(Special)
2002-39 10/3/02 Loading Zones; Parking Time
Limits—Parking Lot West of
Library Building on Second
Street (§§ 11-25; 11-37.1)
2002-40 10/3/02 Amend Airport
Utility—Membership (§ 2-51.3)
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:808
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2002-41 10/24/02 Parking Prohibited at All Times
(§ 11-13)
2002-42 10/24/02 Regulations First Street
Municipal Parking Lot (§ 11-37.1)
2002-43 10/24/02 Parking Prohibited at All Times
(§ 11-13)
2002-44 10/24/02 Amends Rules and Regulations:
Pine Park, Brook Road Sports
Complex Shelter—adds D'Zio
Park (§§ 8-10.1—8-10.5)
2002-45 10/24/02 Purchase of Property (Special)
2002-46 10/24/02 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2002-47 11/7/02 Amend Police Department—Drug
Testing Policy (§ 2-20.10)
2002-48 11/21/02 Land Subdivision and Site Plan
Applications and Zoning
2002-49 11/21/02 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2002-50 11/21/02 Vacate Portions of Street
(Special)
2002-51 12/19/02 Purchase of Property (Special)
2002-52 12/19/02 Acquisition of Property (Special)
2002-54 12/19/02 Not Adopted
2002-55 12/19/02 General Airport Utility
Improvements (Special)
2003-1 2/6/03 Acquisition of Property (Special)
2003-2 2/6/03 Sale of Property (Special)
2003-3 2/6/03 Change Name of Street (Special)
2003-4 Tabled
2003-5 2/6/03 Zoning
2003-6 2/6/03 Zoning
2003-7 Tabled
2003-8 2/27/03 Refund Bond (Special)
2003-9 2/27/03 Amend Drug Free School Zones
(§ 3-10.1)
2003-10 3/6/03 Appropriation (Special)
2003-11 Tabled
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:809
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2003-12 3/20/03 Loading and Unloading Zones
(§ 11-25)
2003-13 3/20/03 Extend Lease Agreement
2003-14 4/3/03 Grant Abatement of Local
Property Tax to Dakdal LLC
2003-15 4/24/03 Amend Alcoholic Beverage Fees
(§ 6-3.4)
2003-16 4/24/03 Sale of Property (Special)
2003-17 5/29/03 No Stopping or Standing at All
Times (§ 11-10.1)
2003-18 6/12/03 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2003-19 6/12/03 Amends Board of
Health—Garbage and Refuse
(§ BH14-5.2)
2003-20 6/12/03 Amends Building and
Construction (§§ 12-1.1, 12-1.2,
12-2.9, 12-3, 12-6.1, 12-6.3,
12-6.4, 12-6.5, 12-7.1)
2003-21 6/12/03 Amends Excavation and Grading
(§§ 31-2.4, 31-2.5, 31-4, 31-5)
2003-22 6/12/03 Amends Flood Plain Control
(§§ 29-4.1—29-4.4)
2003-23 6/12/03 Amends Housing Regulations
(§§ 13-1.3, 13-1.4, 13-1.6, 13-1.7)
2003-24 6/12/03 Amends General Licensing
(§§ 4-1.16, 4-7.9, 4-8.11, 4-8.16)
2003-25 6/12/03 Amends Rental Housing
(§§ 15-2.1, 15-2.5, 15-2.6, 15-3.2,
15-3.3, 15-3.5, 15-3.6, 15-3.7,
15-6.1—15-6.5, 15-8.1)
2003-26 6/12/03 Amends Rent Control (§§ 14-7.2,
14-7.4)
2003-27 6/12/03 Amends Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control (§§ 30-5.1,
30-5.2, 30-5.3)
2003-28 6/12/03 Delete Ch. XXIII, Private
Swimming Pools
(§§ 23-1.1—23-1.9)
2003-29 6/12/03 Amends Protection of Trees
(§§ 19-1.3, 19-1.4)
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:810
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2003-30 6/12/03 Amends Property Maintenance
(§§ 16-3.9, 16-3.11)
2003-31 6/12/03 Sale of Property (Special)
2003-32 6/12/03 Sale of Property (Special)
2003-33 6/12/03 Vehicles Over Designated Weight
Excluded from Certain Streets
(§ 11-15)
2003-34 6/12/03 Parking Prohibited at All Times
(§ 11-13)
2003-35 6/12/03 Amends License Fees (§ 4-2.6)
2003-37 6/12/03 Amends Departments, Boards
and Commissions—Deletes
Department of Inspections—adds
Department of Code Enforcement
and Zoning (§§ 2-9.1, 2-16)
2003-38 6/12/03 Sale of Property (Special)
2003-39 6/12/03 Sale of Property (Special)
2003-40 7/24/03 Amends fees for Community
Center (§ 2-76.7)
2003-41 7/24/03 Sale of Property (Special)
2003-42 7/24/03 Exchange of Property (Special)
2003-43 7/24/03 Sale of Property (Special)
2003-44 7/24/03 Exchange of Property (Special)
2003-45 7/24/03 Sale of Property (Special)
2003-46 7/24/03 Adds Operation of Certain Motor
Vehicles (§ 3-19)
2003-47 8/7/03 Refund of Bond (Special)
2003-48 8/7/03 Bond Ordinance (Special)
2003-49 8/7/03 Grant of Abatement of Local
Property Taxes (Special)
2003-50 8/21/03 Exchange of Property (Special)
2003-51 8/21/03 Sale of Property (Special)
2003-52 8/21/03 Acquisition of Drainage
Easement (Special)
2003-53 Not Adopted
2003-54 9/11/03 Acquisition of Property (Special)
2003-55 9/11/03 No Stopping or Standing at All
Times (§ 11-10.1)
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:811
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2003-56 9/11/03 Exchange of Property (Special)
2003-57 9/11/03 Amends Ordinance No. 93-23
Improvements (Special)
2003-58 9/25/03 Amends Salary Ordinance
(Special)
2003-59 9/25/03 Sale of Property (Special)
2003-60 9/25/03 Tax Abatement (Special)
2003-61 11/20/03 Exchange of Lands (Special)
2003-62 10/23/03 Sale of Property (Special)
2003-63 10/23/03 Vacate Portion of Right-of-Way
(Special)
2003-64 11/6/03 Loading and Unloading Zones
(§ 11-25)
2003-65 Tabled
2003-66 11/6/03 Parking Prohibited at All Times
(§ 11-13)
2003-67 11/6/03 Handicapped Parking—Highpoint
Condo Complex (§ 11-35.4)
2003-68 11/6/03 Lease of Property (Special)
2003-69 11/6/03 Purchase of Property (Special)
2003-70 11/20/03 Rename Certain Streets (Special)
2003-71 11/20/03 Provide for Construction of Kettle
Creek Recreational Complex
(Special)
2003-72 12/4/03 Add Special Law Enforcement
Officer Class II (§ 2-20.8A)
2003-73 12/18/03 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2003-74 12/18/03 No Stopping or Standing at All
Times (§ 11-10.1)
2003-75 12/18/03 Loading and Unloading Zones
(§ 11-25)
2004-1 1/22/04 Add Deputy Public Defender
(§ 2-7.7)
2004-2 2/5/04 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2004-3 2/5/04 Amends Ordinance No. 92-44,
Municipal Utilities Authority
(2-47.8)
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:812
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2004-4 2/5/04 Amend Salary Ordinance
(Special)
2004-5 2/5/04 Penalty—Handicapped Parking
(§ 11-35.7)
2004-6 2/5/04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-7 2/5/04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-8 2/5/04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-9 2/19/04 Amend Hospital, Medical and
Dental Benefits (§ 10-11.1)
2004-10 Died
2004-11 2/19/04 Tax Abatement (Special)
2004-12 Died
2004-13 Tabled
2004-14 2/19/04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-15 Died
2004-16 Died
2004-17 3/11/04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-18 3/11/04 Stop Intersections (§ 11-20)
2004-19 3/11/04 Vacate Street (Special)
2004-20 3/25/04 Amend Construction Permit Fees
(§§ 12-2.1, 12-2.6, 12-2.11)
2004-21 3/25/04 Add Authorization for Holding in
Protective Custody Persons
Arrested for Driving Under the
Influence (§ 3-20)
2004-22 3/25/04 Tax Abatement (Special)
2004-23 3/25/04 Amend Off-Duty Assignments of
Police Officers (§ 2-20.9)
2004-24 4/29/04 Zoning
2004-25 3/25/04 Vacate Portion of Street (Special)
2004-26 3/25/04 Vacate Streets (Special)
2004-27 4/15/04 Amend Lakewood Heritage
Commission Membership
(§ 2-57.5)
2004-28 4/29/04 Rename Street (Special)
2004-29 4/29/04 Rename Street (Special)
2004-30 5/13/04 Sale of Property (Special)
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:813
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2004-31 5/13/04 Vacate Portions of Street
(Special)
2004-32 5/13/04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-33 5/13/04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-34 5/27/04 Lease Agreement (Special)
2004-35 6/17/04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-36 6/17/04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-37 6/17/04 Vacate Portion of Street (Special)
2004-38 6/17/04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-39 6/17/04 Parking on unpaved surfaces
2004-40 Died
2004-41 6/17/04 Zoning
2004-42 6/17/04 No Parking Zone
Regulations—Municipally-Owned
Property (§ 11-37.1)
2004-43 6/17/04 Amend Property Maintenance -
Removal by Township; Costs
Established as a Lien (§ 16-1.5)
2004-44 6/17/04 Amend Operation of Certain
Motor Vehicles - Violations and
Penalties (§ 3-19.5)
2004-45 Died
2004-46 Died
2004-47 7-8-04 Tax Abatement (Special)
2004-48 7-8-04 Tax Abatement (Special)
2004-49 7-8-04 Tax Abatement (Special)
2004-50 7-8-04 Tax Abatement (Special)
2004-51 7-8-04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-52 7-8-04 Exchange of Property (Special)
2004-53 7-8-04 Vacate Portions of Street
(Special)
2004-54 7-8-04 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2004-55 7-8-04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-56 8-5-04 Bond Ordinance (Special)
2004-57 8-19-04 Vacate Rights-of-Way (Special)
2004-58 Died
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:814
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2004-59 8-5-04 Acquisition of Property (Special)
2004-60 8-5-04 Acquisition of Property (Special)
2004-61 8-5-04 School Bus Loading/Unloading
Zones; No Stopping or Standing
at All Times (§§ 11-26, 11-10.1)
2004-62 Died
2004-63 8-19-04 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2004-64 8-19-04 Amends Vital Statistics Fees
(§ 2-76.1)
2004-65 8-19-04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-66 8-19-04 Lease of Property (Special)
2004-67 8-19-04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-68 8-19-04 Conveyance of Easement
(Special)
2004-69 8-19-04 Fee for Renewal of Temporary
Certificate of Occupancy
(§ 12-2.6)
2004-70 9-2-04 One-Way Streets/No Stopping or
Standing (§ 11-10.1, 11-18)
2004-71 9-2-04 Lease of Property (Special)
2004-72 10-14-04 Appointment and Term of
Lakewood Heritage Commission
(§ 2-57.6)
2004-73 10-28-04 Abatement of Taxes (Special)
2004-74 10-14-04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-75 11-4-04 Exchange of Property (Special)
2004-76 11-4-04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-77 Died
2004-78 11-18-04 Abatement of Taxes (Special)
2004-79 Cancellation of Taxes (Special)
2004-80 11-18-04 Amend Ordinance No. 96-26
(Special)
2004-81 11-18-04 Extinguish Rights of Easement
(Special)
2004-82 12-2-04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-83 12-2-04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-84 12-2-04 Acquisition of Property (Special)
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:815
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2004-85 12-2-04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-86 12-2-04 Conveyance of Property (Special)
2004-87 12-16-04 Promotions in the Police
Department (§ 2-20.3)
2004-88 12-16-04 Vacate Portion of Street (Special)
2004-89 12-16-04 Handicapped Parking (§ 11-35.5)
2004-90 12-16-04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-91 12-16-04 Vacate Portion of Street (Special)
2004-92 12-16-04 Sale of Property (Special)
2004-93 12-16-04 Vacate Portion of Street (Special)
2005-1 2-3-05 Salary (Special)
2005-2 2-3-05 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
2005-3 2-3-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-4 2-3-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-5 2-3-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-6 2-3-05 Acquisition of Property (Special)
2005-7 2-3-05 Salary (Special)
2005-8 2-3-05 Salary (Special)
2005-9 2-3-05 Salary (Special)
2005-10 2-3-05 Rename Street (Special)
2005-11 2-3-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-12 2-3-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-13 2-3-05 Add Municipal Court Discovery
Fees (§ 2-76.3)
2005-14 2-3-05 Vacate Street (Special)
2005-15 2-3-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-16 2-3-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-17 2-3-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-18 2-3-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-19 2-3-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-20 2-3-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-21 2-3-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-22 2-3-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-23 2-3-05 Sale of Property (Special)
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:816
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2005-24 3-3-05 Vacate Street (Special)
2005-25 3-3-05 Regulations—St. Mary's Parking
Lot (§ 11-37.4j)
2005-26 3-3-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-27 3-3-05 Vacate Street (Special)
2005-28 3-3-05 Vacate Street (Special)
2005-29 3-31-05 Set Aside Property for
Recreational and Open Space
Inventory (Special)
2005-30 Tabled
2005-31 3-31-05 Amend Compensation for
Municipal Utilities Authority
(§ 2-47.8)
2005-32 3-31-05 Appropriation (Special)
2005-33 4-21-05 Vacate Street (Special)
2005-34 4-21-05 Exchange of Property (Special)
2005-35 4-21-05 Vacate Street (Special)
2005-36 Street Name Change (Special)
2005-37 4-21-05 Vacate Street (Special)
2005-38 4-21-05 Vacate Street (Special)
2005-39 4-21-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-40 5-5-05 CAP Ordinance (Special)
2005-41 5-5-05 Amends Garbage and Refuse (Ch.
BH14)
2005-42 5-5-05 Vacate Street (Special)
2005-43 Tabled
2005-44 5-5-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-45 5-5-05 Stop Intersections (§ 11-20)
2005-46 Street Name Change (Special)
2005-47 5-19-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-48 5-19-05 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
2005-49 5-19-05 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
2005-50 5-19-05 Add Noise Prohibitions (§ 3-22)
2005-51 5-19-05 Sale of Property (Special)
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:817
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2005-52 5-19-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-53 5-19-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-54 5-19-05 Conveyance of Deed (Special)
2005-55 5-19-05 Acceptance of Land Donation
(Special)
2005-56 5-19-05 Conveyance of Deed (Special)
2005-57 6-2-05 No Stopping or Standing at All
Times (§ 11-10.1)
2005-58 6-2-05 Vacate Street (Special)
2005-59 7-14-05 New Unified Development
Ordinance (All new Ch. 18)
2005-60 6-30-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-61 6-30-05 Vacate Street (Special)
2005-62 Not Adopted
2005-63 7-14-05 Vacate Easement (Special)
2005-64 7-14-05 Vacate Street (Special)
2005-65 7-14-05 Vacate Street (Special)
2005-66 7-14-05 Conveyance of Deed (Special)
2005-67 7-14-05 Salaries (Special)
2005-68 7-14-05 Parking Prohibited at All Times
(§ 11-13)
2005-69 7-14-05 Parking Prohibited at All Times
(§ 11-13)
2005-70 7-14-05 Adds Sex Offender Residency
Prohibition (§ 3-23)
2005-71 7-14-05 Exchange of Property (Special)
2005-72 7-14-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-73 7-14-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-74 7-14-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-75 7-14-05 Vacate Streets (Special)
2005-76 7-28-05 Conveyance of Property (Special)
2005-77 8-11-05 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance, Planned Affordable
Housing (Ch. 18 § 18-200,
§ 18-902B)
2005-78 8-25-05 Amends Feeding of Unconfined
Wildlife (§ 8-12)
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:818
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2005-79 8-25-05 Vacate Streets (Special)
2005-80 8-25-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-81 8-25-05 Exchange of Property (Special)
2005-82 9-8-05 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
2005-83 9-8-05 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
2005-84 9-8-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-85 9-8-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-86 9-8-05 Exchange of Property (Special)
2005-87 9-8-05 Amends Sex Offender Residency
Prohibition (§ 3-23)
2005-88 9-8-05 Bond Ordinance (Special)
2005-89 Not Adopted
2005-90 9-22-05 Adds Improper Disposal of Waste
(§ 32-1)
2005-91 9-22-05 Adds Illicit Connections to
Municipal Storm Sewer System
(§ 32-2)
2005-92 9-22-05 Amends Litter (§ 3-6)
2005-93 9-22-05 Amends Definitions, Property
Damage; Annoyance to Other
Persons (§§ 5-1.1, 5-8.8)
2005-94 9-22-05 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance Cluster Option in the
R-20 and R-40 District (Ch. 18
§ 18-902)
2005-95 10-27-05 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance Cluster Option in the
R-15 District (Ch. 18 §§ 18-901,
18-902)
2005-96 10-27-05 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance Creates Corporate
Campus/Stadium Support Zone
(B-6) (Ch. 18 §§ 18-901, 18-903)
2005-97 9-22-05 Stop Intersections (§ 11-20)
2005-98 9-22-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-99 9-22-05 Sale of Property (Special)
2005-100 9-22-05 Salary Ordinance (Special)
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:819
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2005-101 10-6-05 Amends Fees for Copies
(§ 2-76.3)
2005-102 10-6-05 No Stopping or Standing at All
Times; No Parking at All Times
(§§ 11-10.1, 11-13)
2005-103 10-27-05 Reappropriation (Special)
2005-104 10-27-05 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2005-105 10-27-05 Acquisition of Property (Special)
2005-106 10-27-05 Acceptance of Deed (Special)
2005-107 10-27-05 Acceptance of Deed (Special)
2005-108 11-17-05 Stop Intersections (§ 11-20)
2005-109 11-17-05 Handicapped Parking (§ 11-35.1)
2005-110 11-17-05 Parking Prohibited at All Times
(§ 11-13)
2005-111 12-1-05 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance
2005-112 12-8-05 Improvements (Special)
2005-113 12-1-05 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2005-114 12-1-05 Exchange of Lands (Special)
2006-1
2006-2
2006-3 2-9-06 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance — Wireless
Communications (Ch. 18,
§§ 18-200B, 18-903M, 18-1012)
2006-4 2-9-06 Parking Time Limited (§ 11-11)
2006-5 2-9-06 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2006-6 2-9-06 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2006-7 2-9-06 Grant Abatement of Local
Property Taxes (Special)
2006-8 2-9-06 Grant Abatement of Local
Property Taxes (Special)
2006-9 2-9-06 Parking Prohibited at All Times
(§ 11-13)
2006-10 2-9-06 Vacate Portion of Street (Special)
2006-11 2-9-06 Amends Rooming and Boarding
Houses (§§ 15-1, 15-2)
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:820
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2006-12 2-23-06 Amends Fees for Emergency
Medical Services (§ 2-76.4)
2006-13 2-9-06 Conveyance of Deed (Special)
2006-14 2-9-06 Sale of Property (Special)
2006-15 2-9-06 Sale of Property (Special)
2006-16 3-9-06 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance — Commercial
Vehicles Prohibited Parking (Ch.
18, § 18-807D)
2006-17 3-9-06 Vacate Portion of Street (Special)
2006-18 3-9-06 Vacate Portion of Street (Special)
2006-19 3-9-06 Vacate Portion of Street (Special)
2006-20 3-9-06 Add Urination in Public Places
(§ 3-22)
2006-21 3-9-06 Amends Plumbing Fees (§ 12-2)
2006-22 3-23-06 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance (Ch. 18, § 18-815.1)
2006-23 3-23-06 Sale of Property (Special)
2006-24 3-23-06 Vacate Portion of Street (Special)
2006-25 3-23-06 Vacate Portion of Street (Special)
2006-26 Not Adopted
2006-27 4-6-06 Execution of Deed (Special)
2006-28 5-4-06 Amends Recreational Facilities
Designated — Boundaries of
Crystal Lake Preservation Area
(§ 8-4)
2006-29 5-4-06 Amends Unified Land
Development Ordinance (Ch. 18
§ 18-901B)
2006-30 4-6-06 Amends Unified Land
Development Ordinance (Ch. 18
§ 18-803F)
2006-31 4-6-06 Amends Unified Land
Development Ordinance (Ch. 18,
§ 18-906G; 18-907A; 18-909)
2006-32 4-27-06 Capital Improvements (Special)
2006-33 4-27-06 Amends Hours of Sale for
Alcoholic Beverages (§ 6-4.1)
2006-34 4-27-06 Vacate Portion of Street (Special)
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:821
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2006-35 4-27-06 No Stopping or Standing at All
Times (§ 11-10.1)
2006-36 4-27-06 Execution of Deed of Easement
(Special)
2006-37 5-11-06 CAP Ordinance (Special)
2006-38 6-8-06 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance (Ch. 18, § 18-903I)
2006-39 6-8-06 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance (Ch. 18, § 18-903M)
2006-40 6-8-06 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2006-41 6-8-06 Amends Regulations for
Consumption of Alcoholic
Beverages in Public Places
(§ 3-4.4)
2006-42 6-8-06 Exchange of Property (Special)
2006-43 6-22-06 Sale of Property (Special)
2006-44 6-22-06 Smoking Prohibited at the John
Patrick Sports Complex (§ 6 8-14)
2006-45 6-22-06 Parking Prohibited at All Times
(§ 11-13)
2006-46 7-6-06 Amends Towing and Storage
(§§ 4-6.2.1, 4-6.5, 4-6.8, 4-6.11,
4-6.14)
2006-47 6-22-06 Execution of Deed of Easement
(Special)
2006-48 6-22-06 Abatement of Local Property
Taxes (Special)
2006-49 7-27-06 Amends Taxation—Effective
Period (§ 24-1.8)
2006-50 7-27-06 Sale of Property (Special)
2006-51 7-27-06 Exchange of Property (Special)
2006-52 7-27-06 Vacation of Portion of Street
(Special)
2006-53 8-10-06 Add Yard Waste Collection
Program (§ 21-6)
2006-54 8-10-06 Amends Fees Applicable to the
Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Adjustment (§ 2-36.4)
2006-55 8-10-06 Salary Ordinance (Special)
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:822
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2006-56 8-10-06 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2006-57 8-10-06 Vacation of Portion of Street
(Special)
2006-58 9-7-06 Bond Ordinance (Special)
2006-59 8-24-06 Cancellation of Appropriation
(Special)
2006-60 8-24-06 Abatement of Local Property
Taxes (Special)
2006-61 9-7-06 Amends Chapter 29, Flood
Damage Prevention (Ch. 29)
2006-62 9-7-06 Acquisition of Property (Special)
2006-63 9-7-06 Acquisition of Property (Special)
2006-64 9-28-06 Amends Alcoholic Beverage
License Fees and Maximum
Number (§ 6-3.4)
2006-65 Not Adopted
2006-66 10-26-06 Execution of Deed of Easement
(Special)
2006-67 10-26-06 Rename Street (Special)
2006-68 10-26-06 Rename Portion of Street
(Special)
2006-69 Not Adopted
2006-70 11-9-06 Authorizes Township Clerk and/
or Designee to Approve Legalized
Games of Chance Applications
(§ 4-1.13c)
2006-71 11-9-06 Vacation of Portion of Street
(Special)
2006-72 11-9-06 Vacation of Portion of Street
(Special)
2006-73 11-9-06 Adds Christmas Eve and New
Year's Eve Alcoholic Beverage
License Regulations; amends
Closing Provisions (§§ 6-4.4,
6-4.5)
2006-74 11-9-06 Exchange of Property (Special)
2006-75 11-30-06 Execution of Deed of Easement
(Special)
2006-76 11-30-06 Sale of Property (Special)
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:823
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2006-77 11-30-06 Sale of Property (Special)
2006-78 12-7-06 Vacation of Portion of Street
(Special)
2006-79 11-30-06 One-Way Streets (§ 11-18)
2006-80 12-21-06 No Parking—Street Cleaning
(§ 11-12)
2006-81 12-21-06 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2006-82 12-21-06 No Stopping or Standing at All
Times (§ 11-10.1)
2007-1 2-1-07 Amends Unified Land
Development Ordinance,
Stormwater Management and
Control (Chapter 18, § 18-815.1)
2007-2 2-1-07 Sale of Property (Special)
2007-3 2-1-07 Abatement of Local Property
Taxes (Special)
2007-4 2-1-07 Abatement of Local Property
Taxes (Special)
2007-5 2-1-07 Vacation of Property (Special)
2007-6 2-15-07 Vacation of Property (Special)
2007-7 2-15-07 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance, Plot Plan and As-Built
Summary (Chapter 18, § 18-823)
2007-8 2-15-07 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2007-9 2-15-07 Cancellation of Taxes on Certain
Property (Special)
2007-10 3-8-07 Amends fees for Miscellaneous
Services (§ 2-76.1)
2007-11 3-8-07 Readopts Tax Statement
Ordinance (§ 24-1)
2007-12 3-15-07 Exchange of Property (Special)
2007-13 3-8-07 Sale of Property (Special)
2007-14 3-8-07 Sale of Property (Special)
2007-15 3-8-07 Lease of Property (Special)
2007-16 5-17-07 Cancellation of Taxes on Certain
Property (Special)
2007-17 4-12-07 One-Way Streets (§ 11-18)
2007-18 4-12-07 Exchange of Property (Special)
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:824
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2007-19 Not Adopted
2007-20 4-12-07 Sale of Property (Special)
2007-21 5-17-07 CAP Ordinance (Special)
2007-22 5-17-07 Abatement of Local Property
Taxes (Special)
2007-23 5-17-07 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2007-24 5-17-07 Establish Fee Schedule in the
Foreign Trade Zone (Special)
2007-25 5-17-07 Sale of Property (Special)
2007-26 5-17-07 Parking Prohibited at All Times
(§ 11-13)
2007-27 5-17-07 Parking Prohibited Certain Hours
on Certain Streets (§ 11-14)
2007-28 5-17-07 Amends Southeast Preservation
Area—Parks and Playgrounds:
Recreational Facilities
Designated (Special)
2007-29 5-17-07 Conveyance of Fee Simple at
Open Public Sale of Property
(Special)
2007-30 5-17-07 Vacation of Property (Special)
2007-31 6-14-08 Abatement of Local Property
Taxes (Special)
2007-32 6-28-08 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2007-33 7-19-07 Abatement of Local Property
Taxes (Special)
2007-34 7-19-07 Abatement of Local Property
Taxes (Special)
2007-35 7-19-07 Amends Ordinance No. 99-38
(Special)
2007-36 7-19-07 Sale of Property (Special)
2007-37 7-19-07 Sale of Property (Special)
2007-38 7-19-07 Sale of Property (Special)
2007-39 8-2-07 Bond Ordinance (Special)
2007-40 8-2-07 Conveyance and Execution of
Deed of Easement and Right-of-
Way Agreement (Special)
2007-41 8-2-07 Sale of Property (Special)
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:825
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2007-42 9-6-07 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2007-43 9-20-07 Exchange of Property (Special)
2007-44 10-11-07 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2007-45 10-11-07 Parking Prohibited at All Times
(§ 11-13)
2007-46 10-11-07 Sale of Property (Special)
2007-47 10-11-07 Lease of Property
2007-48 10-18-07 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
2007-49 11-1-07 Bond Ordinance (Special)
2007-50 Change Street Name (Special)
2007-51 11-15-07 Died
2007-52 11-15-07 Abatement of Local Property
Taxes (Special)
2007-53 11-15-07 Amends Property Maintenance,
Standard of All Structures
(§§ 16-3.1, 16-3.11)
2007-54 11-15-07 Vacation of Property (Special)
2007-55 11-15-07 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2007-56 11-15-07 Lease of Property (Special)
2007-57 12-13-07 Sale of Property (Special)
2007-58 Died
2007-59 12-13-07 Vacation of Property (Special)
2008-1 Died
2008-2 2-14-08 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2008-3 2-14-08 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2008-4 2-14-08 Exchange of Property (Special)
2008-5 2-14-08 Establishes Position of Chaplain
for Police Department (§ 2-20.3A)
2008-6 2-14-08 Abatement of Local Property
Taxes (Special)
2008-7 2-28-08 Vacation of Property (Special)
2008-8 2-28-08 Vacation of Property (Special)
2008-9 2-28-08 Abatement of Local Property
Taxes (Special)
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:826
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2008-10 2-28-08 Amends Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA)
Compliance Committee and
Disabilities Commission —
Membership (§ 2-50.3)
2008-11 Died
2008-12 2-28-08 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—Mixed Use Mid-Rise
Developments (§§ 18-200,
18-903E, 18-1013)
2008-13 2-28-08 Handicapped Parking (§ 11-35.5)
2008-14 3-13-08 Exchange of Property (Special)
2008-15 3-13-08 Loading Zones (§ 11-25)
2008-16 3-27-08 Acquisition of Property (Special)
2008-17 3-27-08 Abatement of Local Property
Taxes (Special)
2008-18 4-10-08 Vacation of Property (Special)
2008-19 4-10-08 Vacation of Property (Special)
2008-20 4-10-08 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2008-21 Died
2008-22 5-29-08 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2008-23 5-29-08 Acquisition of Property (Special)
2008-24 Died
2008-25 5-29-08 CAP Ordinance (Special)
2008-26 5-29-08 Amends Fees for Emergency
Medical Services —Basic Life
Support Fee Schedule (§ 2-76.4)
2008-27 6-26-08 Sale of Property (Special)
2008-28 6-26-08 Parking Prohibited at All Times
(§ 11-13)
2008-29 6-26-08 Abatement of Local Property
Taxes (Special)
2008-30 6-26-08 Loading Zones (§ 11-25)
2008-31 6-26-08 Sale of Property (Special)
2008-32 7-10-08 Loading Zones (§ 11-25)
2008-33 7-10-08 Adds Determination of Positions
Eligible for Defined Contributions
Retirement Program (§ 10-25)
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:827
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2008-34 7-10-08 Vacation of Property (Special)
2008-35 7-24-08 Vacation of Property (Special)
2008-36 7-24-08 Sale of Property (Special)
2008-37 8-7-08 Adds Prohibition of Use of
Private Containers on Township
Property (Special)
2008-38 8-7-08 Amends Animal
Control—Violations and Penalty
(§ 5-12)
2008-39 8-25-08 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—Basement
Apartments (§ 18-910)
2008-40 8-28-08 Bond Ordinance (Special)
2008-41 8-28-08 Vacation of Street (Special)
2008-42 9-11-08 Bond Ordinance (Special)
2008-43 9-11-08 No Stopping or Standing at All
Times (§ 11-10.1)
2008-44 10-23-08 Vacation of Property (Special)
2008-45 10-23-08 Sale of Property (Special)
2008-46 11-6-08 Parking Prohibited at All Times
(§ 11-13)
2008-47 12-18-08 Vacation of Property (Special)
2009-1 2-5-09 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
2009-2 2-5-09 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
2009-3 2-5-09 Sale of Property (Special)
2009-4 2-5-09 Amends Vital Statistics Fees
(§ 2-76.1)
2009-5 2-5-09 Parking Prohibited During State
of Emergency—Snow (§ 11-7.3)
2009-6 2-19-09 Vacation of Property (Special)
2009-7 3-19-09 Vacation of Property (Special)
2009-8 2-19-09 Amends Construction Permit
Fees; Certificate of Occupancy;
Smoke and Heat Detector Fees
(§§ 12-2.1, 12-2.6, 12-2.14)
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:828
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2009-9 2-19-09 Amends Certificate of
Compliance; Smoke Sensitive
Alarm Devices and Carbon
Monoxide Detectors; Vacation of
Apartments; Inspection Fee;
Exemptions (§§ 15-3.5, 15-3.6)
2009-10 2-19-09 Adds Fee for Zoning Permit
(§ 2-36.4)
2009-11 2-19-09 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2009-12 2-19-09 Handicapped Parking (§ 11-35.1)
2009-13 3-19-09 Amends Property Maintenance
Code—Certificate of Occupancy
Fee (§ 16-2.11)
2009-14 3-19-09 Sale of Property (Special)
2009-15 3-19-09 Emergency Appropriation
(Special)
2009-16 4-2-09 Acquisition of Property (Special)
2009-17 4-23-09 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—Temporary Facilities
for Places of Worship; amends
Temporary Classrooms for
Schools (§§ 18-905E, 18-906G)
2009-18 4-23-09 Vacation of Property (Special)
2009-19 4-23-09 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—Nonconforming Uses
and Lots (§ 18-806)
2009-20 5-6-09 Amends
Members—Transportation Board
(§ 2-56.3)
2009-21 5-6-09 Sale of Property (Special)
2009-22 5-6-09 Vacation of Property (Special)
2009-23 5-6-09 Amends Removal by Township;
Costs Established as Lien
(§§ 16-1.5, 16-2.4)
2009-24 5-6-09 Conveyance of Property (Special)
2009-25 5-6-09 Refund of Bond (Special)
2009-26 5-6-09 CAP Ordinance (Special)
2009-27 6-4-09 Repeals Sex Offender Residency
Prohibition (§ 3-23)
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:829
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2009-28 6-4-09 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—Nonconforming Uses
and Lots (§ 18-806)
2009-29 7-2-09 Dissolves Lakewood Township
Airport Utility (§ 2-51)
2009-30 7-16-09 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2009-31 7-16-09 Sale of Property (Special)
2009-32 7-16-09 Conveyance and Execution of
Deed of Easement (Special)
2009-33 8-6-09 Amends Licensing Fees (§ 4-2.6)
2009-34
2009-35 8-6-09 Amends Dog License Fees
(§ 5-2.5)
2009-36 8-20-09 Amends Planning Board and
Board of Adjustment Fees
(§ 2-36.4)
2009-37 8-20-09 Amends Fees for Copies of CD's
and DVD's (§ 2-76.3)
2009-38 8-20-09 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—adds Zero Lot Line
Development (§ 18-911)
2009-39 8-20-09 Amends Chapter 21, Solid Waste
Management and Recycling (Ch.
21)
2009-40 8-20-09 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—Residential Office
Park (ROP), Permitted Uses
(§ 18-903I)
2009-41 8-20-09 Amends Tax Exemption and
Abatement (§§ 24-1.4, 24-1.5,
24-1.6)
2009-42 8-20-09 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2009-43 8-20-09 Release and Discharge Portion of
Deed Restriction (Special)
2009-44 8-20-09 Amends Redevelopment Plan for
Area II—Pine Street Acquisition
Area (Special)
2009-45 8-20-09 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—Permits Residential
Development in the M-2 Zone
(§ 18-903N)
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:830
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2009-46 9-3-09 Amends Alcoholic Beverage
Control—Adds Identification
Cards (§ 6-7)
2009-47 9-24-09 Vacation of Portion of Right-of-
Way (Special)
2009-48 9-24-09 Abatement of Local Property
Taxes to Site Consultants, LP
(Special)
2009-49 9-24-09 Abatement of Local Property
Taxes to Cedar Holdings LLC
(Special)
2009-50 9-24-09 Abatement of Local Property
Taxes to 418 Clifton Avenue, LLC
(Special)
2009-51 9-24-09 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—Flag Lots
(§ 18-805G)
2009-52 9-24-09 Amends Fees for Excavation of
Public Streets (§ 20-1.5)
2009-53 9-24-09 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—Planned Educational
Campus (§§ 18-200, 18-902H)
2009-54 10-15-09 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2009-55 10-15-09 Four-Way Stop Intersections
(§ 11-21)
2009-56 10-15-09 Left Turn Prohibition (§ 11-23)
2009-57 10-15-09 One-Way Streets (§ 11-18)
2009-58 10-15-09 Right Turn Only (§ 11-23.1)
2009-59 10-29-09 Sale of Property (Special)
2009-60 10-29-09 Amends False
Alarms—Violations, Enforcement
(§§ 3-11.3, 3-11.4)
2009-61 10-29-09 Handicapped Parking (§ 11-35.1)
2009-62 10-29-09 Bus Loading and Unloading
Zone; School Bus Loading and
Unloading Zone; Loading
Zone—Construction Vehicles
Only (§§ 11-25, 11-26.2, 11-25.1)
2009-63 10-29-09 No Parking at Any Time (§ 11-13)
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:831
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2009-64 10-29-09 Parking Prohibited Certain Hours
on Certain Streets (§ 11-14)
2009-65 11-19-09 Bond Ordinance (Special)
2009-66 Died
2009-67 11-19-09 Left Turn Prohibitions (§ 11-23)
2009-68 12-3-09 Vacation of Easement (Special)
2009-70 12-3-09 Abatement of Property Taxes
(Special)
2009-71 12-3-09 Parking Prohibited Certain Hours
on Certain Streets (§ 11-14)
2009-72 12-3-09 Right Turn Only (§ 11-23.1)
2010-1 2-4-10 No Parking at Any Time (§ 11-13)
2010-2 2-4-10 Handicapped Parking (§ 11-35.1)
2010-3 2-4-10 Conveyance of Deed (Special)
2010-4 Died
2010-5 2-4-10 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2010-6 2-18-10 Amends Plumbing Subcode Fees;
Mechanical System Fees
(§§ 12-2.1,12-2.11)
2010-7 2-18-10 One-Way Streets (§ 11-18)
2010-8 2-18-10 Amends False Alarms (§§ 3-11.3,
3-11.4)
2010-9 2-18-10 Cancellation of Taxes, Penalties
and Interest for New Jersey
Center for Judaic Studies
(Special)
2010-10 2-18-10 Cancellation of Taxes, Penalties
and Interest for Shalom Torah
Center (Special)
2010-11 2-18-10 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—Definitions
(§ 18-200)
2010-12 2-18-10 Adds No Solicitation from Public
Right-of-Way (§ 3-15)
2010-13 3-11-10 Amends General
Licensing—Application Fee,
Investigation of Applicant
(§§ 4-1.2, 4-1.3)
2010-14 3-11-10 Vacation of Street (Special)
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:832
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2010-15 3-11-10 Amends Municipal Manager
(§ 2-10.2)
2010-16 3-11-10 Refund of Bond (Special)
2010-17 3-11-10 Street Name Change (Special)
2010-18 3-25-10 Amends Tax Map Maintenance
Fees (§ 2-36.4)
2010-19 4-8-10 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—HD-7 Highway
Development Zone (§ 18-903H)
2010-20 3-25-10 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—B-1 Neighborhood
Business Zone (§ 18-893A)
2010-21 3-25-10 Amends Source Separation
Requirements (§ 21-5)
2010-22 5-13-10 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—R-10, Single-Family
Residential, R-75, Single-Family
Residential (§§ 18-902F, 18-902G)
2010-23 4-8-10 Sale of Property (Special)
2010-24 4-8-10 Grant of Easement (Special)
2010-25 5-13-10 Cancellation of Taxes, Penalties
and Interest for Shalom Torah
Center (Special)
2010-26 5-27-10 Vacation of Street (Special)
2010-27 5-27-10 Handicapped Parking (§ 11-35.1)
2010-28 5-27-10 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—Developers
Agreements (§ 18-403)
2010-29 5-27-10 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—HD-6 Highway
Development Zone (§ 18-903G)
2010-30 5-27-10 Adds Hotel/Motel Room
Occupancy Tax (§ 24-2)
2010-31 5-27-10 Amends Fees—Tax Collector and
CFO (§ 2-76.5)
2010-32 5-27-10 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—Definitions
(§ 18-200)
2010-33 5-27-10 Conveyance of Property (Special)
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:833
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2010-34 5-27-10 Amends Alcoholic Beverage
Control—Hours of Sale
(§§ 6-4.1—6-4.5)
2010-35 6-10-10 CAP Ordinance (Special)
2010-36 6-10-10 Amends Fees for Emergency
Medical Services (§ 2-76.4)
2010-37 6-10-10 Salary Ordinance (Special)
2010-38 6-24-10 Amends Police
Department—Adds Internal
Affairs Unit (§ 2-20.6d)
2010-39 6-24-10 No Stopping or Standing
(§ 11-10.1)
2010-40 6-24-10 Conveyance and Execution of
Deed (Special)
2010-41 7-8-10 Amends Mechanical Systems and
Equipment Fees (§ 12-2.11)
2010-42 7-8-10 Adds Private Storm Drain Inlet
Retrofitting (§ 32-3)
2010-43 7-8-10 Adds Refuse
Containers—Dumpsters (§ 32-4)
2010-44 7-8-10 Cancellation of Taxes, Penalties
and Interest for Congregation
Ahavas (Special)
2010-45 7-8-10 Amends Fees for Copies
(§ 2-76.3)
2010-46 7-22-10 One-Way Streets (§ 11-18)
2010-47 7-22-10 Sale of Property (Special)
2010-48 7-22-10 Street Vacation (Special)
2010-49 7-22-10 Adds Dealers of Precious Metals
and Gems (§ 4-9)
2010-50 7-22-10 No Parking at Any Time (§ 11-13)
2010-51 8-5-10 Amends Ordinance No. 97-29
2010-52 8-5-10 Amends Ordinance No.
01-39—Bond Ordinance (Special)
2010-53 8-5-10 Vacation of Street (Special)
2010-54 8-19-10 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—Change of Use
(§ 18-601.02B)
2010-55 Died
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:834
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2010-56 8-19-10 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—Adds Site
Disturbance (§ 18-824)
2010-57 8-19-10 Adds Bicycle Parking Racks
(§ 3-25)
2010-58 8-19-10 Adds Defacing of Public and
Private Property (§ 3-23)
2010-59 8-19-10 Amends Refuse
Containers—Dumpsters (§ 32-4)
2010-60 8-19-10 Adds Graffiti Abatement (§ 16-4)
2010-61 8-19-10 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—Adds Duplexes
(§ 18-1014)
2010-62 8-19-10 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—Amends Off-Street
Parking and Loading (§ 18-807A)
2010-63 Died
2010-64 9-2-10 Repeals Defacing Property;
Graffiti (§§ 3-5.1, 3-5.2)
2010-65 9-2-10 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—Definition—Subdivision,
Minor (§ 18-200B)
2010-66 9-2-10 Conveyance and Execution of
Deed (Special)
2010-67 9-16-10 Reappropriation (Special)
2010-68 9-16-10 Sale of Property (Special)
2010-69 9-16-10 Vacation of Street (Special)
2010-70 9-16-10 Release and Discharge of Deed
Restriction (Special)
2010-71 10-7-10 Amends Personnel Policies—Adds
Waiver of Employee Coverage of
Health Benefits (§ 10-11.2)
2010-72 10-7-10 Loading and Unloading Zones
(§ 11-26.2)
2010-73 10-7-10 Parking Prohibited Certain Hours
on Certain Streets (§ 11-14)
2010-74 10-7-10 No Stopping or Standing
(§ 11-10.1)
2010-75 10-7-10 No Stopping or Standing
(§ 11-10.1)
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:835
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2010-76 10-7-10 Acceptance of Deed (Special)
2010-77 10-7-10 Acceptance of Deed (Special)
2010-78 10-21-10 Amends Unified Development
Ordinance—Multi-Family
Residential Duplex Regulations
(§ 18-902H)
2010-79 11-4-10 Amends Procedures and Fees for
Purchasing Copies of Public
Records (§ 2-76.3)
2010-80 11-4-10 Amends Licensed Towing
Operators Requirements (§ 4-6)
2010-81 11-18-10 Amends No Stopping or Standing
at All Times (§ 11-10.1)
2010-82 11-18-10 Amends Taxicab Fees (§ 9-5.2)
2010-83 11-18-10 Adds Deputy Municipal Manager
(§ 2-11)
2010-84 11-18-10 Sale of Property (Special)
2010-85 12-9-10 Vacation of Street (Special)
2010-86 11-18-10 Removes Exemption and
Reinstates Taxes for 2009 on
Block 33, Lot 6 (Special)
2010-87 12-9-10 Amends No Stopping or Standing
at All Times (§ 11-10.1)
2010-88 12-9-10 Amends No Stopping or Standing
at All Times (§ 11-10.1)
2010-89 12-9-10 Vacation of Street (Special)
2010-90 12-23-10 Refunds and/or Waives Any and
All Taxes, Penalties, Interest Due
by Lev Avoth Foundation Block
19, Lot 4 for 2009 and 2010
(Special)
2010-91 12-23-10 Amends Through Streets
(§ 11-19)
2010-92 Died
2010-93 12-23-10 Amends Yield Intersections
(§ 11-22)
2010-94 12-23-10 Amends Four-Way Stop
Intersection (§ 11-21)
2010-95 12-23-10 Repeals and Replaces Chapter
19, Protection of Trees (Ch. 19)
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:836
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2011-1 2-3-11 Abatement of property taxes to
W&M Realty Group (Special)
2011-2 2-3-11 Abatement of property taxes to
319 Sunset LLC (Special)
2011-3 2-3-11 Corporate Campus/Stadium
Support Zone (B6), permitted use
(§ 18-903)
2011-4 2-3-11 Bus stops (§ 11-26)
2011-5 2-16-11 Sale of property (Special)
2011-6 2-16-11 Execution of deed of easement
(Special)
2011-7 2-16-11 Motor vehicle card fee for
limousines (§ 4-2.6)
2011-8 3-3-11 Sale of property (Special)
2011-9 Died
2011-10 3-24-11 Sale of property (Special)
2011-11 3-24-11 Neighborhood Business Zone,
permitted use (§ 18-903)
2011-12 3-24-11 Lakewood Development
Corporation—Board of Trustees
(§ 2-96.3)
2011-13 4-7-11 Parking prohibited at all times
(§ 11-13)
2011-14 4-7-11 Vacation of street (Special)
2011-15 4-7-11 Alcoholic Beverage Control fees
(§ 6-3.4)
2011-16 4-7-11 Bus stops (§ 11-26)
2011-17 4-7-11 Unified Development
Ordinance—Definitions
(§ 18-200), Conditional uses
(§ 18-903), Add Mixed
Townhouse Development
(§ 18-1014)
2011-18 4-7-11 Handicapped parking (§ 11-35)
2011-19 4-28-11 Consumption of alcoholic
beverages by underage persons
(§ 6-6.5)
2011-20 4-28-11 Sale of property (Special)
2011-21 4-28-11 Sale of property (Special)
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:837
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2011-22 5-12-11 Taxicabs—Fees—Medallions
(§ 9-5.2)
2011-23 5-12-11 Employee standards—Towing
(§ 4-6.5)
2011-24 5-12-11 Transient merchants, peddlers,
hawkers (§ 4-3)
2011-25 5-26-11 CAP Ordinance (Special)
2011-26 5-26-11 Emergency appropriation
(Special)
2011-27 5-26-11 Service stations and public
garages (§ 18-1008)
2011-28 5-26-11 Stop intersections (§ 11-20)
2011-29 5-26-11 One-way streets (§ 11-18)
2011-30 5-26-11 Stop intersections (§ 11-20)
2011-31 5-26-11 Sale of property (Special)
2011-32 5-26-11 Commercial or tax exemption
and abatement (§ 24-1)
2011-33 5-26-11 Vacation of street (Special)
2011-34 6-16-11 Sale of property (Special)
2011-35 6-16-11 Sale of property (Special)
2011-36 Died
2011-37 6-30-11 Temporary suspension of parking
regulations (§ 11-7.4)
2011-38 7-28-11 Property tax abatement to 603
West County Line Road LLC
2011-39 7-28-11 Parking prohibited certain hours
on certain streets (§ 11-14)
2011-40 7-28-11 Highway Development Zone
(HD-6) permitted uses (§ 18-903)
2011-41 7-28-11 Parking prohibited at all times
(§ 11-13)
2011-42 7-28-11 Sale of property (Special)
2011-43 7-28-11 Sale of property (Special)
2011-44 8-25-11 Amends traffic, 11-18, One way
streets (codified in Supp. No. 23)
2011-45 9-22-11 Sale of property (Special)
2011-46 9-8-11 Sale of property (Special)
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:838
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2011-47 9-8-11 Sale of property (Special)
2011-48 9-22-11 Vacation of street (Special)
2011-49 10-6-11 Amend Ordinance
2003-48—Bond Ordinance
(Special)
2011-50 10-6-11 Vacation of street (Special) 19
2011-51 10-25-11 Bond/Appropriation (Special) 19
2011-52 10-25-11 Discharge deed restriction
(Special)
19
2011-53 11-17-11 Exchange of property (Special) 19
2011-54 12-1-11 Vacation of street (Special) 19
2011-55 12-1-11 Tax abatement agreement
(Special)
19
2011-56 12-15-11 Alcoholic beverages—prohibited
locations, 6-3.6
19
2011-57 12-15-11 Grant of easement with New
Jersey American Water Company
(Special)
19
2011-58 12-15-11 Vacation of street (Special) 19
2011-59 Died 19
2012-1 2-2-12 Refund bond (Special) 19
2012-2 2-2-12 Improper disposal of waste,
32-1.3, 32-1.4
19
2012-3 2-2-12 Public Defender—Appointment,
2-7.2
19
2012-4 2-2-12 UDO-Definitions, 18-200;
automobile repairs and service,
18-1016
19
2012-5 2-2-12 Sale of property (Special) 19
2012-6 Died 19
2012-7 2-16-12 Handicapped parking, 11-35 19
2012-8 2-16-12 Student discharge and pickup,
11-23
19
2012-9 2-16-12 Turn prohibitions, 11-13 19
2012-10 2-16-12 Parking prohibited at all times,
11-13
19
2012-11 2-16-12 Stopping or standing prohibited,
11-10.1
19
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:839
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2012-12 3-1-12 Construction permit fees, 12-2 19
2012-13 3-1-12 Certificate of
Compliance—Smoke-sensitive
alarm devices and carbon
monoxide detector, 15-3.5;
vacation of
apartments—inspections fees,
exemptions, 15-3.6
19
2012-14 3-1-12 Property Maintenance—Fee for
certificate of occupancy, 16-3.11
19
2012-15 3-1-12 UDO-Requirements of permits,
18-1102
19
2012-16 3-1-12 UDO-Definitions—Shed, 18-200B 19
2012-17 3-15-12 Sale of property (Special) 19
2012-18 3-29-12 Sale of property (Special) 19
2012-19 3-15-12 Exchange of property (Special) 19
2012-20 3-15-12 Stopping or standing prohibited,
3-15.12
19
2012-21 3-15-12 One-way streets, 11-18; right
turn only, 11-23
19
2012-22 3-15-12 Parking prohibited at all times,
11-13; parking prohibited certain
hours, certain streets, 11-14
19
2012-23 3-15-12 Lease agreement (Special) 19
2012-24 3-29-12 Taxicabs—Definitions, 9-2;
medallions, 9-5, meters and
rates, 9-8
19
2012-25 3-29-12 Handicapped parking, 11-35 19
2012-26 4-19-12 UDO-Paving materials, walls and
fence, 18-803
19
2012-27 4-19-12 Vacation of street (Special) 19
2012-28 4-19-12 Vacation of street (Special) 19
2012-29 4-19-12 Fees—Mechanical systems and
equipment, 12-2.11
19
2012-30 4-19-12 Interference with retail or
wholesale business practices, 3-5
19
2012-31 5-3-12 Vacation of street (Special) 19
2012-32 5-3-12 Vacate easement (Special) 19
2012-33 Died 19
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:840
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2012-34 5-17-12 CAP (Special) 19
2012-35 5-17-12 Vacation of street (Special) 19
2012-36 5-17-12 Vacation of street (Special) 19
2012-37 5-17-12 Vacation of street (Special) 19
2012-38 5-17-12 Vacation of street (Special) 19
2012-39 5-17-12 Supplemental sick leave, 10-15.1f 19
2012-40 6-21-12 Vacate street (Special) 19
2012-41 6-21-12 One way streets, 11-18 19
2012-42 6-21-12 Sale of property (Special) 19
2012-43 7-5-12 Sale of property (Special) 19
2012-44 7-5-12 Vacation of street (Special) 19
2012-45 8-16-12 Stopping or standing prohibited,
11-10.1
19
2012-46 Died 19
2012-47 Died 19
2012-48 8-16-12 Vacation of street (Special) 19
2012-49 Died 19
2012-50 Died 19
2012-51 8-16-12 Vacation of street (Special) 19
2012-52 8-16-12 UDO-Definitions, 18-200B;
Mixed-use multifamily
development, 18-1017
19
2012-53 9-6-12 Vacation of street (Special) 19
2012-54 9-20-12 Sale of property (Special) 19
2012-55 9-20-12 Exchange of lands (Special) 19
2012-56 9-20-12 Traffic regulations—Leisure
Village East, 11-37.3m
19
2012-57 10-11-12 Code Enforcement Officer/
Parking Enforcement Officer,
2-16.5
19
2012-58 10-11-12 School bus loading and unloading
zone, 11-26B
19
2012-59 10-11-12 Control of movement and parking
of traffic—municipal parking lots,
11-37.1
19
2012-60 10-25-12 Bond (Special) 19
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:841
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2012-61 10-25-12 Exchange of lands (Special) 19
2012-62 10-25-12 Exchange of lands (Special) 19
2012-63 11-20-12 Sale of property (Special) 19
2012-64 12-6-12 Vacation of street (Special) 19
2012-65 12-6-12 Vacation of street (Special) 19
2013-1 Not adopted 20
2013-2 2-7-13 Four-way stop intersections,
11-21; Yield intersections, 11-22
20
2013-3 2-20-13 Department of Public Works,
duties, 2-15.4; repeal
Department of Lakewood
Community Center, 2-18
20
2013-4 2-20-13 Exchange of land (Special) 20
2013-5 2-20-13 Fees—fingerprinting, 2-76.1 20
2013-6 2-20-13 Sale of land (Special) 20
2013-7 2-20-13 B-6 Zone, permitted uses, 18-903 20
2013-8 Not adopted 20
2013-9 2-20-13 Vacate deed restriction (Special) 20
2013-10 2-20-13 Conveyance of deed (Special) 20
2013-11 Not adopted 20
2013-12 3-7-13 Stopping or standing prohibited,
11-10.1
20
2013-13 3-7-13 Off-duty assignments of police,
2-29.9
20
2013-14 3-7-13 Salary (Special) 20
2013-15 3-21-13 Exercise of eminent domain
(Special)
20
2013-16 3-21-13 B-6 Zone—Permitted and
conditional uses, 18-903
20
2013-17 3-21-13 Paving material, walls and
fences, 18-803
20
2013-18 3-21-13 Residential Office Park (ROP),
18-903I
20
2013-19 3-21-13 Vacate easement (Special) 20
2013-20 4-18-13 Prohibit open fires on public
property, 3-27
20
2013-21 4-18-13 Vacate street (Special) 20
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:842
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2013-22 4-18-13 Vacate street (Special) 20
2013-23 4-18-13 Transient merchants, peddlers
and hawkers—Definition, Mobile
food vendors, 4-3
20
2013-24 4-18-13 Unauthorized camping on public
or private property, 3-26
20
2013-25 4-18-13 Personnel—Accumulation and
termination of employment,
10-14.3, repeal, 10-14.5
20
2013-26 Not adopted 20
2013-27 4-18-13 Stopping or standing prohibited,
11-10.1
20
2013-28 4-18-13 Personnel—waiver of employee
coverage of health benefits,
10-11.2
20
2013-29 4-18-13 Unconforming uses and lots,
18-806
20
2013-30 5-23-13 UDO-Zoning Map 18-901 20
2013-31 4-18-13 UDO-Definitions, 18-200;
conditional uses, 18-903;
conditional use
requirements—mixed use
developments, 18-1018
20
2013-32 5-2-13 Taxicab—medallions, 9-5.5 20
2013-33 Not adopted 20
2013-34 5-2-13 Vacate street (Special) 20
2013-35 5-2-13 Vacate street (Special) 20
2013-36 5-2-13 Deed of easement (Special) 20
2013-37 5-23-13 Change of street name (Special) 20
2013-38 5-23-13 Cable television—Ch. 22 20
2013-39 5-23-13 Sale of property (Special) 20
2013-40 6-6-13 Amend Zoning Map, 18-901 20
2013-41 6-6-13 Sale of property, Special 20
2013-42 7-11-13 CAP, Special 20
2013-43 7-11-13 Four way stops, 11-22 20
2013-44 7-11-13 Stopping or standing prohibited,
11-10.1
20
2013-45 7-11-13 Construction permit fees, 12-2.1 20
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:843
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2013-46 7-11-13 Zoning permit fees, 18-1102 20
2013-47 7-25-13 Conveyance of property, Special 20
2013-48 7-25-13 Vacation of street, Special 20
2013-49 7-25-13 Corporate campus/Stadium
Support Zone (B-6), 18-903R
20
2013-50 7-25-13 Service stations and public
garages, 18-1008
20
2013-51 7-25-13 Signs-definitions, 18-200;
prohibited signs, 18-812; digital
billboards, 18-903A, 18-903C,
18-903D, 18-903G, 18-903H,
18-903M, 18-1016
20
2013-52 Not adopted 20
2013-53 7-25-13 Vacation of street, Special 20
2013-54 8-8-13 Bond, Special 20
2013-55 8-8-13 Stopping or standing prohibited,
11-10.1
20
2013-56 8-22-13 Four-way stops, 11-20 20
2013-57 8-22-13 Sale of property 20
2013-58 9-12-13 Single-Family Residential Zones
(R-10A), 18-902L
20
2013-59 10-3-13 Hospital Support Zone (HS)
definition, 18-901; regulations,
18-903S
20
2013-60 9-12-13 Airport Business Commercial
Zone-definition, 18-901;
regulations, 18-903T
20
2013-61 9-12-13 Stop intersections, 11-20 20
2013-62 9-12-13 Impact fees, 18-706 20
2013-63 Not adopted 20
2013-64 10-3-13 Installation of traffic signal,
Special
20
2013-65 10-17-13 Sale of property, Special 20
2013-66 10-17-13 Prohibiting open fires on public
property, 3-27
20
2013-67 11-7-13 Parking time limited, 11-11 20
2013-68 11-7-13 Stop intersections, 11-20 20
2013-69 11-7-13 Handicapped parking, 11-35 20
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:844
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2013-70 11-7-13 Definition-Public Street, 18-200 20
2013-71 11-7-13 Change of street name, Special 20
2013-72 11-7-13 Vacation of street, Special 20
2013-73 11-21-13 Bond, Special 20
2013-74 11-21-13 Restrict residential uses within
200 feet of Route 9 South of
Central Avenue, 18-903G,
18-903H
20
2013-75 11-21-13 Four-way stops, 11-22 20
2013-76 11-21-13 Stormwater management-general
maintenance, 18-815.1.9
20
2013-77 12-5-13 Sale of property, Special 20
2013-78 12-5-13 Planning Board/Zoning Board of
Adjustment fees, 2-36.4
20
2013-79 12-5-13 Commercial Uses with frontage
on CR 526, 18-902C.2.f.,
18-902D.2.f., 18-902E.2.b.,
18-902F.2.b., 18-902G.2.b.,
18-1020
Repealed by Court order on June
2, 2017
20
2013-80 Not adopted 20
2013-81 12-19-13 Parking time limited, 11-11 20
2013-82 Not adopted 20
2013-83 12-19-13 Vacation of street, Special 20
2013-84 12-19-13 Vacation of street, Special 20
2013-85 Not adopted 20
2014-1 2-20-14 4-way stop intersections, 11-21 21
2014-2 2-20-14 Municipal parking lots, 11-37a,14 21
2014-3 2-20-14 Vacation of street, Special 21
2014-4 2-20-14 Vacation of street, Special 21
2014-5 3-20-14 Sale of property, Special 21
2014-6 3-20-14 Stopping or standing prohibited,
11-10.1
21
2014-7 3-20-14 Fees for Emergency Medical
Services, 2-76.4
21
2014-8 3-20-14 Amends UDO-Duplexes, 18-1014 21
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:845
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2014-9 3-20-14 Exchange of property, Special 21
2014-10 3-20-14 Amends UDO-nonconforming
uses and lots, 18-806
21
2014-11 3-20-14 Amends UDO-definitions,
18-200B
21
2014-12 3-20-14 Amends UDO-residential zoning
districts, 18-902
21
2014-13 5-8-14 Amends UDO-Zoning Map,
18-901
21
2014-14 3-20-14 4-way stop intersections, 11-21 21
2014-15 3-20-14 Parking prohibited at all times,
11-13
21
2014-16 3-20-14 Sale of property, Special 21
2014-17 4-3-14 Bond, Special 21
2014-18 4-3-14 Sale of property, Special 21
2014-19 5-8-14 Amends UDO-basement
apartments, 18-910
21
2014-20 5-8-14 Amends UDO-establishment of
zoning districts, 18-901A; Zoning
Map, 18-901B create Oak Street
Core Neighborhood Overlay
Zone, 18-902M
21
2014-21 4-3-14 Change street name, Special 21
2014-22 4-3-14 Tax abatement agreement with
Lakewood Conference Center,
LLC, Special
21
2014-23 5-8-14 Sale of property, Special 21
2014-24 5-8-14 Sale of property, Special 21
2014-25 5-8-14 Sale of property, Special 21
2014-26 5-8-14 Acquisition of storm sewer
easement, Special
21
2014-27 5-22-14 Sale of property, Special 21
2014-28 5-22-14 Sale of property, Special 21
2014-29 5-22-14 Vacate street, Special 21
2014-30 5-22-14 Vacate street, Special 21
2014-31 6-12-14 Amends UDO-digital billboards,
18-1019
21
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:846
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2014-32 5-22-14 Amends UDO-Residential Office
Park (ROP), 18-903I
21
2014-33 5-22-14 Exercise of eminent domain,
Special
21
2014-34 5-22-14 Sale of property, Special 21
2014-35 5-22-14 Vacate street, Special 21
2014-36 5-22-14 Vacate street, Special 21
2014-37 5-22-14 Amends UDO-definitions,
18-200B
21
2014-38 5-22-14 Solid waste and
recycling—collection regulations,
21-3
21
2014-39 6-12-14 Tax abatement agreement with
Condor Jackson, LLC, Special
21
2014-40 6-26-14 Tax abatement agreement with
Bais Rivka Rochel, Special
21
2014-41 6-12-14 Sale of property, Special 21
2014-42 6-12-14 Sale of property, Special 21
2014-43 6-12-14 Stopping or standing prohibited,
11-10.1
21
2014-44 6-12-14 Acquisition of property, Special 21
2014-45 6-26-14 CAP, Special 21
2014-46 6-26-14 Use of ball fields by out-of-town
groups and organized league,
8-15
21
2014-47 6-26-14 Amends UDO-Zoning Map,
18-901B
21
2014-48 7-24-14 Parking prohibited at all times on
certain streets, 11-13
22
2014-49 7-24-14 Peddlers and hawkers-definitions,
4-3.1
22
2014-50 7-24-14 Acquisition of property, Special 22
2014-51 7-24-14 Add Oak Street Core
Neighborhood Overlay Zone-2,
18-901, 18-902N
22
2014-52 7-24-14 Add Single Family Residential-
R-12B; R-12C and R-10B,
18-901B; 18-902O, 18-902P;
18-902Q
22
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:847
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2014-53 7-24-14 Tax Map/GIS Database Update
Fees, 18-707
22
2014-54 7-24-14 Parking prohibited at all times,
11-13
22
2014-55 8-7-14 Exchange of lands, Special 22
2014-56 8-7-14 Amend UDO-definition-planned
educational campus, 18-200
22
2014-57 8-7-14 Sale of property, Special 22
2014-58 8-21-14 Sale of property, Special 22
2014-59 8-21-14 Sale of property, Special 22
2014-60 8-21-14 Exchange of lands, Special 22
2014-61 8-21-14 Add Single Family Residential
Zones R-12D, R-20A, R-40A,
18-901; 18-902Q, 18-902R,
18-902S
22
2014-62 8-21-14 Exchange of lands, Special 22
2014-63 9-4-14 Bond, Special 22
2014-64 9-18-14 Multiple stop intersections,
11-21.1, 11-21.2
22
2014-65 9-18-14 Sale and conveyance of
easement, Special
22
2014-66 9-18-14 Conveyance of easement, Special 22
2014-67 9-18-14 Parking time limited on certain
streets, 11-11.1
22
2014-68 9-18-14 Conveyance of easement, Special 22
2014-69 9-18-14 Sale of property, Special 22
2014-70 10-2-14 Bond, Special 22
2014-71 10-2-14 Bond, Special 22
2014-72 10-2-14 Stopping or standing prohibited,
11-10.1
22
2014-73 10-2-14 Exchange of lands, Special 22
2014-74 Carried 22
2014-75 10-2-14 Sale of property, Special 22
2014-76 10-2-14 Sale of property, Special 22
2014-77 10-2-14 Vacate portion of street, Special 22
2014-78 10-23-14 Sale of property, Special 22
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:848
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2014-79 10-23-14 Repeal waiver of employee
coverage of health benefits,
10-11.12
22
2014-80 10-23-14 Handicapped parking, 11-35.6 22
2014-81 10-23-14 Abatement of property taxes to
Laundry Time, LLC, Special
22
2014-82 10-23-14 Deed of easement, Special 22
2014-83 11-6-14 Handicapped parking, 11-35.6 22
2014-84 11-6-14 Sale of property, Special 22
2014-85 11-6-14 Transportation Improvement
District, 18-505
22
2014-86 11-20-14 Vacate portion of street, Special 22
2014-87 11-20-14 Dealers of precious metals, and
other secondhand goods, 4-9
22
2014-88 11-20-14 Change name of Woehr Street to
Woehr Avenue, Special
22
2014-89 12-10-14 Vacate portion of street, Special 22
2014-90 12-10-14 Vacate portion of street, Special 22
2014-91 12-10-14 Conveyance of easement, Special 22
2014-92 12-10-14 Sale of property, Special 22
2014-93 12-10-14 Sale of property, Special 22
2014-94 12-10-14 Stopping or standing prohibited,
11-10.1
22
2015-1 2-5-15 Vacate dedication of property for
open space, Special
23
2015-2 2-5-15 Amends Ch. 2, Administration,
amends 2-20.9, off-duty
assignments of Police Officers
23
2015-3 2-5-15 Amends Ch. 11, Traffic, amends
11-10.1, stopping and standing
prohibited
23
2015-4 2-19-15 Amends Ch. 11, Traffic; amends
11-18, one-way streets; amends
11-21, 4-way stops; amends
11-37 control for movement and
parking of traffic on public and
private property-Second Street
Parking Lot; First Street
Municipal Lot
23
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:849
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2015-5 2-19-15 Amends Ch. 4, General
Licensing; adds 4-10 Dealers in
scrap metal
23
2015-6 2-19-15 Amends Ch. 4, General
Licensing; amends 4-9, dealers of
precious metals and other
secondhand goods
23
2015-7 2-19-15 Vacate portion of street, Special 23
2015-8 2-19-15 Exchange of land, Special 23
2015-9 3-12-15 Authorizes cancellation of all
taxes due on certain property,
Special
23
2015-10 3-12-15 Amends salaries, Special 23
2015-11 Not adopted 23
2015-12 3-26-15 Amends Ch. 11, Traffic; amends
11-37.1, Part 1, Municipal
parking lots
23
2015-13 3-26-15 Sale of property, Special 23
2015-14 3-26-15 Amends Ch. 9, Taxicabs; amends
9-6.5, violations, summons,
complaints, waiver of hearings
23
2015-15 3-26-15 Amends Ch. 6, Alcoholic
Beverage Control; amends 6-6.5,
consumption of alcoholic
beverages by underage persons
on private property
23
2015-16 3-26-15 Amends Ch. 24, Taxation; adds
24-3, procedures for application,
approval and administration of
long term tax exemptions
23
2015-17 3-26-15 Amends Ch. 4, General
Licensing; amends 4-9, dealers of
precious metals and other
secondhand goods
23
2015-18 3-26-15 Tax abatement agreement with
Lakeview Village LLC, Special
23
2015-19 3-26-15 Tax abatement agreement with
Sanyo Realty, LLC, Special
23
2015-20 3-26-15 Tax abatement agreement with
1001 New Hampshire Avenue
LLC, Special
23
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:850
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2015-21 4-16-15 Refund Bond, Special 23
2015-22 4-16-15 Bond, Special 23
2015-23 4-16-15 Vacate portion of street, Special 23
2015-24 4-16-15 Authorize deed of a fee simple
interest, Special
23
2015-25 4-16-15 Acquisition of property, Special 23
2015-26 4-30-15 Bond, Special 23
2015-27 4-30-15 Purchase of easement, Special 23
2015-28 5-21-15 Amends Ch. 2, Administration;
amends 2-12.1, Directory of
Department (Finance); deletes
2-12.2, Division of Treasury
23
2015-29 5-21-15 Amends Ch. 11, Traffic; amends
11-26, bus stops
23
2015-30 5-21-15 Amends Ch. 18, Unified
Development Ordinance; amends
902B Residential (R-40) District
23
2015-31 Not adopted 23
2015-32 6-11-15 Emergency appropriation,
Special
23
2015-33 6-11-15 Amends Ch. 18, Unified
Development Ordinance, repeals
18-707, Tax Map/GIS Database
Update fees; amends Ch. 2,
Administration; adds 2-76.8, Tax
map/GIS Database Update fees
23
2015-34 6-11-15 Amends Ch. 11, Traffic; amends
11-37.1, Part 1, Municipal
parking lots-Fifth Street Lot
Repealed by Court Order on April
24, 2017
23
2015-35 7-9-15 Amends Ch. 18, Unified
Development Ordinance; amends
18-901, Zoning Districts and
Zoning Map; adds 18-902U,
Single Family Residential (R-40B)
District Repealed by Court Order
on April 24, 2017
23
2015-36 6-25-15 Sale of property, Special 23
2015-37 6-25-15 Amends Ch. 2, Administration;
amends 2-20 Police Department
23
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:851
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2015-38 6-25-15 Amends Ch. 2, Administration;
adds 2-20.13, Rules and
Regulations for Police
Department
23
2015-39 7-9-15 Amends Ch. 11, Traffic; amends
11-21.1, 4-way stops
23
2015-40 7-9-15 Vacate portion of street, Special 23
2015-41 7-9-15 Establishes CAP Bank, Special 23
2011-44 8-25-11 Amends Traffic; 11-18, one way
streets
23
2015-42 7-23-15 Amends Ch. 18, Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-200,
definitions-basketball courts;
garage private, shed
24
2015-43 7-23-15 Amends Ch. 18, Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-12E,
temporary advertising signs at
local events
24
2015-44 7-23-15 Amends Ch. 2, Administration;
2-76.8, Tax Map/GIS Database
update fee
24
2015-45 7-23-15 Authorize cancellation of taxes,
penalties and interest for
Congregation Kollel Inc., Special
24
2015-46 7-23-15 Authorizes cancellation of taxes,
penalties and interest for Bais
Madrash Hatorah, Inc., Special
24
2015-47 8-20-15 Sale of property, Special 24
2015-48 8-20-15 Sale of property, Special 24
2015-49 8-20-15 Sale of property, Special 24
2015-50 8-20-15 Sale of property, Special 24
2015-51 8-20-15 Sale of property, Special 24
2015-52 8-20-15 Sale of property, Special 24
2015-53 8-20-15 Sale of property, Special 24
2015-54 8-20-15 Sale of property, Special 24
2015-55 9-3-15 Vacation of street, Special 24
2015-56 9-3-15 Amends Ch. 16, Property
Maintenance; adds 16-1.7,
regulates the removal of
household goods
24
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:852
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2015-57 9-3-15 Vacation of streets, Special 24
2015-58 10-8-15 Amends Ch. 10, Personnel
Policies; creates 10-26,
background checks
24
2015-59 10-8-15 Lease agreement, Special 24
2015-60 10-8-15 Execute financial agreement with
Ezra Holdings Urban Renewal
LLC, Special
24
2015-61 11-12-15 Amends Ch. 18, Unified
Development Ordinance, creates
18-506, Oak Street Corridor
Improvement District
24
2015-62 11-12-15 Grant a Conservation, Deed
Restriction easement, Special
24
2015-63 11-12-15 Bond, Special 24
2015-64 12-3-15 Execute Financial agreement
with Ocean Care Realty Urban
Renewal LLC
24
2015-65 12-3-15 Amends Ch. 3, Police
Regulations, adds 3-28, disposal
of Police prisoner property
24
2015-66 12-3-15 Amends Cedar Bridge
Redevelopment Plan, Special
24
2015-67 12-3-15 Sale of property, Special 24
2015-68 12-3-15 Sale of property, Special 24
2015-69 12-3-15 Sale of property, Special 24
2015-70 12-3-15 Sale of property, Special 24
2015-71 12-3-15 Amends Ch. 20, Streets and
Sidewalks in entirety
24
2015-72 12-3-15 Amends Ch. 11, Traffic; 11-35,
handicapped parking
24
2015-73 12-3-15 Acquisition of property-eminent
domain, Special
24
2015-74 12-17-15 Vacation of street, Special 24
2015-75 Not adopted 24
2015-76 12-17-15 Sale of property, Special 24
2015-77 12-17-15 Amends Ch. 11, Traffic; 11-21.1,
four-way stops
24
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:853
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2015-78 12-17-15 Amends Ch. 16, Property
Maintenance; creates 16-5,
regulating care, maintenance
security and upkeep of vacant or
abandoned residential properties
in foreclosure
24
2015-79 12-17-15 Lease agreement, Special 24
2015-80 12-17-15 Sale of property, Special 24
2016-1 2-4-16 Amends Ch. 11, Traffic; 11-23,
Turn Prohibitions
25
2016-2 2-4-16 Tax abatement agreement with
16 South Avenue, LLC, Special
25
2016-3 Not adopted 25
2016-4 Not adopted 25
2016-5 2-4-16 Amends Ch. 4, General
Licensing; 4-6.6, Rates for
Towing Operator's License
25
2016-6 2-4-16 Sale of property, Special 25
2016-7 2-4-16 Sale of property, Special 25
2016-8 2-4-16 Sale of property, Special 25
2016-9 2-4-16 Sale of property, Special 25
2016-10 2-4-16 Sale of property, Special 25
2016-11 2-18-16 Amends Ch. 18, Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-200,
Definitions (digital billboard);
18-812A.12.b, Prohibited Signs;
18-903, Conditional Uses;
18-1019, Digital Billboards
25
2016-12 2-18-16 Salary range, Special 25
2016-13 2-18-16 Amends Ch. 10, Personnel;
10-11.2, Compensation for
Waiver of Employee Coverage of
Health Benefits
25
2016-14 2-18-16 Amends Ch. 11, Traffic; 11-14,
Parking Prohibited Certain Hours
on Certain Streets
25
2016-15 3-17-16 Sale of property, Special 25
2016-16 3-17-16 Amends Ch. 2, Administration;
2-36.4, Fees, Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment
25
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:854
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2016-17 5-5-16 Sale of property, Special 25
2016-18 5-5-16 Acquisition of property, Special 25
2016-19 5-5-16 Amends Ch. 2, Administration;
2-76.1, Fees for Miscellaneous
Services
25
2016-20 5-5-16 Amends Ch. 11, Traffic; change
Street-Silvestro Drive to Claire
Drive, added footnote
25
2016-21 5-19-16 Tax abatement agreement with
Lakewood Equity, LLC, Special
25
2016-22 5-19-16 Tax abatement agreement to
Chateau Holdings LLC, Special
25
2016-23 5-19-16 Salary ranges, Special 25
2016-24 6-2-16 CAP, Special 25
2016-25 6-2-16 Vacation of easement, Special 25
2016-26 6-2-16 Amends Ch. 3, Police
Regulations; 3-29, Prohibit
Possession of Weapons at First
Energy Park
25
2016-27 6-16-16 Sale of property, Special 25
2016-28 7-7-16 Amends Ch. 2, Administration;
2-20.9, Off-duty Assignments of
Police Officers
25
2016-29 7-7-16 Amends Ch. 11, Traffic; 11-13
Parking prohibited at all times
25
2016-30 8-4-16 Amends Ch. 18 Unified Land
Development, 18-601.2C Site
Plan Exceptions, See Unified
Land Development Volume
Supplement No. 19 (6/17)
25
2016-31 7-7-16 Sale of property, Special 25
2016-32 7-21-16 Capital-appropriation, Special 25
2016-33 Not Adopted 26
2016-34 8-18-16 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-902L
Single Family Residential (R-10A)
26
2016-35 8-4-16 Sale of Property, Special 26
2016-36 8-4-16 Sale of Property, Special 26
2016-37 8-4-16 Sale of Property, Special 26
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:855
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2016-38 8-4-16 Amends Ch. 10 Personnel
Policies; 10-15.1 Sick Leave
26
2016-39 Not Adopted 26
2016-40 8-18-16 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; adds
18-912 Oak Street Core
Residential Development
26
2016-41 8-4-16 Amends Ch. 11 Traffic; 11-35.6
Restricted Parking Zones in
Front of Residences Occupied by
Handicapped Persons
26
2016-42 8-18-16 Grant of Sewer Easement,
Special
26
2016-43 9-15-16 Amends Ch. 18 Unified Land
Development Ordinance; 18-506
Oak Street Corridor
Improvement District in entirety
26
2016-44 10-6-16 Vacation of Street, Special 26
2016-45 Not Adopted 26
2016-46 10-6-16 Vacation of Street, Special 26
2016-47 10-6-16 Tax Abatement Agreement with
Excel Corporate Park VII, LLC,
Special
26
2016-48 10-27-16 Change Street Name, Special 26
2016-49 10-27-16 Vacation of Street, Special 26
2016-50 11-10-16 Change Street Name, Special 26
2016-51 12-1-16 Vacation of Street, Special 26
2016-52 12-1-16 Vacation of Street, Special 26
2016-53 12-1-16 Vacation of Street, Special 26
2016-54 12-1-16 Vacation of Street, Special 26
2016-55 12-22-16 Vacation of Street, Special 26
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:856
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2017-1 2-15-17 Amends Ch. 2 Administration;
adds Article XV creates 2-25
Department of Human
Resources; amends Ch. 10
Personnel; adds Note to Chapter
10 Title concerning Code
Appendix B, Personnel Policies
and Procedures Manual; adds
10-1.3 Personnel Policies and
Procedures Manual Adopted
27
2017-2 2-15-17 Amends Ch. 9 Taxicabs; 9-8
Meters and Rates, 9-8.1
27
2017-3 3-2-17 Tax abatement agreement to
Casa Nova Today, LLC, Special
27
2017-4 3-16-17 Bond, Special 27
2017-5 3-2-17 Change Street Name, Special 27
2017-6 3-2-17 Change Street Name, Special 27
2017-7 3-2-17 Accept Dedication of Right-of-
Way, Special
27
2017-8 3-2-17 Sale of property, Special 27
2017-9 3-2-17 Sale of property, Special 27
2017-10 3-2-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-1112
Land Development Checklist
27
2017-11 3-2-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-903
E Highway Development Zone
(B-5)
27
2017-12 4-6-17 Amends Ch. 11 Traffic; 11-13
Parking Prohibited At All Times
on Certain Streets
27
2017-13 5-4-17 Amends Ch. 17 Unified
Development Ordinance;
18-903D Wholesale Service Zone
(B-4) Permitted Uses
27
2017-14 4-6-17 Tax abatement agreement to
1205 Paco Way LLC, Special
27
2017-15 4-6-17 Sale of property, Special 27
2017-16 5-4-17 CAP Bank, Special 27
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:857
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2017-17 6-8-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance;
18-505D Transportation
Improvement District, Impact
Fees; Exhibit B Summary of Cost
Estimates for Lakewood TID 1
and 2
27
2017-18 4-20-17 Amends Ch. 24 Taxation; 24-1.7
Commercial or Industrial
Structure Tax Abatement
Agreement
27
2017-19 5-4-17 Change Street Name, Special 27
2017-20 6-8-17 Grant of Easement, Special 27
2017-21 6-8-17 Lease Agreement, Special 27
2017-22 6-22-17 Amends Ch. 11 Traffic; 11-18
One-Way Streets
27
2017-23 7-13-17 Amends Ch. 24 Taxation; 24-3.1
Definitions-PILOT Review
Professional; amends 24-3.3b.
Application Fee; amends 24-3.4
Consideration and Approval
28
2017-24 12-7-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-901
Establishment of Zoning Districts
and Zoning Map to add Riparian
Buffer Conservation Overlay;
adds 18-902V Riparian Buffer
Conservation Overlay Zone
28
2017-25 8-10-17 Amends Ch. 16 Property
Maintenance; adds 16-6 Outdoor
Landscape Water Conservation
Ordinance 16-6.1—16-6.6
28
2017-26 8-10-17 Amends Board of Health, adds
Ch. 21 Well Head Protection;
BH21-1.1—BH21-1.10, Appendix
A Major Potential Pollutant
Sources, Appendix B Minor
Potential Pollutant Sources
28
2017-27 11-8-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-200
Definition of Terms; amends
18-807A Off-Street Parking,
Loading and Circulation
28
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:858
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2017-28 8-31-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance;
18-807B Off- Street Parking,
Loading and Circulation; amends
18-903M Industrial Zone (M-1),
Residential Zoning Districts
28
2017-29 8-10-17 Amends Ch. 2 Administration,
2-76.1 Fees for Miscellaneous
Services
28
2017-30 10-18-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance, 18-812
Signs
28
2017-31 8-31-17 Authorizes Conservation
Restriction/Easement (Forest and
Riparian Zone Preservation
Areas)
28
2017-32 9-14-17 Sale of Property, Special 28
2017-33 Not Adopted 28
2017-34 9-14-17 Amends Ch. 2 Administration;
2-12.5 Tax Assessor, Department
of Finance
28
2017-35 9-14-17 Property Dedication, Special 28
2017-36 9-14-17 Amends Ch. 2 Administration;
2-25 Department of Human
Resources, amends footnote;
amends Ch. 10 Personnel 10-1.3;
adopts Personnel Policies and
Procedures Manual-See Code
Appendix B for Manual
28
2017-37 10-18-17 Sale of Property, Special 28
2017-38 10-18-17 Deed of Easement, Special 28
2017-39 11-8-17 Amends Ch. 10 Personnel
Policies; 10-26 Background
Checks, 10-26.1—10-26.7
28
2017-40 11-8-17 Sale of Property, Special 28
2017-41 11-8-17 Sale of Property, Special 28
2017-42 12-7-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance;
18-815B Stormwater
Management/Residential Site
Improvement Standards
28
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:859
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2017-43 11-8-17 Deed of Easement, Special 28
2017-44 11-8-17 Deed Restriction, Special 28
2017-45 12-7-17 Tax Abatement Agreement,
Special
28
2017-46 12-7-17 Amends Ch. 2 Administration;
2-20.9 Off-Duty Assignments of
Police Officers
28
2017-47 Not Adopted 28
2017-48 12-7-17 Sale of Property, Special 28
2017-49 12-7-17 Sale of Property, Special 28
2017-50 12-7-17 Vacation of Briggs Street, Special 28
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:860
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2017-51 12-7-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance;
18-807B Off-Street Parking,
Loading and Circulation; 18-901
Establishment of Zoning Districts
and adopts Zoning Map dated
December 7, 2017 and Amended
Zoning Map dated December 7,
2017; 18-902B Residential
(R-40); 18-902H Multi-Family
Residential (R-M); 18-902L
Single Family Residential
(R-10A); 18-902M Oak Street
Core Neighborhood Overlay
Zone-1; 18-902N Oak Street Core
Neighborhood Zone-2; repeals in
18-902 Residential Zoning
Districts: O (R-12B), P (R-12C), Q
(R-10B), R (R-12D), S (R-20A);
amends 18-903F Highway
Development Zone (B-5A);
18-903J renames Crystal Lake
Preserve (CLP) to Open Space
Preservation (OSP); 18-903M
Industrial Zone (M-1); repeals
18-903N Industrial Zone (M-2),
repeals 18-903O Industrial Park
Professional Service Zone (PS);
amends 18-903P Industrial Park
Limited Professional Service
Zone (LP); repeals 18-903Q Open
Space (OS); repeals and replaces
18-903T Airport Business
Commercial Zone; adds 18-903U
Public Purpose Overlay Zone
(PP); amends 18-906E and
18-906H Public and Private
Schools; adds 18-1021 Planned
Unit Development; adds 18-1022
Mixed-Use Development—Cross
Street Core; adds 18-1023
Mixed-Use Development—Oak
Street Core
28
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:861
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2017-52 12-7-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; amends
18-200 Definitions; creates
18-904.1 Planned Development
Noncontiguous Cluster (PDNC)
Overlay Zone and Attachment 1
PDNC Overlay Zone Map,
Attachment 2 PDNC Overlay
Zone Map (Sch. A and B),
Attachment 3 List of Properties
(Sch. B); Attachment 4 List of
Properties (Sch. A)
28
2017-53 Not Adopted 28
2017-54 12-21-17 Sale of Property, Special 28
2017-55 12-21-17 Vacation of Streets, Special 28
2017-56 12-21-17 Amends Ch. 20 Streets and
Sidewalks; 20-1 Excavations in
the Public Streets: renames
20-1.6 to Road Restoration Fee;
amends 20-1.7 Bonds; amends
20-1.10 Restoration of Surface
Paving and Subsurface
Foundation; amends 20-1.11
Permit Conditions and
Regulations; amends 20-1.15
Excavations in Recently
Improved Streets; amends 20-2
Sidewalk Construction and
Removal 20-2.3, 20-2.4; amends
20-3.8 Method of Assigning
House and Other Property
Identification Numbers
28
2017-57 12-21-17 Vacation of Kennedy Boulevard
East, Special
28
2017-58 12-21-17 Deed Restriction, Special 28
2017-59 12-21-17 Returns and Forgives Tax
Obligations for 2015, 2016 and
2017 for Block 149, Lot 4, Bnos
Bina, Inc., Special
28
2018-1 2-8-18 Salary, Special 29
2018-2 2-8-18 Street Vacation, Special 29
2018-3 2-8-18 Street Name Change Cathedral
Street to Crystal Court
29
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:862
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2018-4 3-8-18 Tax Abatement for Cedarbridge
Holdings, LLC, Special
29
2018-5 3-8-18 Tax Abatement for Block 160 Lot
1.05
29
2018-6 3-8-18 Amends Ch. 11 Traffic; 11-21.1
Four-Way Stops
29
2018-7 3-8-18 Amends Ch. 24 Taxation;
Readoption and Ten year
extension of 24-1 Tax Exemption
and Abatement
29
2018-8 3-8-18 Lease of property, Special 29
2018-9 3-8-18 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; adds
Article XII Affordable Housing
Provisions, adds
18-1200—18-1208 Reserved,
18-1209 Development Fees to
Fund Affordable Housing,
18-1210 Reserved
29
2018-10 3-22-18 Bond, Special 29
2018-11 3-22-18 Sale of property, Special 29
2018-12 3-22-18 Sale of property, Special 29
2018-13 3-22-18 Authorizes Private Sale and
Conveyance of portion of
property, Special
29
2018-14 3-22-18 Authorizes Tax Collector to
Cancel Taxes on Block 508.02 Lot
5, Special
29
2018-15 3-22-18 Amends Ch. 20 Streets and
Sidewalks; 20-1.6 Road
Restoration Fee; 20-1.10
Restoration of Surface Paving
29
2018-16 4-12-18 Sale of property, Special 29
2018-17 4-12-18 Amends Ch. 3 Police Regulations;
repeals 3-17 Fireworks
29
2018-18 4-12-18 Deed restriction on Block 248 Lot
28 for Park, Recreation and Open
Space
29
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:863
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2018-19 4-12-18 Establishes First Energy Park as
an amusement park; Amends Ch.
4, General Licensing, to require
licensing of games and
establishes fees, Adds 4-11,
Amusement Parks
29
2018-20 4-12-18 Amends Ch. 11 Traffic; 11-14
Parking Prohibited During
Certain Hours on Certain Streets
29
2018-21 4-26-18 Vacation of Street, Special 29
2018-22 4-12-18 CAP Bank, Special 29
2018-23 4-26-18 Amends Ch. 8 Parks, Playgrounds
and Recreational Areas; 8-10,
Rules and Regulations: Pine Park,
Brook Road Sports Complex and
Larry D'Zio Park; 8-11 Brook
Road Sports Complex Athletic
Fields; 8-13 Permit for Special
Events in Parks
29
2018-24 4-26-18 Sale of property, Special 29
2018-25 4-26-18 Sale of property, Special 29
2018-26 4-26-18 Amends Ch. 11 Traffic; 11-21
Multiple Stop Intersections
29
2018-27 5-31-18 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-815
Stormwater Management/
Residential Site Improvement
Standards, 18-815.1.1,
18-815.1.9
29
2018-28 Not adopted 29
2018-29 5-31-18 Amends Ch. 1 Traffic; 11-18 One-
Way Streets
29
2018-30 6-21-18 Sale of property, Special 29
2018-31 6-21-18 Sale of property, Special 29
2018-32 6-21-18 Amends Ch. 11 Traffic; 11-14
Parking Prohibited During
Certain Hours on Certain Streets
29
2018-33 6-21-18 Amends Ch. 11 Traffic; 11-13
Parking Prohibited At All Times
on Certain Streets
29
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:864
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2018-34 7-12-18 Amends Ch. 11 Traffic; 11-21.2
Multiple Stop Intersections
Three-Way Stops
29
2018-35 7-12-18 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-900
Zoning Districts and Regulations,
General
29
2018-36 7-12-18 Exchange of property, Special 29
2018-37 7-12-18 Sale of property, Special 29
2018-38 Not adopted 29
2018-39 8-16-18 Exchange of property, Special 29
2018-40 8-16-18 Tax Abatement 1400-1480 Ocean
Avenue; Special
29
2018-41 8-16-18 Salary, Special 29
2018-42 8-16-18 Vacation of street, Special 29
2018-43 9-6-18 Authorizes Tax Collector to
cancel taxes for 2017 on Block 61
Lot 4
29
2018-44 9-6-18 Amends Ch. 2 Administration;
Fees for Miscellaneous Services,
adds 2-76.9 Lakewood Shuttle
Bus Creation and Fees
29
2018-45 9-6-18 Amends Ch. 2 Administration;
Fees for Miscellaneous Services,
adds 2-76.10 Vehicle Wash Fees
29
2018-46 9-6-18 Sale of property, Special 29
2018-47 Street vacation, Special 29
2018-48 Not adopted 29
2018-49 9-6-18 Sale of property, Special 29
2018-50 9-6-18 Vacation of portion of Paper
Street, Bushwick Avenue, Special
29
2018-51 10-11-18 Sale of property, Special 29
2018-52 10-11-18 Easement, Special 29
2018-53 10-11-18 Land Conveyance to Lakewood
Township Industrial Commission,
Special
29
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:865
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2018-54 10-11-18 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance;
18-903E, Highway Development
Zone (B-5)
29
2018-55 10-11-18 Tax Abatement to New
Hampshire Holdings, LLC,
Special
29
2018-56 11-1-18 Authorizes road widening for
portion of James Street, Special
29
2018-57 11-1-18 Accepts land donation, Wayne
Street, Special
29
2018-58 11-29-18 Amends Ch. 11 Traffic; 11-13
Parking Prohibited At All Times
on Certain Streets
29
2018-59 11-29-18 Amends Ch. 12 Building and
Construction; 12-3 Building
Contractors-Insurance
29
2018-60 12-13-18 Tax Abatement to Excel Business
Park I LLC, Special
29
2018-61 12-13-18 Financial Agreement between
Township of Lakewood and
AOTSR, LLC, Cedarbridge
Redevelopment Area, Special
29
2018-62 12-13-18 Financial agreement with Ave of
the State Office, LLC, Special
29
2018-63 12-13-18 Authorizes agreement with
Cedarbridge Equity Urban
Renewal, LLC, Special
29
2018-64 12-13-18 Authorizes agreement with
Cedarbridge Office Urban
Renewal, LLC, Special
29
2018-65 12-13-18 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; Design
Standards, 18-803F Paving
Materials, Walls and Fences;
18-815 Stormwater Management/
Residential Site Improvement
Standards, Maintenance and
Repair, 18-815.1.9
29
2018-66 12-13-18 Vacation of portion of Old Brook
Road, Special
29
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:866
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2018-67 12-13-18 Agreement with Pine Holdings
Urban Renewal, LLC, Special
29
2019-1 2-7-19 Property Purchase, Special 30
2019-2 2-7-19 Tax cancelation, Special 30
2019-3 2-7-19 Tax cancelation, Special 30
2019-4 2-7-19 Amends Ch. 2 Administration,
2-38.8 Assistance (Industrial
Commission)
30
2019-5 2-7-19 Salaries, Special 30
2019-6 2-7-19 Street Vacation, Special 30
2019-7 2-7-19 Amends Personnel Policies and
Procedures Manual dated
8-31-17, source at 10-1.3
30
2019-8 2-7-19 Street vacation, Special 30
2019-9 3-7-19 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance, 18-818
Projections Into Yards
30
2019-10 2-7-19 Financial agreement with Avenue
of the States Urban Renewal,
Special
30
2019-11 3-7-19 Change of Street name to
Melrose Court (from Garden Hills
Drive), Special
30
2019-12 3-7-19 Deed for Road Widening, Special 30
2019-13 3-7-19 Amends Ch. 11 Traffic, 11-26B
School Bus Loading and
Unloading Zones
30
2019-14 3-7-19 Amends Ch. 11 Administration,
2-12.2 Claims Approval and
Designation of Approval Officers
30
2019-15 3-28-19 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance (clarifies
previous ordinances), amends
18-807(B)3 (Off-Street Parking,
Loading and Circulation,
18-901(A)47 (Zoning Districts),
18-901(B) Zoning Map adds 3
and 4, Schedule of General
Regulations (Art. IX), 18-902(T)
repealed and reserved, 18-906
Public and Private Schools H,1
30
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:867
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2019-16 3-28-19 Amends Ch. 3 Police Regulations,
Adds 3-30 Code Blue Warming
Center
30
2019-17 3-28-19 Easement, Special 30
2019-18 3-28-19 Sale of land, Special 30
2019-19 3-28-19 Easement, Special 30
2019-20 Not adopted 30
2019-21 3-28-19 Amends Ch. 11 Traffic, 11-13
Parking Prohibited
30
2019-22 3-28-19 Street Vacation, Special 30
2019-23 4-17-19 Street Vacation, Special 30
2019-24 4-17-19 Amends Ch. 12 Building and
Construction, adds 12-8
Illuminated Street Address Signs
30
2019-25 4-17-19 Sale of Lane, Special 30
2019-26 5-30-19 Street Vacation, Special 30
2019-27 4-17-19 CAP Bank, Special 30
2019-28 5-30-19 Street Vacation, Special 30
2019-29 7-18-19 Amends Ch. 10 Personnel
Policies, 10-15.7 Leave Without
Pay
30
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-30 10-3-2019 Abatement of
Property Taxes
NCM 31
2019-31 8-15-2019 Unified Development
Ordinance
Amendment
Ch. 18 31
2019-32 8-15-2019 Bond NCM 31
2019-33 8-15-2019 Sale of Property NCM 31
2019-34 8-15-2019 Abatement of
Property Taxes
NCM 31
2019-35 9-12-2019 Sale of Property NCM 31
2019-36 10-3-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 11 31
2019-37 10-3-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 11 31
2019-38 10-3-2019 Street Vacation NCM 31
2019-39 10-3-2019 Sale of Property NCM 31
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:868
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-40 10-3-2019 Agreement NCM 31
2019-41 10-3-2019 Agreement NCM 31
2019-42 10-3-2019 Agreement NCM 31
2019-43 10-3-2019 General Licensing
Amendment
Ch. 4 31
2019-44 10-3-2019 Personnel Policies
Amendment
Ch. 10 31
2019-45 11-14-2019 Sale of Property NCM 31
2019-46 11-14-2019 Sale of Property NCM 31
2019-47 11-14-2019 Abatement of
Property Taxes
NCM 31
2019-48 11-14-2019 Sale of Property NCM 31
2019-49 11-14-2019 Exchange of Property NCM 31
2019-50 11-14-2019 Unified Development
Ordinance
Amendment
Ch. 18 31
2019-51 12-5-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 11 31
2019-52 12-5-2019 Sale of Property NCM 31
2019-53 12-5-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 11 31
2019-54 12-5-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 11 31
2019-55 12-5-2019 Conveyance of Land NCM 31
2019-56 12-5-2019 Sale of Property NCM 31
2020-01 1-16-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 11 31
2020-02 1-16-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 11 31
2020-03 1-16-2020 Traffic Amendment Ch. 11 31
§ DL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § DL-1
AO:869
Unified Development Ordinance
Chapter UDAO
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Chapter 18
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
[Editor's Note: The Unified Development Ordinance was adopted on
July 14, 2005 by Ordinance No. 2005-59. Ordinance source histories
for subsequent amendments are noted in the text.]
§ DL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § DL-1
AO:870
ARTICLE I
PURPOSES; SCOPE; INTERPRETATION; SHORT TITLE
18-100. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the nature and extent of the uses
of land and of buildings and structures thereon for the purposes set forth
in the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D et seq.) and to exercise the
power to zone and regulate land development granted to municipalities of
the State of New Jersey.
18-101. Scope.
From and after the effective date of this chapter the use of all land and every
building or portion of a building erected, altered with respect to height
and area, added to, or relocated, and every use within a building or use
accessory thereto, in the Township of Lakewood, shall be in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter.
18-102. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of
this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other
ordinance, or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling.
Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose
greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such statute, other
ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
18-103. Short Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Lakewood Township
Unified Development Ordinance of 2005."
18-100 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-103
AO:871

ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS
18-200. Definitions of Terms. [Amended by Ord. No. 2005-77 § 3;
Ord. No. 2006-3 § 2; Ord. No. 2008-12 § 1; Ord. No. 2009-53 § 3;
Ord. No. 2010-11 § 1; Ord. No. 2010-32 § 1; Ord. No. 2010-65; Ord.
No. 2011-17 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-4 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-16 § 1; Ord. No.
2012-52 § 1; Ord. No. 2013-31 § 1; Ord. No. 2013-51 § 1; Ord. No.
2013-70; Ord. No. 2014-11; Ord. No. 2014-37; Ord. No. 2014-56;
Ord. No. 2015-42; Ord. No. 2016-11 § 2; Ord. No. 2017-27; Ord. No.
2017-52 §§ 2, 3]
A. For the purpose of this chapter any words used in the present tense
include the future. The singular number includes the plural and the
plural the singular; the word "lot" includes the word "Plot; the word
"zone" includes the word "district"; the word "occupied" includes the
word "designed" and the phrase "intended to be occupied"; the word
"use" includes the words "arranged," "designed" and the phrase
"intended to be used"; and the word "shall" is always mandatory.
B. The term "such as", where used herein, shall be considered as
introducing a typical or illustrative rather than an entirely exclusive
designation of permitted or prohibited uses, activities, establishments
or structures. As used in this chapter, the following words, terms and
phrases shall have the meaning indicated:
ABANDONMENT — The deliberate relinquishment of property or a
cessation of the use of a property, by the owner with the intention
neither of transferring rights to the property to another owner nor of
resuming the use of the property.
ABUT — To physically touch or border upon; or to share a common
property line but not overlap. See Adjoining Lot or Land; Contiguous.
ACCESSORY USE, STRUCTURE OR BUILDING — A use, structure or
building that is customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the
principal and on the same lot. No accessory use shall form the basis for
a claim of right to a principal or main use.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY — A building the use of which
is incidental to that of the main building and which is located on the
same lot or adjoining lot under the same ownership and shall include
but not be limited to tents and canopies used for promotions, religious,
educational, church, charity, political and social events, Sukkoth,
greenhouses, etc. as defined and permitted under New Jersey State
Uniform Construction Code and local zoning ordinances.
ACTIVE RECREATION — Recreational activities which require physical
participation including but not limited to sports such as soccer,
baseball, softball, tennis, basketball, field hockey, football, lacrosse and
street hockey; and facilities including but not limited to playground
equipment of all types.
18-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-200
AO:873
ACUTE CARE FACILITY — A facility providing nursing care to sick,
invalid, infirm, disabled or convalescent persons in addition to lodging
and board or health-related service, or any combination of the
foregoing.
ADDITION — As applied to a building or structure shall mean an
enlargement of the original structure by an extension of any side and
the original foundation, or by increasing the height. An addition must
be served by the same mutual main entrance and be served by the
electric, water and sewer of the original building.
ADJOINING LOT OR LAND — A lot or parcel of land that shares all or
part of a common lot line with another lot or parcel of land. See Abut;
Contiguous.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER — The Clerk of Lakewood Township, or
any other municipal official designated by ordinance.
ADULT — Persons over the age of 18.
ADVERSE EFFECT — Conditions or situations creating, imposing,
aggravating or leading to impractical, unsafe or unsatisfactory
conditions on a subdivided property, property subject to development
or off tract property such as, but not limited to; improper circulation
and drainage rights of way inadequate drainage facilities; insufficient
street widths; unsuitable street grades; unsuitable street locations to
accommodate prospective traffic or coordinate and compose a
convenient system; locating lots in a manner not adaptable for the
intended purposes without danger to health or peril from flood, fire,
erosion or other menace; and, providing for lots of insufficient size and
neither providing nor making future allowance for access to the interior
portion of the lot or for other facilities required by this chapter.
AFFORDABLE — A dwelling unit for which a household pays, with
regard to a sale unit, not more than 28% of the eligible gross monthly
income for mortgage payments, property taxes, insurance, and
condominium or homeowners' association fees, if any, and with regard
to a rental unit, not more than 30% of eligible gross monthly income for
all shelter costs including utilities.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PLAN — The document required to be
submitted to and approved by the Planning Board on an application for
inclusionary development. The plan should include, at a minimum, the
number of low- and/or moderate-income units within the development,
their location within the development and their phasing within the
development and their adherence to all appropriate regulations of
Lakewood Township and the Council On Affordable Housing.
AFFORDABLE UNIT — A housing unit in the Township, the sales or
rental of which is established in accordance with this chapter and
which shall be occupied by a low- or moderate-income household in
accordance with this chapter.
18-200 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-200
AO:874
AGENT — One or more persons designated to represent the applicant
before either the Planning Board or Zoning Board.
AIRPORT — Any area of land or water, or both, designed and set aside
for the landing and taking off of fixed and rotary wing aircraft, utilized
or to be utilized by the general public for such purposes, publicly or
privately owned, and licensed by the Commissioner of Transportation
as a public use airport or landing strip.
ALLEY — A public or private street primarily designed to serve as
secondary access to the side or rear of the properties whose principal
frontage is on some other street.
ALTERATION — As applied to a building or a structure shall be a
change or rearrangement of the original rooms, facilities, or exterior
changes of the original building or structure, which does not increase
the footprint of the structure. No Board approval shall be required for
any alteration which does not entail a change of use.
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers,
bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or
towers.
ANTENNA — Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on
a tower, building or structure and used in communications that radiate
or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio
frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications
signals or other communication signals.
APPLICANT — Any person or entity submitting an application for any
permit or approval pursuant to Article VI. An applicant shall be
required to have a legal or equitable ownership interest in the property,
this includes a contract purchaser, which is the subject of the
application.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — The application form and all
accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval of a
subdivision, plan, site plan, planned development, conditional use,
zoning variance, permit to build in a mapped area or for a structure not
related to a street, or any other use or approval permitted under Article
VI.
APPROVING AUTHORITY — The Planning Board, Zoning Board or
Governing Body of the municipality, unless a different agency is
designated by ordinance, when acting pursuant to the authority of this
chapter.
AREA, BUILDING — See Floor Area.
ASSISTED LIVING UNIT (ALU) — A dwelling unit varying in square
feet from 200 to 500 square feet that provides a residential living
environment assisted by congregate meals, housekeeping and personal
services, for persons 55 years of age or older, who have temporary or
periodic difficulties with one or more essential activities of daily living,
18-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-200
AO:875
such as feeding, bathing, dressing or mobility. ALU's shall be located
in a facility that may include accessory uses including dining rooms,
bathing areas, common areas, offices and other space necessary to
provide above services. The definition of ALU shall include any partially
assisted and fully assisted living units.
ATTIC — The unfinished space between the ceiling assembly and the
roof assembly.[Ord. No. 2017-27 § 1]
ATTIC, HABITABLE — An attic that has a stairway as a means of access
and egress, and in which the ceiling area at a height of seven feet above
the attic floor is not more than 1/3 the area of the next floor below.[Ord.
No. 2017-27 § 1]
AUTOMOBILE REPAIR SERVICES — General repair, rebuilding, or
reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles, or trailers, including
bodywork, welding, painting service and upholstering service.
AUTOMOBILE TRAILER, MOBILE HOME, TRAILER COACH OR
TRAILER — Any vehicle or structure designed and constructed in such
manner as will permit occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for one or
more persons or the conduct of any business or profession, occupation
or trade (or use as a selling or advertising device), and designed that
it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on
highways or streets, propelled or drawn by its own or other motive
power, excepting devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks.
AWNING — A roof-like cover that projects from the wall of a building
for the purpose of shielding an entrance, walkway, doorway or window
from the elements. For purposes of determining if setback
requirements are met, setbacks are measured from the end of the
awning. Retractable awnings are exempt from the setback
requirements.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/
cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices, and/or
long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partly or completely
below grade. A basement may contain bedrooms if it is constructed in
accordance with the requirements of all applicable construction codes.
BASKETBALL COURTS — An accessory use to a residential home, not
to be installed closer than five feet to the side and rear property lines,
not permitted within the front yard setback. Lighting must conform to
Township requirements and be properly shielded so as not to disturb
adjacent properties. Electrical permits must be obtained for any
proposed lighting. Approval is required from the Township Engineer
if substantial grading changes are proposed, otherwise no permit is
required. If the basketball court does not meet the above requirements,
Board approval is required.[Ord. No. 2015-42]
18-200 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-200
AO:876
BEDROOM — A private room planned and intended for sleeping,
separable from other rooms by a door, and accessible to a bathroom
without crossing another bedroom.
BICYCLE-COMPATIBLE ROADWAY — Means a road designed to
accommodate the shared use of the roadway by bicycles and motor
vehicles.
BICYCLE PATH — Means bikeway physically separated from motorized
vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier, and either within the
highway right-of-way or within an independent right-of-way or
easement.
BIKEWAY — Means any road, path, or way in some manner is
specifically designated as being open to bicycle travel, regardless of
whether such facilities are designated for the exclusive use of bicycles
or are to be shared with other transportation modes.
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets.
BOARD — For the purpose of this chapter the term Board shall mean
both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment.
BUFFER — An area within a property or site, generally adjacent to
and parallel with the property line, either consisting of trees, shrubs
or other landscaping and/or berms, designed to continuously limit the
view or control other impacts of the site from adjacent site, properties
or roadways.
BUFFER LANDSCAPING — Landscaping, including permitted fencing,
placed within designated buffers.
BUILDABLE AREA — The central portion of any lot lying inward from
all required setback lines.
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns, piers
or walls including trailers permitted by ordinance not including a deck.
BUILDING AREA — The area covered by a building and defined by the
intersection of a horizontal plane at average grade level and the vertical
planes which coincide with the exterior surfaces of the building. In case
of a section of a building which is cantilevered, the exterior surface of
the most projected area is used to determine the area. This area does
not include steps.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The ratio of the horizontal area, measured
from the exterior surface of the exterior walls of the ground floor,
excluding decks and porches of all principal and accessory buildings on
a lot to the total lot area.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical dimension measured from the
average elevation of the finished lot grade at the front of the building
to the highest point of the roof deck, to the deckline of a mansard roof
and to the average height between the plate and ridge of a gable, hip
or gambrel roof.
18-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-200
AO:877
BUILDING INSPECTOR — The individual designated by the appointing
authority to enforce the provisions of the building code. Also referred
to as the construction official.
BUILDING LINE — A line formed by the intersection of a horizontal
plane at average grade level and a vertical plane that coincides with the
exterior surface of the building on any side. In case of a cantilevered
section of a building or a deck, the vertical place will coincide with
the most projected surface. All yard requirements are measured to the
building line.
BUILDING SEPARATION — The distance between two buildings
measured from the face of the outer walls. Minor architectural features
such as chimneys, roofs, overhangs, decks and window bays shall not
be considered the face of a building, provided that such features do
not extend more than six feet into the minimum building separation
area (measured from the face of the foundation wall). Overhangs and
window bays shall not be considered the face of a building, provided
that such features do not extend more than 30 inches into the minimum
building separation area (measured from the face of the foundation
wall).
BUSINESS, RETAIL — An establishment with the set purpose of selling
commodities or goods in typically to the public.
BUSINESS, WHOLESALE — An establishment with the set purpose of
selling commodities or goods in large quantities typically for resale.
CANOPY — See Awnings.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT — A governmental acquisition of real
property or major construction project.
CARTWAY — That area of a street within which vehicles are permitted,
including travel lanes and parking areas but not including, curbs,
sidewalks or swales.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A document issued by a
governmental authority allowing the occupancy or use of a building
and certifying that the structure or use has been constructed and will
be used in compliance with all the applicable municipal codes and
ordinances.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY (TEMPORARY) — A certificate of
occupancy issued for a temporary and specified period of time.
CHURCH OR ANY HOUSE OF WORSHIP — A building or group of
buildings including customary accessory buildings, parish houses,
mikvah and Sunday school buildings designed or intended for public
worship, or religious services. For the purpose of this chapter, the
words "Church, or any house of worship" shall include chapels,
synagogues, cathedrals, temples and similar designations as well as
parish houses, and such accessory uses.
18-200 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-200
AO:878
CIRCULATION — Systems, structures and physical improvements for
the movement of people, goods, water, air, sewage or power by such
means as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers, airways,
pipes and conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such
means as terminals, stations, warehouses, and other storage buildings
or transshipment points.
CLEAR SIGHT DISTANCE — A line of unobstructed vision from a point
three and three quarters (3 3/4) feet above the center line of a street to
a point six inches above the same center line.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular area at a street intersection
with another street, alley, or driveway where vision from an automobile
is unobstructed, formed by the intersecting street lines and a line
drawn between points on the street center lines located a required
distance in feet from the intersection of the center lines.
CLUSTER OR CLUSTERING — Cluster or clustering refers to a more
compact form of development that would otherwise not be permitted
under conventional zoning standards. Under the clustering provision,
traditional bulk and area requirements are relaxed to allow a
concentration of dwelling units on a portion of the site while preserving
undeveloped space elsewhere on the site as long as the density of
dwelling units number of dwelling units constructed is not increased
from what would have otherwise been permitted on the site. All Cluster
Development shall be designed in accordance with § 18-904.
COMMERCIAL BILLBOARD — An advertising sign, structure or symbol
erected and maintained by an individual or corporation engaged in the
sale or rental of space thereon to a clientele of manufacturing, service
or commercial enterprises, upon which space is displayed, by means of
painting, posting or other means, advertising copy describing products
or services which are not made, produced, assembled or sold from the
premises on which the advertisement is displayed.
COMMERCIAL OFFICE PARK — An integrated development of retail
commercial buildings and office buildings on four or more lots under
common ownership of control, together with such other primary.
COMPLETED APPLICATION — Where required, all application fees, all
escrow deposits shall be paid in full, and all checklist requirements
shall have been complied with, unless waived by the reviewing board,
in order for an application to be deemed complete.
COMMON PROPERTY — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water, together with the improvements
thereon and designed and intended for the ownership, use and
enjoyment shared by the residents and owners of a development.
Common property may contain such complementary structures and
improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit of the
residents and owners of the development.
COMMUNITY BASED HEALTH CARE FACILITIES — Any facility
operated by a public or non-profit entity whose purpose is to provide
18-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-200
AO:879
health related services such as medical care, health and social service
counseling, medical testing or similar services.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE DEVELOPMENTALLY DISABLED
— Any community residential facility licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
30:11B-1 et seq., providing food, shelter, and personal guidance, under
such supervision as required, to not more than 15 developmentally
disabled or mentally ill persons, who require assistance, temporarily or
permanently, in order to live in the community, and shall include, but
not be limited to - Group homes, half-way houses, intermediate care
facilities, supervised apartment living arrangements, and hostels. Such
a residence shall not be considered a health care facility within the
meaning of the "Health Care Facilities Planning Act" N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1
et seq. In the case of such community residence housing mentally ill
persons, such a residence shall have been approved for a purchase
of service contract or an affiliation agreement pursuant to such
procedures as shall be established by regulation of the Division of
Mental Health and Hospitals of the New Jersey Department of Human
Services. See Developmentally Disabled Person and Mentally Ill Person.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR PERSONS WITH HEAD INJURIES —
Means a community residential facility licensed pursuant to P.L. 1977,
c.448 (C.30:IIB 1 et seq.) providing food, shelter and personal guidance,
under such supervision as required, to not more than 15 persons with
head injuries, who require assistance, temporarily or permanently, in
order to live in the community, and shall include, but not be limited
to - Group homes, halfway houses, supervised apartment living
arrangements and hostels. Such a residence shall not be considered a
health care facility within the meaning of the "Health Care Facilities
Planning Act," P.L. 1971, c. 136 (C.26:2H 1 et seq.).
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE FOR THE TERMINALLY ILL — Any
community residential facility operated as a hospice program providing
food, shelter, personal guidance and health care services, under such
supervision as required, to not more than 15 terminally ill persons.
COMMUNITY SHELTER FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE —
Any shelter approved for a purchase of service contract and certified
pursuant to standards and procedures established by the New Jersey
Department of Human Services, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:40-1-14,
providing food, shelter, medical care, legal assistance, personal
guidance, and other services to not more than 15 persons who have
been the victims of domestic violence, including any children of such
victims, who temporarily require shelter and assistance in order to
protect their physical or psychological welfare.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
only upon a showing that such use in a specified location will comply
with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of
such use as contained in this chapter, and upon the issuance of an
authorization by the Planning Board.
18-200 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-200
AO:880
CONGREGATE CARE FACILITIES — A congregate care facility may
include residential units and common dining facilities, recreational
activities, and other accessory uses for the exclusive benefit of its
residents, regulated by N.J.A.C. 8:33H and 8:36-1 et seq.
CONSTRUCTION OFFICIAL — See Building Inspector.
CONSERVATION AREA OR CONSERVATION EASEMENT — A
designated area of land or water which is intended to be preserved
and managed for the protection of its natural resources, and where
appropriate, opened to the public for passive enjoyment of natural
resources.
CONTIGUOUS — Next to, abutting, or touching and having a boundary,
or portion thereof, that is coterminous. See Abut; Adjoining Lot or Land.
CONTIGUOUS CLUSTER — A contiguous area to be developed as a
single entity according to a plan containing a section or sections to
be developed for residential purposes, nonresidential purposes, or a
combination thereof, at a greater concentration of density or intensity
of land use than authorized within the section or sections under
conventional development, in exchange for the permanent preservation
of another section or other sections of the area as common or public
open space, or for historic or agricultural purposes, or a combination
thereof.[Ord. No. 2017-52 § 3]
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY (CCRC) — A facility
which has a primary purpose of providing housing and continuing care
for people 55 years of age or older or where either the husband or wife
is 55 years of age or older, and consists of independent apartment units,
assisted living units, skilled care nursing units and/or CCRC Accessory
Uses all as defined herein and as regulated by N.J.S.A. 52:27D-330
through 357, known as the Continuing Care Retirement Community
Regulation and Financial Disclosure Act. For purposes of this chapter,
"continuing care" means the provision of lodging, nursing, medical
or other health related services at the same or another location to
an individual pursuant to an agreement effective for the life of the
individual or for a period greater than one year, including mutually
terminable contracts, and in consideration of the payment of an
entrance fee with or without other periodic charges to an individual
who is 55 years of age or older or where either the husband or wife is
55 years of age or older.
CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL — Uses and facilities designed to serve
residents in its immediate vicinity.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail establishment typically offering for
sale prepackaged food products, household items and other goods
commonly associated with the same and having a gross floor area of
less than 5,000 square feet.
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT — A development other than
planned development.
18-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-200
AO:881
COVERAGE —
CUL-DE-SAC — A residential street with access closed at one end by a
vehicular turn around.
CURB LEVEL — The average level of the curb in front of the lot.
DAY CARE CENTER — A licensed, principle use for the purpose of
providing custodial care of persons, for a period not to exceed 18
hours within a single day in return for the payment of tuition, fees, or
other compensation. Day care may include care of either children or
adults who are unable to care for themselves because of diminished
capabilities. See Family Day Care Home.
DAYS — Calendar days.
DECK — A permanent construction, usually of wood, and either freestanding
or connected to a building, having no roof and supported by
pillars or posts.
DENSITY, GROSS — The permitted number of dwelling units per gross
acre of land on a particular tract.
DETENTION BASIN — A man-made or natural storm water
management collector facility designed to collect surface and subsurface
water in order to impede its flow and to release the same
gradually at a rate not greater than that prior to the development of the
property, into natural or man-made outlets.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or any
land proposed to be included in a proposed development including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT — The division of a parcel of land into two or more
parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, relocation or
enlargement of any building or other structure, or of any mining
excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any building
or other structure, or land or extension of use of land, for which
permission may be required pursuant to this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION — A Zoning, Subdivision, Plan, Unified
Development Ordinance, or other Township regulation of the use and
development of land, or amendment thereto.
BUILDING COVERAGE — The building area covered by all
permanent buildings on a lot, expressed as a percentage of the
total lot area.
a.
IMPERVIOUS LOT COVERAGE — The building coverage plus the
area of paved surfaces which cover a lot such as: required parking
spaces and necessary maneuvering areas, passageways/driveways
giving access thereto, services areas, access ways, streets,
walkways, patios, pools and plazas.
b.
18-200 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-200
AO:882
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or ground water from land
by drains, grading or other means as retention or detention basins and
includes control of runoff to minimize erosion and sedimentation during
and after construction or development and means necessary for water
supply preservation or prevention or alleviation of flooding.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation
of storm water sewers or drainage ditches or required along a natural
stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the
flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in
accordance with Chapter One of Title 58 of the New Jersey Statutes
Annotated.
DWELLING — A building having one or more rooms providing living
and sanitary facilities for one family including equipment for cooking or
provisions for the same; provided, however, that trailers or campers as
defined herein shall not be or be considered as buildings or dwellings
within the scope of this chapter. Dwellings shall include but not be
limited to the following types:
GARDEN APARTMENT — A dwelling unit which is designed for,
and occupied exclusively as, the residence of one housekeeping
unit. Garden apartments may have other dwellings intended for
occupancy by one housekeeping unit above or below, or adjacent to
them in the same building.
a.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING — two or more dwelling units located
within a single building, with a private entrance to each dwelling
unit.
b.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A building containing
one dwelling unit and that is not attached to any other dwelling by
any means and is surrounded by open space or yards.
c.
TOWNHOUSE — A dwelling which is designed for, and occupied
exclusively as, the residence of one housekeeping unit. That is
attached by means of one or more common fire walls to two or
more other townhouse dwellings in the same building and each
townhouse is intended for occupancy by one housekeeping unit.
Townhouse dwellings may not have any other dwellings above or
below them within the same building. Townhouse buildings must
exclusively consist of units that do not have any other dwellings
above or below any of the individual units. Any unit in excess of
two units that does not meet the "Townhouse" definition shall be
considered a multi-family dwelling.
d.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building on a single lot containing
two dwelling units, one unit above the other, each of which is
totally separated from the other by an unpierced ceiling and floor
extending from exterior wall to exterior wall with a common
stairwell exterior to both dwelling units and having separate
private entrances to each dwelling unit.
e.
18-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-200
AO:883
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more of the property rights by the
owner to, or for the use by, the public, a corporation, or another person
or entity.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION — A municipal advisory body
created pursuant to P.L. 1968, c. 245 (C. 40:56A-1 et seq.).
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments
by water, wind, ice and gravity.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Underground gas, electrical, telephone,
telegraph, sanitary sewer collection systems, or water transmission or
distribution systems, including mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits,
cables, and normal above ground appurtenances such as fire alarm
boxes, police call boxes, light standards, poles, traffic signals, and
hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection
therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service
by public utilities or municipal or other government agencies for the
public health or safety or general welfare. Essential services shall
not be deemed to include wireless telecommunications towers and
antennas.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FACADE — The total wall surface, including door and window area, of
a building's principal face.
FAMILY — One or more persons living as a single non-profit
housekeeping unit, doing their own cooking, and living upon the
premises as a separate housekeeping unit, or a collective body of
persons doing their own cooking and living together upon the premises
as a separate housekeeping unit in a domestic relationship based upon
birth, marriage, or other domestic bond.
FAMILY DAY CARE HOME — An accessory use provided in a private
residence approved by the New Jersey Division of Youth and Family
Services or an organization with which the Division contracts for family
day care in which child care services are regularly provided to no less
than three nor more than five children for a period of time no less
than 15 hours per week nor more than 18 hours within a single day.
The limitation on the number of children for whom day care services is
provided shall not include children who are (a) Legally related to the
service provider or (b) Who are being cared for as part of a cooperative
agreement between parents for the care of their children by one or
more of the parents where no payment for the care is being provided.
See Day Care Centers.
DUPLEX — A building on a single lot containing two side-by-side
only dwelling units with fronts staggered by not more than three
feet, each of which is totally separated from the other by an
unpierced wall extending from ground to roof with both dwelling
units and having separate private entrances to each dwelling unit.
The entrances for both dwelling units must face a public street.
Front-to-back dwelling units are not considered to be a duplex.
f.
18-200 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-200
AO:884
FARM — A tract of land at least five acres in size used for the growing
and harvesting of crops and the raising and breeding of certain animals,
including truck farms, fruit farms, nurseries and greenhouses, dairies
and livestock fodder.
FARMING — Agricultural activity or the raising of livestock, poultry or
small animals as a major source of income.
FARMHOUSE — Dwelling on farm property qualifying for farm land
assessment and housing the owner or operator of said farm.
FAST FOOD OPERATIONS — A business establishment where food and
drink are sold ready for consumption and where customers consume
the food and drink either inside or outside the confines of the
establishment.
FENCE — A vertical enclosure, solid or partially open, to prevent
straying from within or intrusion from without and to provide visual
screening or privacy.
FINAL APPROVAL — The official action of the Reviewing Board taken
on a preliminary approved major subdivision or site plan after all
conditions, engineering plans and other requirements have been
completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been
installed or guaranties properly posted for their completion, or
approval conditioned upon the posting of such guaranties.
FINAL PLAT — The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision that
is presented to the Planning/Zoning Board of Adjustment Board for final
approval in accordance with this chapter and which if approved shall
be filed with the proper County Recording Officer.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS — Any establishment wherein business of
primarily a financial nature is transacted, such as; banks, savings and
loans, mortgage companies and similar institutions.
FLAG LOT — A lot with building area which fronts upon an access strip
rather than on or abutting a public street or road, and with access
thereto over, upon and across a private access drive within the access
strip.
FLOOD FRINGE AREA — The portion of the flood hazard area outside
of the floodway.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Land in the flood plain subject to a one
(1.0%) percent or greater chance of flood in any given year.
FLOODPLAIN — The area adjoining any natural stream and including
any water or drainage course or body of water subject to periodic
flooding or overflow based on the 100 year or 1% flood.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100
year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot at any point.
18-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-200
AO:885
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of the building, measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls
or from the center line of walls separating two buildings. In particular,
the floor area of a building shall include:
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The sum of the area of all floors of buildings
or structures, as defined under floor area above, compared to the total
area of the site.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A private residential garage with no commercial
occupation or use, with a maximum of three bay doors. Garages may be
attached or detached, however detached garages shall be a maximum
of one story with a maximum height of 16 feet. Detached garages must
conform to accessory building setback requirements. Attached garages
must conform to principal building setback requirements. Zoning and
building permits are required for garages. If the garage does not meet
the garage definition, Board approval is required.[Ord. No. 2015-42]
GARAGE, PUBLIC OR COMMERCIAL — A building or space other
than a private garage, for the storage of motor vehicles exclusively
or for the storage of motor vehicles at which filling station service,
sales of accessories or repairs, other than body or collision repairs and
appointing and refinishing, are permitted. This term does not include
motor vehicle show rooms for new or used motor vehicles.
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A comprehensive plan for the
development of a planned development as provided in N.J.S.A. 40:55D -
45.1 et seq.
GOLF COURSE — A tract of land laid out for at least nine holes for
playing the game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and
hazards and that may include a clubhouse and shelter.
GOVERNMENT AGENCY — Any department, commission, independent
agency or instrumentality of the United States of America, of a State,
County, incorporated or unincorporated municipality, township,
authority, district or other governmental unit.
Basement and cellar space (whether or not a floor has actually been
laid; however, just the area directly under a headroom of seven feet
or more).
a.
b. Stairwells.
Attic space which may be considered a floor/inhabitable as per
appropriate state/federal regulations.
c.
d. Enclosed porches.
Garage Spaces.
However, the floor area of a building shall not include uncovered steps/
porches, terraces, breeze ways and open spaces.
e.
18-200 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-200
AO:886
GRADE — The slope of a road, path, driveway, swale or other surface
or the average finished ground elevation adjoining a building at project
completion.
GROSS RESIDENTIAL AREA — Land devoted to residential buildings
and accessory uses on the same lot, such as informal open space, drives
and service areas and including land for streets, parks, playgrounds
and non-residential buildings incidental to the residential area as a
whole.
GROSS RESIDENTIAL DENSITY — The number of dwelling units per
gross residential acre.
HISTORIC SITE — Any real property, man-made structure, natural
object or configuration or any portion or group of the foregoing of
historical, archaeological, cultural, scenic or architectural significance.
HOME OCCUPATION — A business, including child care, profession,
occupation, or trade, conducted for gain or support and located entirely
within a residential building, which use is accessory, incidental, and
secondary to the use of the building for a dwelling and does not change
the essential residential character or appearance of such building.
HOSPITAL — An institution in a building or a series of buildings
providing in-patient public health services primarily for medical or
surgical care of the sick or injured and including related facilities,
such as out-patient and emergency departments, conference, training,
diagnostic and central service facilities, cafeteria, gift shop,
pharmacies, administrative and staff offices and employee day care,
which are integrated with the hospital facilities or complex,
HOTEL OR RESORT HOTEL — A hotel is a place of lodging that
provides temporary sleeping accommodations and supporting facilities
that may include, but not be limited to, a lobby, full-service restaurant,
cocktail lounges, meeting rooms, banquet facilities, and convention
facilities. It typically provides a swimming pool or another recreational
facility such as a fitness room.[Amended 11-14-2019 by Ord. No.
2019-50]
HOUSEHOLD — A family living together in a single dwelling unit, with
common access to and common use of all living, sanitary and eating
areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and serving of food
within the dwelling unit.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — One or more persons living together in one
dwelling unit on a non-seasonal basis and sharing living, sleeping,
cooking and sanitary facilities on a non-profit basis.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered by
buildings, structures or compacted or covered with a layer of materials
so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INTERESTED PARTY — Any person, whether residing within or outside
the Township, whose right to use, acquire, or enjoy property is, or may
be, affected by actions taken under this chapter or whose rights to
18-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-200
AO:887
use, acquire, or enjoy property under this chapter have been denied,
violated or infringed by an action or a failure to act under this chapter.
JUNK — The term junk shall mean any one or more or accumulation of
one or more of the following items:
Old iron, glass, paper or cordage in such a state of disrepair,
uselessness, age and condition as to be not readily usable for
the purpose for which it was originally intended, or not usable
after further treatment or processing so as to form or structure
or in such condition as to be considered worthless trash or not
reasonably restorable to its original use because the cost of
restoration would greatly exceed the market value of the item when
restored.
a.
An automobile which because of age, lack of maintenance, general
condition or partial or complete demolition is in such condition
as to be inoperable, unfit to be reasonably restored for highway
transportation because of the degree of damage or the fact that the
cost of restoration would greatly exceed the market value therefor
or motor vehicles which are unfit for reconditioning for registration
and use for highway transportation.
b.
Used, damaged or broken parts of motor vehicles or materials from
motor vehicles, the sum of which parts or materials shall be equal
in bulk to one or more motor vehicles.
c.
Household appliances, motors, furniture or furnishings or pieces
of industrial or manufacturing equipment, which are broken or
in such state of disrepair as to be unusable without additional
work being performed or additional parts being provided or added,
except as located within a store or shop specifically engaged in the
repair of such items.
d.
One or more used automobile tires that are in such condition as
to be unsafe for use on a motor vehicle or for resale as used
automobile tires capable of being placed upon and used on motor
vehicles for highway transportation.
e.
One or more items of machinery, equipment or parts thereof that
are unusable for the purpose for which they were originally
intended without repairing, reconditioning or re-manufacturing to
such extent as to be in excess of the reasonable market value of the
equipment, machinery or parts.
f.
Used building materials, parts of building, piping, electrical wiring
or other materials of any nature whatsoever that are not reasonably
marketable for use or re-use for the purpose for which they were
originally processed or manufactured or not readily adaptable for
any other use due to their condition, state of disrepair or due to the
fact that reconditioning or reuse or use of the items would exceed
the reasonable value of the item.
g.
18-200 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-200
AO:888
JUNK YARD — Shall mean and include the business of buying, selling
or storing junk; keeping a place for the storage or deposit of junk;
possession of junk for sale or re-sale of junk or parts therefrom. This
definition shall also apply to and include yards and portions of yards
used for the storing of motor vehicles or machinery or parts of either for
the purpose of obtaining parts therefrom for the repair or replacement
on motor vehicles.
Junk yard shall also apply to the entire area of the premise on which
junk is kept or any warehouse, garage or storage building on the
premises except that portion specifically designated on the application
for license as for use other than for storage of junk.
Junk yard shall also be inclusive of any place where automobile
demolition is carried on as a business, or where dismantling of
automobiles or removal of parts therefrom other than for the purpose
of replacement or repair of the part removed is carried on. If an
automobile is dismantled or a part removed for replacement or repair,
the automobile shall, if not repaired and restored to operative condition
within 15 days, be classified for the purpose of this chapter as a junk
automobile and must be removed to and stored upon the premises of a
licenses junk yard or within an enclosed garage until proper parts area
available for complete restoration and repair.
KENNEL — Any structure, premises, or refuge wherein or whereon the
business of boarding or selling, or breeding of animals is carried on;
included shall be such establishments as animal shelters and animal
hospitals.
LAND — Real property including improvements and fixtures on, above
or below the surface.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner(s) of land, the holder(s)
of an option or contract to purchase or other person(s) having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land shall be deemed to be a
landowner for the purpose of this chapter.
LANDSCAPE AREA — An area of land restricted to landscape items
which may also include such elements as natural features, earth berms,
sculpture and furniture, signs, lighting, access ways, bikeways and
pedestrian walkways, but not including motor vehicle parking,
extending along the entire lot line where they are required. The width
of a landscape area shall be measured at right angles to the lot line.
LIVING SPACE — A potentially habitable area within a dwelling unit.
LOADING SPACE — A space or berth on the same lot with a building or
group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle
while loading or unloading, with 15 feet of vertical clearance.
If the condition of any item is such that it is inoperable or dismantled,
broken, in a state of disrepair or not readily adaptable for other use, the
burden of proof of market value shall be on the owner.
18-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-200
AO:889
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat
or otherwise, as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built
upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — An area which is determined by the limits of the lot lines
bounding that area, and is always expressed in terms of square feet or
acres. Any portion of a lot included in a public or private right of way
shall not be included in calculating lot area.
LOT, CORNER — A lot or parcel of land abutting on two or (2) more
intersecting streets when the interior angle of intersection does not
exceed 135 degrees. Each corner lot shall have two front yards, a
minimum of one side yard and one rear yard.
LOT DEPTH — The mean distance measured from the front lot line to
the rear lot line.
LOT FRONTAGE — That side of a lot abutting on a street; the front lot
line. This definition shall apply to all lots, including, but not limited to,
odd shaped lots, triangular lots and lots having curved or irregular front
lines.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT SIZE — The total horizontal area included within the lot lines.
Where the front lot line is the center line of a street or lies in part or in
whole in the street area, the lot area shall not include that part of the
lot in use or to be used as a right-of-way.
LOT WIDTH — The mean horizontal distance between the side lot
lines measured at right angles to its depth. Required lot width shall be
measured at the most forward allowable building line or setback line;
however; the mean width shall not be less than the required lot width.
LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household earning between 0% and
50% of the regional median income established by the Council on
Affordable Housing for the geographic area in which Lakewood
Township is located, as adjusted for household size.
LOW-INCOME UNIT — Housing affordable, according to Federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development or other recognized
standards, for home ownership and rental costs, and occupied or
reserved for occupancy by households with a gross household income
set by applicable state and federal standards.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by
a municipality for the maintenance of any improvements required by
this chapter, including but not limited to surety bonds, letters of credit
and cash, as more specifically addressed in § 18-401 of this chapter.
MAJOR SITE PLAN — Any site plan not classified as a minor site plan.
MANUFACTURING — The treatment or processing of raw materials
and the production of articles of finished products from raw or prepared
materials by giving them new forms or qualities. Also, an activity which
involves the fabrication, reshaping, reworking, assembly or combining
18-200 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-200
AO:890
of products from previously prepared materials and the synthesis of
chemical or chemical products or the processing of any raw materials.
Light manufacturing includes light industrial operations such as
electronic, machine parts and small component assembly, as opposed
to heavy industrial operations such as automobile assembly, milling or
forge activities.
MASTER PLAN — The Master Plan for the Township of Lakewood as
adopted by the Lakewood Township Planning Board in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
MEAN ELEVATION — The average of the ground level measurements
computed at the four extreme corner points of any existing or proposed
building.
MIKVAH — A ritual bathhouse used in accordance with religious
ceremonies.
MINIMUM TRACT SIZE — The minimum amount of the gross acreage
of the entire tract prior to any subdivision or development.
MINOR SITE PLAN — A minor plan shall be as specified herein and
an applicant may prepare a minor plan application drawn according
to the standards and conditions specified in this chapter. A minor site
plan shall be a site plan which entails an addition of less than 1,500
square feet. Additions on houses of worship measuring less than 1,500
square feet shall be exempt from the site plan requirements as long
as all applicable bulk, setback, parking and buffering requirements are
met.
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — A grouping of retail and commercial
businesses, hotels, financial institutions and personal service
establishments, and residential uses on a single site; planned and
constructed as an integrated entity with on-site customer, employee,
and residential parking. Such developments must be designed for
goods delivery separated from customer and residential access with
aesthetic considerations, as well as provide adequate traffic calming
and address other vehicular and pedestrian design considerations
necessary for the proposed uses. Mixed-use development shall include
multiple uses, including both residential and commercial uses, but
may include individual buildings as part of the overall mixed-use
development that contain solely commercial uses, mixed-use buildings
consisting of residential and commercial uses, and residential buildings
consisting solely of residential uses.
MIXED-USE MID-RISE DEVELOPMENT — A grouping of retail
business, office buildings, personal service establishments, and
residential uses on a single site planned and constructed as a total
entity with on-site customer, employee, and resident parking designed
for goods delivery separated from customer and residential access with
aesthetic considerations.
MIXED-USE MULTIFAMILY DEVELOPMENT — A grouping of retail
and commercial businesses, financial institutions and personal service
18-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-200
AO:891
establishments, and residential uses on a single site; planned and
constructed as an integrated entity with on-site customer, employee
and residential parking. Such developments must be designed for
goods delivery separated from customer and residential access with
aesthetic considerations, as well as provide adequate traffic calming
and address other vehicular and pedestrian design considerations
necessary for the proposed uses.
MIXED-USE TOWNHOUSE DEVELOPMENT — A grouping of retail
and commercial businesses, hotels, financial institutions and personal
service establishments, and residential uses on a single site; planned
and constructed as an integrated entity with on-site customer,
employee, and residential parking. Such developments must be
designed for goods delivery separated from customer and residential
access with aesthetic considerations, as well as provide adequate traffic
calming and address other vehicular and pedestrian design
considerations necessary for the proposed uses.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any park, trailer park, trailer court, court,
camp, site, lot, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained or intended
for the purpose of supplying a location or accommodations for any
trailer coach or trailer coaches and upon which any trailer coach or
trailer coaches are parked, and includes all buildings used or intended
for use as part of the equipment thereof, whether a charge is made
for the use of the mobile home park and its facilities or not. Mobile
home parks shall not include automobile or trailer sales lots on which
unoccupied trailers are parked for purposes of inspection and sale.
MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household earning between
50% and 80% of the regional median income established by Council
on Affordable Housing for the geographic area in which Lakewood
Township is located, as adjusted for household size.
MODERATE-INCOME UNIT — Housing affordable according to Federal
Department of Housing and Urban Development or other recognized
standards for home ownership and rental costs, and occupied or
reserved for occupancy by households with a gross household income
as defined by applicable state and federal regulations.
MOTEL — A structure or group of structures which provide sleeping
rental units for temporary occupancy, in which each rental unit has a
private entrance direct to the outside and in which each rental unit has
its own sanitary facilities.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — The Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or
Governing Body, or any agency created by or responsible to one or more
municipalities, when acting pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D 1, et seq.
MUNICIPAL RESIDENT — A person who is domiciled in the
municipality.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot which in its area, dimension, or
location of, does not conform to the regulations of the chapter for the
district in which it is located.
18-200 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-200
AO:892
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure which in its size,
design, or location upon a lot does not conform to the regulations of the
chapter for the district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use or activity which was lawful prior to
the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district by which it is
located by reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment.
NONCONTIGUOUS CLUSTER — Noncontiguous areas to be developed
as a single entity according to a plan containing an area, or a section
or sections thereof, to be developed for residential purposes,
nonresidential purposes, or a combination thereof, at a greater
concentration of density or intensity of land use than authorized within
the area, section, or sections, under conventional development, in
exchange for the permanent preservation of another area, or a section
or sections thereof, as common or public open space, or for historic
or agricultural purposes, or a combination thereof.[Ord. No. 2017-52
§ 3]
NURSING HOME — An extended or intermediate care facility licensed
or approved in accordance with the requirements of the State of New
Jersey to provide full time convalescent or nursing care to individuals
who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable
to care for themselves.
OBLIGOR — One that places himself under a legal obligation.
OCCUPANCY — Shall mean any one or more of the following:
OFFICIAL MAP — A map adopted by ordinance pursuant to Article 5 of
the Municipal Land Use Law.
OFF SITE — Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but
within the property (of which the lot is a part), which is the subject of
a development application, or within a contiguous portion of a street or
right-of-way.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE — An interior or exterior storage area
for a motor vehicle that is accessible from an access aisle and that is
not located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
OFF-TRACT — Not located on the property which is the subject of a
development application nor on the closest half of the abutting street
or right-of-way.
The actual physical occupancy by living thereon or therein by any
person.
a.
Placing on or storage therein of any furniture, furnishings, personal
belongings, merchandise, tools or equipment used in a person's
trade, business or profession or any other indicia or intent to
occupy or use the lands or building in question as contrary to
merely permitting the land or building to exist in a totally unused
state.
b.
18-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-200
AO:893
ON-SITE — Located on the lot in question and excluding any abutting
street or right-of-way.
ON-TRACT — Located on the property which is the subject of a
development application or on the closest half of an abutting street or
right-of-way.
ON-STREET PARKING SPACE — A temporary storage area for a motor
vehicle which is located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
OPEN SPACE — An unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal
or accessory building.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water, or a combination of land and water within the site designated,
designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents and
owners of a development. Common open space excludes land areas
within the rights-of-way of streets to be located within a Development
unless exclusively designed for access to open space. A legally
constituted organization of the property owners with authority to place
liens on property shall be formed for the maintenance of the common
areas and facilities, or this common open space may be deeded to the
Township if accepted by the Township for use by all residents of the
Township.
OPEN SPACE ORGANIZATION — An incorporated, non profit
organization operating in a planned development under recorded land
agreement through which (a) each owner is automatically a member;
(b) each occupied dwelling unit is automatically subject to a charge for
a proportionate share of the expenses for the organization's activities
and maintenance, including any maintenance costs levied against the
association by the Township; and (c) each owner and tenant has the
right to use the common property.
OWNER — Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, copartnership
or corporation having a proprietary interest in the land sought to be
subdivided.
PARKING SPACE — An area provided for the parking of one motor
vehicle.
PASSIVE OPEN SPACE OR PASSIVE RECREATION AREAS — An
unimproved area of land which may include: water set aside, dedicated,
designated, or reserved for public or private use and enjoyment which
utilizes and depends on the natural environment and requires no
modifications of the environment other than to provide access or
reserved for public or private use and enjoyment which utilizes and
depends on the natural environment and requires no modifications of
the environment other than to allow access. It permits such low impact
uses as hiking, fishing, canoeing, nature study, horseback riding, and
bicycling. Passive open space typically includes wooded areas, streams,
lakes, and other varieties of natural vegetative areas.
18-200 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-200
AO:894
PERMITTED USE — Any use of land or buildings as permitted by this
chapter.
PERVIOUS SURFACE — Any surface that permits a significant portion
of surface water to be absorbed.
PLAT — The map of a subdivision.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Any security which may be accepted by
a municipality, including cash, provided that the municipality shall not
require more than 10% of the total performance guaranty in cash in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 et seq.
PERSON — Includes persons, partnership, firm, company, corporation,
tenant, owner, lessee or licensee, their agents, heirs or assigns.
PHASE — A portion of a site plan or subdivision as shown on the plans
and application.
PLANNED AFFORDABLE RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — A private
residential community developed by a nonprofit housing development
entity and comprised of various housing types and accessory uses,
intended for and restricted to low- and moderate-income households.
The form of ownership for the dwelling units in a residential
development may be fee simple, condominium, cooperative, rental or
any combination thereof.
PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of a minimum
contiguous or noncontiguous size as specified by ordinance to be
developed according to a plan as a single entity containing one or
more structures with appurtenant common areas to accommodate
commercial or office uses or both and any residential and other uses
incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by
ordinance.[Ord. No. 2017-52 § 3]
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — A planned development is a planned unit
development, planned unit residential development, contiguous cluster
or noncontiguous cluster, planned commercial development or planned
industrial development.[Ord. No. 2017-52 § 2]
PLANNED EDUCATIONAL CAMPUS — An educational campus
containing less than 100 acres of a not for profit institution of higher
education that is a not for profit entity that is fully accredited and
licensed by the Office of the Secretary of Higher Education of the State
of New Jersey and one that offers both undergraduate and graduate
degrees and is devoted to higher education and no other forms of
education and that contains housing and accessory uses proportionate
to the educational facilities intended for only for faculty and students
who will attend or staff the institution's educational facilities and that
is adjoining to or within 500 feet of faculty and student housing so as to
create a unified campus setting. The land and all structures including
dwelling units shall be owned and developed only by the institution of
higher education and not by or in partnership or in other arrangement
with any investor group, construction company, a not for profit entity
18-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-200
AO:895
or any other third party. The occupancy of the residential uses in the
institution of higher education must be limited to: (a) students, faculty
or staff of the institution of higher education, or (b) the immediate
families of faculty, staff or students.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT — A planned industrial
development is an area of minimum contiguous or noncontiguous size
as specified by ordinance to be developed according to a plan as
a single entity containing one or more structures with appurtenant
common areas to accommodate industrial uses and any other uses
incidental to the predominant use as may be permitted by
ordinance.[Ord. No. 2017-52 § 2]
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT — An area with a specified minimum
contiguous or noncontiguous acreage of 10 acres or more to be
developed as a single entity according to a plan, containing one or
more contiguous clusters or noncontiguous clusters or planned unit
residential developments and one or more public, quasi-public,
commercial or industrial areas in such ranges of ratios of nonresidential
uses to residential uses as shall be specified in the zoning
ordinance.[Ord. No. 2017-52 § 3]
PLANNED UNIT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area with a
specified minimum contiguous or noncontiguous acreage of five acres
or more to be developed as a single entity according to a plan
containing one or more contiguous clusters or noncontiguous clusters,
which may include appropriate commercial, or public or quasi-public
uses all primarily for the benefit of the residential development.[Ord.
No. 2017-52 § 3]
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of Lakewood Township.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS — Architectural
drawings prepared during early and introductory stages of the design
of a project illustrating in a schematic form, its scope, scale and
relationship to its site and immediate environs.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL — The conferral of certain rights prior to
final approval after specific elements of a development plan have been
agreed upon by the Planning Board and the applicant.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — The preliminary map indicating the proposed
layout of the subdivision and site improvements that is submitted to the
Township for consideration and preliminary approval and meeting the
requirements of § 18-604 of this chapter.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING OR USE — A building or buildings in which is
conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is
situated or the open land of which such use is made or upon which such
activity is carried out.
PROFESSIONAL — The term professional means any person or entity
whose principals are required to be licensed by New Jersey law and
who supply legal representation, engineering services, planning
18-200 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-200
AO:896
services, expert testimony or written reports in support of an
application. Professionals shall include both any individuals supplying
the representation, testimonies or reports and the firms or entities in
which such individuals practice.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession or occupation, including architects, artists, authors,
counselors, social workers, dentists, doctors, lawyers, planners,
veterinarians, clergy, musicians, optometrists, engineers, realtors and
similar professions and occupations.
PUBLIC AREAS — Public parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other
recreational areas; and other public open spaces; scenic and historic
sites; and sites for schools and other public buildings and structures.
PUBLIC DEVELOPMENT PROPOSAL — A master plan, capital
improvements program or other proposal for land development adopted
by the appropriate public body, or any amendment thereto.
PUBLIC DRAINAGEWAY — The land reserved or dedicated for the
installation of storm water sewers or drainage ditches, or required
along a natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and
providing for the flow of water to safeguard the public against flood
damage, sedimentation and erosion.
PUBLIC PURPOSE USES — The use of land or buildings by the
governing body of the Township or any officially created authority or
agency thereof.
PUBLIC STREET — Any improved street located within an existing,
proposed or former Township Right of Way, comprised of pavement and
may include gutters, curbs and sidewalks.
PUBLIC WATER AND PUBLIC SEWERAGE — Centralized municipal
or municipally operated water and sewerage system, or water and
sewerage system franchised or approved by the Township in
accordance with the Township sewer and water plan. "With sewer and
water" as used in this chapter means that public water and public
sewerage shall be provided in order for the use to be permitted in the
zone district.
QUORUM — The majority of the full authorized membership of any
agency.
REGIONAL SHOPPING CENTER — A unified development of stores,
shops or other commercial establishments, together with areas for
internal circulation, parking and other accessory uses consisting of one
or more lots under the same or separate ownership, and having therein
a building or group of buildings containing not less than 600,000 square
feet of net floor area.
RESEARCH LABORATORY — A building or group of buildings in which
are facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or
experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of
products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
18-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-200
AO:897
RESIDENTIAL SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS (RSIS) — As
promulgated by the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs in
N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 through 8.
RESTAURANT — A business establishment whose principal business is
the selling of unpackaged food to the customer in a ready to consume
state, or in non disposable containers, and where the customer
consumes these foods while seated at tables or counters located within
the building.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE IN — Any restaurant, refreshment stand, snack
bar, dairy bar, hamburger stand or hot dog stand where food is served
primarily for consumption at counters, stools, tables or bars outside the
building or primarily for consumption in automobiles parking on the
premises whether brought to said automobiles by the customer or by
employees of the restaurant, regardless of whether or not additional
seats or other accommodations are provided for customers inside the
building.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — An establishment which may have a
drive-in/walk up window that offers quick food service, which is
accomplished through a limited menu of items already prepared and
held for service, or prepared, fried, or grilled quickly or heated in a
device such as a microwave oven. Orders are not generally taken at the
customer's table and food is generally served in disposable wrapping or
containers.
RESUBDIVISION — (1) The further division or relocation of lot lines
of any lot or lots within a subdivision previously made and approved
or recorded according to law or (2) the alteration of any streets or
the establishment of any new streets within any subdivision previously
made or approved or recorded according to law, but does not include
conveyances as to combine existing lots by deed or other instrument.
RETENTION BASIN — A man-made or natural stormwater
management collector facility designed to collect surface water and to
retain some or all of the water that drains into it.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot which fronts upon two parallel
streets, and is not accessible from one of the parallel streets. Reverse
frontage lots shall have one front yard, one rear yard and two (two) side
yards. (See § 18-805G)
REVIEWING BOARD — The Planning Board or Board of Adjustment,
whichever Board has jurisdiction over the particular application.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The land and space required on the surface,
subsurface and overhead for the construction and installation of
materials necessary to provide passageway for vehicular traffic,
pedestrians, utility lines, poles, conduits and mains, signs, hydrants,
trees and shrubbery.
18-200 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-200
AO:898
SEDIMENTATION — The deposition of soil that has been transported
from its site of origin by water, ice, wind, gravity or other natural means
as a product of erosion.
SELF-SERVICE STORAGE — A warehouse type structure containing
relatively small storage spaces usually of varying sizes, which are
leased or rented individually. Individuals are typically permitted to
access their storage spaces directly without appointment during
business hours. Also known as mini-warehouses.
SENIOR CITIZEN — A person 55 years of age or older. For the purposes
of this chapter a senior citizen is considered a person 48 years of age
or older.
SETBACK — The required minimum horizontal distance between the
building line and the related front, side or rear property line.
SHADE TREE COMMISSION — An advisory commission established
pursuant to applicable law, which among its duly authorized
responsibilities is the review of Tree Protection Management Plans
submitted to the Reviewing Board in accordance with § 18-803H of this
chapter.
SHED — A 1-story accessory building for the storage of incidental
items, with a maximum building footprint of 200 square feet and a
maximum height 12 feet and may be placed up to five feet off the side
and rear property lines. Sheds are prohibited within the front yard
setback. Zoning and/or building permits are required. If the structure
does not meet the shed definition, Board approval is required.[Ord. No.
2015-42]
SHOPPING CENTER — A grouping of retail business, service uses,
houses of worship or offices on a single site planned, constructed
and managed as a total entity with customer and employee parking
provided on site, provisions for goods delivery separated from customer
access, aesthetic considerations and protection from the elements.
SIGHT EASEMENT AT INTERSECTION — A triangular shaped area
established at intersections in which nothing is erected, placed, planted
or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct sight
distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection.
SIGN — Any object, device, display or structure or part thereof, situated
outdoors or indoors, visible from the street, public right-of-way or
other public facility, which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct
or attract attention to an object, person, institution, organization,
business, product, service, event or location by any means, including
words, letters, figures, design, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or
projected images.
SIGN AREA — That area defined by the frame or edge of a sign.
Where no frame or edge exists, the area shall be defined by a projected
enclosed four sided (straight sides) geometric shape which most closely
outlines said sign. Where a sign has more than one side, sign area
18-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-200
AO:899
shall be construed to include the total area used for advertisement or
identification.
SIGN, COMMERCIAL — Any sign which is owned or operated by any
person engaged in the business of outdoor advertising for direct profit
gained from the rental of signs, or any sign advertising a commodity not
sold or produced on the premises.
SIGN FUNCTIONS — These may include, but not be limited to, the
following:
ADVERTISING — Shall mean a sign directing attention to a
business commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or
offered elsewhere than upon the premises where the sign is
maintained.
a.
BUSINESS — Shall mean a sign directing attention to a business,
commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold or offered
upon the same premises as those upon which the sign is located.
b.
DIRECTORY — Shall mean a sign of permanent character, but
with interchangeable letters, words or numerals, indicating the
names of persons associated with, or events conducted upon, or
products or services offered upon the premises whereon a sign is
maintained.
c.
INSTRUCTIONAL — Shall mean a sign conveying instructions with
respect to the premises on which it is maintained, such as parking
lot entrance or exit signs, and danger signs.
d.
NAMEPLATE — Shall mean a sign indicating the name, address
and/or profession or occupation of a person.
e.
PUBLIC — Shall mean signs of a noncommercial nature and in the
public interest, erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in
the performance of his duty, such as safety signs, danger signs,
memorial plaques or citations, official court and public notices,
signs of historical interest, and the like. Public shall also include
non-for-profit organizations, houses of worship and educational
institutions. As long as erected for non-profit organization.
f.
TEMPORARY — Shall mean a sign which is designed to advertise
or announce, for a limited period, a particular event or series of
events, to solicit political support, or to announce the availability
for sale of a particular item or items.
g.
IDENTIFICATION — Shall mean any structure or part thereof or
thereto or painted or represented displays any letter, symbol,
trademark, word or similar device used to identify the product
made or the activity being pursued by any individual, business,
service, commercial or industrial enterprise, which is displayed
upon the lot or premises occupied by such an enterprise for the
h.
18-200 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-200
AO:900
SIGN HEIGHT — The greatest vertical dimension between the top of a
sign and the ground.
SIGN TYPES — These may include, but not be limited to, the following
types:
purpose of appraising the public of the location of such enterprise
for the type of activity in which it is managed.
INTERIOR — Shall mean any sign that is affixed to or painted on
the interior of a window or any sign located inside and within three
feet of the face of the window which is designed to be visible from
the windows exterior.
i.
OFFICIAL — Shall mean any sign, symbol or device, erected and
maintained by a Federal, State, County or local governmental
agency for the purpose of informing or guiding the public or for
the protection and promotion of health, safety, convenience and
general welfare.
j.
GROUND — Shall mean a freestanding sign supported by uprights
or braces in or upon the ground and not attached to any part of a
building.
a.
HANGING — Shall mean a sign designed to project beyond the
front face and perpendicular to it over a public walkway.
b.
INTEGRAL — Shall mean a sign carved into stone, concrete, or
similar material or made of bronze, aluminum, or other permanent
type construction and made an integral part of the structure.
c.
MARQUEE — Shall mean a sign attached to or hung from a
marquee, canopy or other covered structure projecting from and
supported by the building.
d.
ROOF — Shall mean a sign which is erected, constructed or
maintained on, above or as part of the roof of any building.
e.
WALL — Shall mean a sign which is attached directly to the
building and is parallel to the building.
f.
FREESTANDING — Shall mean a sign supported by one or more
upright poles, columns, or braces placed in or on the ground and
not attached to any building or structures.
g.
STREET SIGNS — Shall mean a sign used to identify street names
along public rights-of-way and designed in accordance with §
18-814.
h.
DIGITAL BILLBOARD — An advertising sign upon which space
images are displayed, by means of a digital display of information,
provided that a digital billboard may include a static, illuminated,
non-digital sign advertising businesses or activities existing at the
property on which the digital billboard is situated. The digital
i.
18-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-200
AO:901
SITE PLAN OR PLAN — A development plan of one or more lots on
which is shown: (1) the existing and proposed conditions of the lot;
(2) the location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking
spaces, walkways, means of ingress/egress, drainage facilities, utility
services, landscaping, signage, lighting etc., (3) any other information
that may be reasonably required in order to make an informed decision
pursuant to an ordinance requiring review and approval of site plans.
SITE PLAN/PLAN REVIEW — Examination of the specific development
plans for a lot. Wherever the term "Plan Approval" is used herein, it
shall be understood to mean a requirement that the plan be reviewed
and approved by the appropriate Board.
SKETCH PLAT — The sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient accuracy
to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and meeting
the requirements of Article VI of this chapter.
SKILLED CARE NURSING UNIT — A nursing bed or individual room
which provides board, shelter and twenty-four skilled nursing and
medical care to chronic or convalescent patients. Skilled Care Nursing
Units shall be in a facility that may include accessory uses including
dining rooms, bathing areas, common areas, offices, clinics, therapy
areas, medical facilities and other space necessary to provide the above
services.
STREET LINE — That line determining the limit of the road, street or
highway rights of the public, either existing or contemplated.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive
or other way (1) which is an existing State, county or municipal
roadway, or (2) which is shown upon a plat heretofore approved
pursuant to law, or (3) which is approved by official action as provided
by this act, or (4) which is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in
the office of the county recording officer prior to the appointment of
a planning board and the grant to such board of the power to review
plats; and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials to form a construction for
occupancy, use or ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below
the surface of a parcel of land.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into
two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale
or development. The following shall not be considered subdivisions
within the meaning of this act, if no new streets are created: (1)
divisions of land found by the planning board or subdivision committee
thereof appointed by the chairman to be for agricultural purposes
billboard may not exceed the length or width or extend more
than five feet above the digital billboard. Digital billboards are
conditionally permitted in the B-1, B-3, B-4, HD-6, HD-7 and M-1
zones. [Ord. No. 2016-11 § 2]
18-200 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-200
AO:902
where all resulting parcels are five acres or larger in size, (2) divisions
of property by testamentary or intestate provisions, (3) divisions of
property upon court order, including but not limited to judgments of
foreclosure, (4) consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded
instrument and (5) the conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts
or parcels of land, owned by the same person or persons and all of
which are found and certified by the administrative officer to conform
to the requirements of the municipal development regulations and are
shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax map
or atlas of the municipality. The term "subdivision" shall also include
the term "resubdivision."
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — All subdivisions not classified as Industrial
or Minor Subdivisions. Major subdivisions shall however also include
any proposed subdivision which would otherwise qualify as a minor
subdivision if the subdivision under consideration represents a further
subdivision of an original tract of land for which a previous minor
subdivision or subdivisions, or a major subdivision had been approved
by the Planning Board within three years prior to the filing of the
application, and the combination of the proposed subdivision and the
previous subdivisions of said original tract would constitute, if
considered together as a whole, a major subdivision.
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision of land that does not involve
(a) the creation of more than three additional lots, in addition to any
one retained parcel, including the relocation or adjustment of existing
lot lines provided such relocation or adjustment does not result in the
creation of more than three additional lots, in addition to any one
retained parcel (b) planned development, (c) any new street, or (d)
extension of any off tract improvement. In counting lots to determine
whether or not a proposed subdivision is a minor subdivision, the
Township tax maps dated January 1, 2004 shall be used.
SUKKAH — A temporary structure constructed for religious reasons on
or about the Sukkoth holiday.
SWIMMING POOL — A water filled enclosure, permanently constructed
or portable, having a depth of more than 18 inches below the level
of the surrounding land, or an aboveground pool, having a depth of
more than 24 inches, designed, used and maintained for swimming and
bathing.
SWIMMING POOL, COMMERCIAL — Commercial swimming pools
shall mean and include all pools associated with commercial land uses.
Commercial swimming pools shall be further classified into types in
accordance with their particular use and shall meet the appropriate
design standards as set forth by the National Swimming Pool Institute.
SWIMMING POOL, PORTABLE — Portable pools shall not be subject
to the requirement of this chapter and are those pools which are
not otherwise permanently installed; do not require water filtration,
circulation and purification; do not exceed a water surface of 100
square feet; and do not require braces or supports.
18-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-200
AO:903
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL — Private residential
swimming pools shall mean and include artificially constructed pools,
whether located above or below the ground, having a depth of more
than 18 inches and/or a water surface of 100 square feet or more;
designed and maintained for swimming and bathing purposes by an
individual for use by members of his household and guests and which
is located on a lot as an accessory use to a detached dwelling and shall
include all buildings, structures, equipment and appurtenances thereto.
Private residential swimming pools shall be further classified into types
in accordance with their particular use and shall meet the appropriate
design standards as set forth by the National Swimming Pool Institute.
THRU-LOT — A lot which fronts upon two parallel streets.
TOWER — See "Wireless Telecommunications Tower."
TOWER HEIGHT — When referring to a wireless telecommunications
tower or other structure, the distance measured from the finished
grade to the highest point on the tower or other structure, including the
base pad and any antenna. (See also the definition of "building height.")
TOWNSHIP — Township of Lakewood, Ocean County, New Jersey.
TRACT — An area, parcel, site, piece of land, or property which is the
subject of a development application.
TRELLIS — A structure of open latticework, especially one used as a
support for vines and other creeping plants.
USE — The purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed,
arranged, or intended, or for which land or buildings are occupied or
maintained.
USE, PRINCIPAL — The main use(s) of land or structures, as
distinguished from a secondary or accessory use(s).
UNITS, DWELLINGS —
VARIANCE — A departure from the terms of this chapter authorized
by the appropriate municipal agency in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70, et seq.
WETLANDS — Those areas meeting the definition of wetlands under
N.J.A.C. 5:1-1 et seq. and enforced by the NJDEP.
For single-family detached or attached units - one housekeeping
unit equals one unit.
a.
For condominiums, cooperatives and apartments - one
housekeeping unit equals one unit.
b.
c. Assisted Living Facilities - one housekeeping unit equals one unit.
Skilled Nursing Care Facilities and Nursing Homes - one bed
equals one unit.
d.
18-200 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-200
AO:904
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure that
is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting
one or more antennas for telephone, radio or similar communication
purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers, guyed towers, or
monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission
towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone
towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. The term includes the
structure and any support thereto.
YARD — The area that lies between the principal or accessory building
or buildings and the nearest lot line.
YARD, FRONT — A yard on the same lot with the principal building,
extending the full width of the lot and situated between the street line
and the front line of a building projected to the side lines of that lot.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending across the full width of the lot and
lying between the rear line of the lot and the nearest line of any
building. The depth of a rear yard shall be measured at right angles
to the rear line of the lot, or if the lot is not rectangular, then in the
general direction of its side building lines.
YARD SIDE — A yard between the side line of the lot and the nearest
line of the building and extending from the front yard to the rear yard,
or in the absence of either of such yards, to the street or rear lot line
as the case may be. The width of a side yard shall be measured at right
angles to the side line of the lot.
ZONING BOARD — The Zoning Board of Adjustment of Lakewood
Township.
ZONING DISTRICT — A finite area of land, as designated by its
boundaries on the zoning map, throughout which specific and uniform
regulations govern the use of land and/or the location, size and use of
buildings.
ZONING OFFICER, OR ZONING ADMINISTRATION OFFICER — The
official responsible for the administration of this chapter as hereinafter
set forth.
ZONING PERMIT — A document signed by the Zoning Officer, (a)
which is required by ordinance as a condition precedent to the
commencement of a use or the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, conversion, or installation of a structure or building and (b)
which acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with
the provisions of the municipal zoning ordinance or variance therefrom
duly authorized by a municipal agency pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60
and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70.
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq., as amended, such term is intended to have the
meaning set forth in the definition of such term found in such statute,
unless a contrary intention is clearly expressed in the context of this
chapter.
18-200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-200
AO:905

ARTICLE III
PLANNING BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT63
18-300. Establishment of the Board of Adjustment.
A. The Zoning Board of Adjustment presently in existence pursuant to the
Municipal Land Use Law N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 is hereby continued to
consist of seven regular members and two alternates, who shall be
residents of the Township. Regular members shall be appointed by the
governing body for terms of four years, each computed from January 1
of the year of their appointment, except full terms filled for the first
time under this section shall be so fixed (for four or less years) and so
arranged that to the greatest practicable extent the expiration of all
terms will be distributed evenly over the first four years after the initial
appointment. Alternate members shall be appointed by the governing
body for terms of two years, each computed from January 1 of the year
of their appointment, except full terms filled for the first time under this
section shall be so fixed (for two or less years) and so arranged that to
the greatest practicable extent the expiration of all terms will be
distributed evenly over the first two years after the initial appointment.
B. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hold any elective
position under the municipality.
C. Any vacancy on said Board occurring other than by expiration of term
shall be filled by appointment by the governing body of the municipality
to serve for the unexpired term of the member whose term shall
become vacant. A member may be removed by the governing body for
cause but only after public hearing and other requested procedural due
process protection.
D. Yearly, the Board of Adjustment shall organize by selecting from among
its regular members a Chairman and Vice Chairman. The Board shall
also select a Secretary who may or may not be a member of the Board
or a municipal employee.
E. The governing body shall make provision in its budget and appropriate
funds for the expenses of the Board of Adjustment.
F. The office of Board of Adjustment Attorney is hereby created. The
Board of Adjustment may annually appoint to such office and fix
compensation or rate of compensation of an attorney at law of New
Jersey other than the municipal attorney.
G. The Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which
63.Editor's Note: See Volume I Chapter 2, Administration, § 2-34 Planning Board and § 2-35
Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of
Lakewood, 1999, for the establishment of these Boards.
18-300 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-300
AO:907
18-301. Powers and Jurisdiction of the Board of Adjustment.
The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
governing body for its use.
H. The Board of Adjustment shall adopt such rules and regulations as may
be necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this
chapter.
A. Error or Refusal: Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
appellant that there is error in any order, requirement decision or
refusal made by an administrative officer based on or made in the
enforcement of the Unified Development Ordinance.
B. Exceptions or Interpretations: Hear and decide, in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map
or for decisions upon other special questions upon which the Board is
authorized to pass, by any ordinance or Official Map.
C. Variance of Area or Yard Requirements: Where, by reason of
exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of a specific piece of
property; or by reason of exceptional topographic conditions; or
physical features uniquely affecting a specific piece of property; or by
reason of other extraordinary and exceptional situation or condition of
such piece of property or the structures thereon, the strict application
of any regulation of this chapter would result in peculiar and
exceptional practical difficulties or to exceptional and undue hardship
upon the developer of such property, grant, upon an application or an
appeal relating to such property, a variance from such strict application
of such regulation so as to relieve any difficulties or hardships; where in
an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of property the
purposes of this chapter would be advanced by a deviation from the
ordinance requirements and the benefits of the deviation would
substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a variance to allow
departure from the zoning regulations; provided, however, that a
proposed use is an inherently beneficial use shall not be dispositive of a
decision on a variance under this section and provided that no variance
shall be granted under this subsection to allow a structure or use in a
district restricted against such structure or use; and provided further
that the proposed development does not require approval by the
Planning Board of a subdivision, site plan or conditional use in
conjunction with which the Planning Board shall review a request for a
variance pursuant to this chapter.
D. Variance of Use Regulations: In particular cases and for special reasons
grant a variance to permit (1) a structure or use in a district restricted
against such structure or use; (2) an expansion of a nonconforming use;
(3) deviation from a specification or standard pertaining solely to a
conditional use; (4) an increase in the permitted floor area ratio; (5) an
18-300 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-301
AO:908
increase in the permitted density, except as applied to the required lot
area for a lot or lots for detached one or two dwelling unit buildings,
which lot or lots are either an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting
from a minor subdivision; or (6) a height of a principal structure which
exceeds by ten (10') feet or 10% the maximum height permitted in
the district for a principal structure. A variance under this section
shall be granted only by affirmative vote of 2/3 of the full authorized
membership of the Board.
E. If an application for development requests one or more variances but
not a variance for purpose enumerated in Subsection D of this section,
the decision on the requested variance or variances shall be rendered
under Subsection C of this section.
F. General Provision: No variance or other relief may be granted under the
terms of this section including a variance or other relief involving an
inherently beneficial use, without showing that such variance or other
relief can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good
and will not substantially impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan
and this chapter. Any application to the Board of Adjustment under this
section may be referred to any appropriate person or agency, including
the Planning Board, for its report; provided that such reference shall
not extend the period of time within which the Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall act.
G. Other Powers: The Board of Adjustment shall have such other powers as
prescribed by law, by affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized
membership of the Board, including but not limited to, the following:
1. By direct issuance of a building permit for the construction of a
building or structure within the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area as shown on a duly
adopted Official Map Ordinance of the municipality whenever one
or more parcels of land within said bed cannot yield a reasonable
return to the owner unless a building permit is granted. The Board
shall impose reasonable requirements as a condition of granting
the building permit as to promote the health, morals, safety and
general welfare of the public.
The Board of Adjustment shall not exercise the power otherwise
granted by this section if the proposed development requires
approval by the Planning Board of a subdivision, plan or conditional
use in conjunction with which the Planning Board has power to
direct the issuance of permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60.
2. Direct issuance of a building permit for construction of a building
or structure on a lot not abutting a street which is shown on a duly
adopted Official Map of the Municipality or which is (1) an existing
State, County or municipal street or highway; or (2) a street shown
upon a plat approved by the Municipal Planning Board; or (3) a
street on a plat duly filed in the office of the County Recording
18-301 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-301
AO:909
18-302. Appeals and Applications to the Board of Adjustment.
Officer. Before any such permit shall be issued, (1) such street shall
have been certified to be suitably improved to the satisfaction of
the Township Committee, or such suitable improvement shall have
been assured by means of a performance guarantee, in accordance
with standards and specifications for road improvements approved
by the Township Committee, as adequate in respect to the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the special circumstance
of the particular street and (2) if applicable, it shall have been
established that the proposed access conforms with the standards
of the State Highway Access Management Code adopted pursuant
to the State Highway Access Management Act of 1989. The Board
may grant such relief only where enforcement of the statute
requirement that a building lot abut a street would entail practical
difficult or unnecessary hardship, or where circumstances of the
case do not require the building or structure to abut a street. The
Board shall impose requirements of conditions that will provide
adequate access for fire fighting equipment, ambulances and other
emergency vehicles necessary for the protection of health and
safety and will protect any future street layout shown on the
Official Map or on the general circulation plan element of the
Municipal Master Plan.
3. The Board of Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same
extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Planning Board,
subdivision or plan approval or conditional use approval whenever
the Board of Adjustment is reviewing an application for approval of
a variance pursuant to § 18-301 of this chapter; provided, however,
that the exercise of subdivision and/or plan review by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall be restricted to that lot (or lots) upon
which the proposed variant use is to be situated.
H. Inquiries as to whether a proposed land use is permissible under this
chapter shall be submitted in writing to the Board of Adjustment which
shall issue a written response within 45 days after the next meeting
following receipt of the request or within such additional time as may
be consented to by the inquirer.
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be taken by an interested party
affected by any decision of an officer of the municipality based on, or
made in, the enforcement of this chapter or Official Map. Such appeal
shall be taken within 20 days by filing a notice of appeal with the
Administrative Officer from whom the appeal is taken specifying the
grounds of such appeal. Three copies of the notice shall simultaneously
be submitted to the Board of Adjustment. The officer from whom the
appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
B. A developer may file an application for development with the Board of
Adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior application
18-301 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-302
AO:910
18-303. Establishment and Composition of the Planning Board.
to the Administrative Officer of the municipality. 15 copies of such an
application shall be filed with the Secretary of the Board of Adjustment.
All plot plans, maps and/or other information required for review by
the Zoning Board of Adjustment or this chapter shall be submitted to
the Secretary to the Board of Adjustment at least 10 days prior to
the date set by the Board of Adjustment for the public hearing on the
application. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the
Secretary of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
C. The Board of Adjustment shall render a decision not later than 120 days
after the date that (1) an appeal is taken from the decision of an officer
of the municipality or (2) a complete application for development is
submitted to the Board by a developer. Failure of the Board to render a
decision within such 120 day period or within such further time as may
be consented to by the applicant shall constitute a decision favorable to
the applicant.
D. Any appeal to the Board of Adjustment shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect to which the decision appealed from
was made unless the officer from whose action the appeal is taken
certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal shall
have been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate
a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In
such case proceedings shall not be stayed other than by an order of the
Superior Court upon notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken
and on due cause shown.
E. In acting on any appeal, the Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm,
wholly or in part, or may modify the action, order, requirement,
decision, interpretation or determination appealed from and to that end
have all the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
A. The Planning Board shall consist of nine members of the following four
classes. All members of the Planning Board except for the Class II
members set forth below, shall be municipal residents.
Class I - The Mayor, or in the Mayor's absence, the Mayor's designee.
Class II - One of the officials of the municipality, other than a member of
the governing body, to be appointed by the Mayor; provided that if there
is an Environmental Committee, the member of the Environmental
Committee who is also a member of the Planning Board as required
by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board
member if there is both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
and a member of the Board of Education among the Class IV members
or alternate members.
Class III - A member of the Township governing body to be appointed
by the Township governing body.
18-302 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-303
AO:911
Class IV - Other citizens of the Township, to be appointed by the
Mayor. The members of Class IV shall hold no other municipal office,
position or employment except that one member may be a member of
the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Historic Preservation Commission,
if established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 and one member may be
a member of the Board of Education. If there is an Environmental
Commission, the member of the Environmental Commission who is
also a member of the Planning Board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1
shall be a Class IV member unless there be among the Class IV or
alternate members of the Planning board both a member of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment and a member of the Board of Education, in which
case the member common to the Planning Board and Environmental
Commission shall be deemed a Class II member of the Planning Board.
For the purposes of this section, membership on a Township board or
commission whose function is advisory in nature, and the establishment
of which is discretionary and not required by statute, shall not be
considered the holding of a Township office.
B. Terms
1. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with
their official tenure. The terms of the members composing Class II
and Class III shall be for one year or terminated at the completion
of their respective terms of office, whichever occurs first, except
for a Class II member who is also a member of the Environmental
Committee shall be for three years or terminate at the completion
of their term of office as a member of the Environmental
Committee, whichever comes first.
2. The term of a Class IV member who is also a member of the Board
of Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever
they are no longer a member of such other body or at the
completion of his Class IV term, whichever comes first.
3. The terms of all Class IV members first appointed pursuant to this
chapter shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable
extent the expiration of such term shall be evenly distributed over
the first four years after their appointment and as determined by
resolution of the governing body; provided, however, that no term
of any member shall exceed four years and further provided that
nothing herein shall affect the term of any present member of the
Planning Board, all of whom shall continue in office until the
completion of the terms of four years except as otherwise herein
provided. All terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which
the appointment was made.
4. If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of
term, it shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the
unexpired term.
18-303 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-303
AO:912
18-304. Powers and Jurisdiction of the Planning Board.
The Planning Board shall have the powers listed below in addition to other
powers established by law:
C. Two Class IV alternate members, who shall be municipal residents,
shall be appointed to the Planning Board by the Mayor, and shall meet
the qualifications of Class IV members of the Planning Board. Alternate
members shall be designated at the time of appointment by the Mayor
as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No. 2". The terms of the alternate
members shall be for two years, except that the terms of the alternate
members shall be such that the term of not more than one alternate
member shall expire in any one year; provided, however, that in no
instance shall the term of the alternate members first appointed exceed
two years. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term
shall be filled by the Mayor for the unexpired term only. Alternate
members may participate in all matters but may not vote except in the
absence or disqualification of a regular member of any class.
Participation of alternate members shall not be deemed to increase the
size of the Planning Board established by ordinance of the governing
body pursuant to Section 14 of P.L. 1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-23). A vote
shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of
an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to
which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1 shall vote.
D. The Planning Board shall elect a Chairman and Vice Chairman annually
from the members of Class IV, select a Secretary who may or may not be
a member or alternate member of the Planning Board or a municipal
employee, and create and fill such other offices as established by
ordinance. An alternate member shall not serve as Chairman or Vice
Chairman. It may employ, or contract for, and fix the compensation of
legal counsel, other than the Municipal Attorney, and experts, and other
staff and services as it may deem necessary, not exceeding, exclusive of
gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body for its
use. The governing body shall make provision in its budget and
appropriate funds for the expenses of the Planning Board.
E. The Planning Board may also employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The Board shall not authorize expenditures which
exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the
governing body for its use.
F. The Planning Board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be
necessary to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this
chapter.
A. Prepare, maintain and administer the Master Plan for the physical
development of the Township, including any areas outside its
boundaries which, in the Board's judgment, bear essential relation to
the planning of the Township.
18-303 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-304
AO:913
18-305. Provisions Applicable to Both the Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
B. Administer the provisions of this chapter.
C. Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans required
by State or Federal law or regulations.
D. Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
E. Prepare a capital improvements program if authorized by the Township
Committee.
F. Consider and make report to the governing body within 35 days after
referral as to any proposed development regulation submitted to it and
also pass upon other matters specifically referred to the Planning Board
by the governing body.
G. The Planning Board shall have such other powers as prescribed by law,
including, but not limited to, the power to grant the following variances,
to the same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, when the Planning Board is reviewing
applications for approval of subdivisions, plans or conditions uses:
1. Variances pursuant to § 18-301C of this chapter from lot area, lot
dimension, setback and yard requirements; provided that relief
pursuant to this subsection from lot area requirements shall not be
granted if there is an increase in the permitted density requiring a
variance pursuant to § 18-301D.
2. Direction pursuant to § 18-301G1 of this chapter for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or
public drainageway, flood control basin or public area; and
3. Direction pursuant to § 18-301G2 of this chapter for issuance of a
permit for a building or structure on a lot not abutting a street.
A. Conflicts of Interest: No member of the Planning Board or Zoning Board
of Adjustment shall act on any matter in which they have either directly
or indirectly, any personal or financial interest. Whenever any such
member shall disqualify themselves from acting on a particular matter,
they shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such
matter nor participate in any discussion or decision relating thereto.
B. Meetings
1. Regular meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be scheduled for the entire calendar year and set
for a certain time an place, no less often than once a month, and
shall be held as scheduled unless canceled for lack of applications
for development to process.
18-304 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-305
AO:914
2. Special meetings may be scheduled at the call of the Chairman or
on the request of any two Board members, which shall be held on
notice to its members and the public in accordance with all
applicable legal requirements.
3. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present, said quorum to be the majority of the full authorized Board
membership.
4. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of the members of the
Board at the meeting except as otherwise required by N.J.S.A.
40:55-D et seq. A member of the Board who was absent for one or
more of the meetings at which a hearing was held shall be eligible
to vote on a matter upon which the hearing was conducted,
provided, however, that such Board member certifies in writing to
the Board that he or she has read a transcript or listened to a
recording of all of the hearings from which he or she was absent.
5. All meetings shall be open to the public. Notice of all such meetings
shall be given in accordance with the requirements of the Open
Public Meeting Law, C.231, Laws of New Jersey, 1975.
C. Records
1. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall
include the names of the persons appearing and addressing the
Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the Planning or
Zoning Board, the findings, if any, made by it and reasons
therefore. The minutes shall thereafter be made available for public
inspection during the normal business hours at the office of the
Board Secretary. Any interested party shall have the right to
compel production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal
proceedings, concerning the subject matter of such minutes.
2. A verbatim recording shall be made of every hearing. The
recording of the proceedings shall be made by either stenographer,
mechanical or electronic means. The Municipality shall furnish a
transcript or duplicate recording in lieu thereof on request to any
interested party at their expense. Each transcript shall be certified
in writing by the transcriber to be accurate.
D. Public Hearing
1. The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case
may be, shall hold a hearing on each application for development.
Each Board shall make the rules governing such hearings.
2. Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing
shall be on file and available for public inspection at least 10 days
before the date of the hearing during normal business hours in the
office of the Board Secretary. The applicant may produce other
18-305 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-305
AO:915
documents, records or testimony at the hearing to substantiate or
clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and documents.
3. The officer presiding at the hearing, or such person as they may
designate, shall have power to administer oaths and issue
subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant evidence, including witnesses and
documents presented by the parties, and the provisions of the
"County and Municipal Investigations Law," P.L. 1953, c.38
(C.2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
4. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the
presiding officer, and the right of cross examination shall be
permitted to all interested parties through their attorneys, if
represented, or directly, if not represented, subject to the
discretion of the presiding officer and to reasonable limitations as
to time and number of witnesses.
5. A verbatim recording shall be made of every hearing. The
recording of the proceedings shall be made either by stenographic,
mechanical or electrical means. The Township shall furnish a
transcript or duplicate recording in lieu thereof on request to any
interested at their expense, provided that the charge for a
transcript shall not exceed the maximum permitted in N.J.S.A.
2A:11-15. Each transcript shall be certified in writing by the
transcriber to be accurate.
6. If an applicant desires a certified court reporter, the costs of taking
testimony and transcribing it and providing a copy of the transcript
to the Township or court shall be at the expense of the applicant,
who shall also arrange for the attendance by the reporter. All costs
for transcription of the record before the applicable Board shall be
entire and sole obligation of the applicant or appellant, whichever
requests the transcript.
7. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing,
but the Board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
E. Public Notice of a Hearing
1. Public notice of a hearing shall be given for the following
applications for development:
a. Any request for a variance;
b. Any request for conditional use approval;
c. Any request for the issuance of a permit to build within the bed
of a mapped street or public drainageway or on a lot not
abutting a street;
18-305 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-305
AO:916
d. Any request for major or minor plan approval involving one or
more of the aforesaid elements; and
e. Any request for preliminary subdivision approval;
f. Any request for preliminary major site plan approval.
2. Public notice of a hearing shall be given for an extension of
approvals for five or more years under Subsection d of Section 37
of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-49) and Subsection b of Section 40 of
P.L.1975, c. 291 (C.40:55D-52); for modification or elimination of a
significant condition or conditions in a memorializing resolution in
any situation wherein the application for development for which
the memorializing resolution is proposed for adoption required
public notice, and for any other applications for development, with
the following exceptions: (1) conventional site plan review
pursuant to Section 34 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-46), (2) minor
subdivisions pursuant to Section 35 of P.L.1975, c.291
(C.40:55D-47) or (3) final approval pursuant to Section 38 of
P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-50); notwithstanding the foregoing, the
governing body may by ordinance require public notice for such
categories of site plan review as may be specified by ordinance, for
appeals of determinations of administrative officers pursuant to
Subsection a of Section 57 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-70), and for
requests for interpretation pursuant to Subsection b of Section 57
of P.L.1975, c.291(C. 40:55D-70). Public notice shall also be given
in the event that relief is requested pursuant to Section 47 or 63 of
P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-60 or C.40:55D-76) as part of an
application for development otherwise excepted herein from public
notice. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official
newspaper of the municipality, if there be one, or in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality.
3. Notice of a hearing on an amendment to the zoning ordinance
proposing a change to the classification or boundaries of a zoning
district, exclusive of classification or boundary changes
recommended in a periodic general reexamination of the Master
Plan by the Planning Board pursuant to Section 76 of P.L.1975,
c.291 (C.40:55D-89), shall be given at least 10 days prior to the
hearing by the Administrative Officer to the owners of all real
property as shown on the current tax duplicates, located, in the
case of a classification change, within the district and within the
State within 200 feet in all directions of the boundaries of the
district, and located, in the case of a boundary change, in the State
within 200 feet in all directions of the proposed new boundaries of
the district which is the subject of the hearing.
4. A notice pursuant to this section shall state the date, time and place
of the hearing, the nature of the matter to be considered and an
identification of the affected zoning districts and proposed
boundary changes, if any, by street names, common names or other
18-305 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-305
AO:917
identifiable landmarks, and by reference to lot and block numbers
as shown on the current tax duplicate in the Municipal Tax
Assessor's Office.
5. Notice shall be given by: (1) serving a copy thereof on the property
owner as shown on the said current tax duplicate, or his agent in
charge of the property, or (2) mailing a copy thereof by certified
mail and regular mail to the property owner at his address as
shown on the said current tax duplicate.
6. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon
its president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized
by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal
property regime, community trust or homeowners' association,
because of its ownership of common elements or areas located
within 200 feet of the boundaries of the district which is the subject
of the hearing, may be made in the same manner as to a
corporation, in addition to notice to unit owners, co-owners, or
homeowners on account of such common elements or areas.
7. The Administrative Officer shall execute affidavits of proof of
service of the notices required by this section, and shall keep the
affidavits on file along with the proof of publication of the notice of
the required public hearing on the proposed zoning ordinance
change. Costs of the notice provision shall be the responsibility of
the proponent of the amendment.
8. The Secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, shall notify the applicant at least
two weeks prior to the public hearing at which the application will
be discussed. Notice of a public hearing requiring public notice
shall be given by the applicant at least 10 days prior to the date of
the hearing in the following manner and necessary proof of notice
shall be submitted to the Secretary at least two days prior to the
hearing in question:
a. By publication in the official newspaper of the municipality, if
there be one, or in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality.
b. To all owners of real property as shown on the current tax
duplicate located within 200 feet in all directions of the
property which is the subject of the hearing, which notice shall
be given by serving a copy thereof on the property owner, as
shown on the current tax duplicate, or their agent in charge of
the property; or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to
the property owner at the address as shown on the said current
tax duplicate. It is not required that a return receipt be
18-305 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-305
AO:918
obtained. Notice is deemed complete upon mailing (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-14).
c. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon
any partner; notice to a corporate owner may be made by
service upon its president, a vice president, secretary or other
person authorized by appointment or by law to accept service
on behalf of the corporation.
d. To the Clerk of any adjoining municipality or municipalities
when the property involved is located within 200 feet of said
adjoining municipality or municipalities, which notice shall be
given by personal service or certified mail.
e. To the County Planning Board when the application for
development involves property adjacent to an existing county
road or proposed road shown on the County Official Map or the
County Master Plan or adjoins other County land.
f. To the Commissioner of the Department of Transportation
when the property abuts a state highway.
g. To the Director of the Office of State Planning when the
hearing involves an application for development of property
which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling units, in which case
the notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Board Secretary.
h. To the corporate secretary of all public utilities and the general
manager of all cable television companies which have
registered with the municipality in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12.1, possess a right-of-way or easement within the
municipality by personal service or certified mail.
i. In addition to any notification requirement otherwise imposed
under this chapter, an applicant seeking approval of a
development which does not require notice, as provided in §
18-701, shall be required to provide public notice, by personal
service or certified mail, to the corporate secretary of any
public utility and the general and the general manager of any
cable television company that posses a right of way or
easement situated within the property limits of the property
which is the subject of the application for development
approval under this section.
9. Upon an applicant's written request, the Tax Assessor shall, within
seven days, make and certify a list from said current tax duplicates
of names and addresses of owners within the Township to whom
the applicant is required to give notice. The applicant shall be
charged ten (10) dollars for said list and shall be entitled to rely
upon the information contained in such list, and failure to give
notice to any owner not on the list shall not invalidate any hearing
18-305 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-305
AO:919
18-306. Notice of Hearing on Change in Classification or
Boundaries of Zoning Districts.
Notice of the hearing on an amendment to this chapter proposing a change
to the classification or boundaries of a zoning district, exclusive of
classification or boundary changes recommended in a periodic general
reexamination of the Master Plan by the Planning Board pursuant to Section
76 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-89), shall be given prior to adoption in
accordance with the provisions of Section 2 of P.L.1995, c.249
(C.40:55D-62.1). A protest against any proposed amendment or revision of
a zoning ordinance may be filed with the Municipal Clerk, signed by the
owners of 20% or more of the area either (1) of the lots or land included
in such proposed change, or (2) of the lots or land extending 200 feet in all
directions there from inclusive of street space, whether within or without
the municipality. Such amendment or revision shall not become effective
following the filing of such protest except by the favorable vote of 2/3 of all
the members of the governing body of the municipality.
18-307. Notice of Decisions.
Notice of any decision of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment
when acting upon an application for development and any decision of the
governing body when voting upon an appeal shall be given in the following
manner:
or proceeding. Additionally, the applicant shall be responsible for
giving proper notice to all property owners pursuant to § 18-305E
above who do not reside within the Township.
10. The applicant shall file an affidavit or proof of service with the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
11. The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing and
the nature of the matters to be considered, and an identification of
the property proposed for development by street address, if any, or
by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax
duplicate in the Municipal Tax Assessor's Office, and the location
and times at which any maps or documents for which approval is
sought are available for inspection.
A. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the Board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant or appellant, or, if represented, to their
attorney without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be
mailed within 10 days to any interested party who has requested it and
who has paid the required fee.
B. A brief notice of the decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the Township. The cost for such publication shall be
charged to the applicant and arranged by either the Secretary of the
Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment. The notice shall be sent
18-305 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-307
AO:920
to the official newspaper for publication within 10 days of the date of
decision.
C. A copy of the decision shall also be filed in the office of the Township
Clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed decision available to any
interested party upon payment of a fee calculated in the same manner
as those established for copies of other public documents in the
Township and shall also make the copy of the decision available for
public inspection during normal business hours.
18-307 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-307
AO:921

ARTICLE IV
IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEES
18-400. Performance Guarantees.
As a condition of final development approval, the Reviewing Board shall
require, for the purpose of assuring the installation of all improvements
required under such approval, that the applicant furnish a performance
guaranty in accordance with the following standards:
A. The performance guaranty must run in favor of the Township, and be in
an amount not to exceed 120%, rounded to the nearest dollar, of the
cost of installation of improvements the Township or Reviewing Board
may deem necessary or appropriate, including, but not limited to,
streets, grading, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street lighting,
shade trees, surveyor's monuments (as shown on the final map and
required by the Map Filing Law, (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9), water mains,
culverts, storm sewers, sanitary sewers or other means of sewage
disposal, drainage structures, erosion control and sedimentation
control devices, public improvements and landscaping, provided that
no more than 10% of the total performance guaranty shall be in cash
and the balance shall be in the form of a surety bond issued by a
bonding company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey and
rated A+ or better by A.M. Best or a letter of credit issued by a banking
institution licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey. Such bond
or letter of credit must be approved and accepted by the Township
governing body. The Township Engineer shall review the improvements
required by the Reviewing Board which are to be bonded and itemize
their cost. This itemization shall be the basis for determining the
amount of the performance guaranty required by the Township and the
inspection fees required by this Code. The Township Engineer shall
forward his/her estimate of the cost of improvements to the applicant
within 30 days after the date of receipt of a request sent by certified
mail for this estimate. Any performance guaranty delivered to the
Township Clerk pursuant to this section shall be for an initial term of
not less than two years, shall provide for automatic one year renewals
and shall only be terminable on the date of expiration, either of the
original period or any renewal period, upon not less than 60 days
advanced written notice. In the event that any of the improvements to
be installed are covered by a performance guaranty to another
governmental agency, no performance guaranty shall be required from
the Township for such improvements.
B. If at any time during the period of time between acceptance of the
initial performance guaranty and the date of the Township Committee
formally releases such performance guaranty, the Township Committee
has reasonable cause to doubt the value, legality, enforceability or
effectiveness of such guaranty, all development activity for which such
guaranty was established shall be discontinued until such time as a
substitute guaranty, in form and substance equivalent to the guaranty
18-400 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-400
AO:923
which was required to be in place at the time the status of the original
guaranty was questioned, shall be delivered to and accepted by the
Township Committee. By way of illustration and not limitation, the
following shall be instances of reasonable cause to doubt the value,
legality, enforceability or effectiveness of such guaranties:
1. The company issuing the bond shall cease to do business, declare
insolvency or bankruptcy or be forced into involuntary bankruptcy.
2. The bank, savings and loan, credit union, mortgage banking
company or other banking or banking-like entity issuing a letter of
credit shall become insolvent, be taken over by any governmental
or quasi-governmental agency or company or otherwise cease to do
business.
3. The issuer of any performance guaranty shall serve on the
Township, notice of termination or cancellation of such guaranty.
C. The amount of any performance guaranty may be reduced by the
Township Committee, by resolution, when portions of the improvements
have been certified by the Township Engineer to have been completed.
The time allowed for installation of the improvements for which the
performance guaranty has been provided may be extended by the
Township Committee by resolution.
D. If the required improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the finally approved development plans and approvals,
the obligor and surety shall be liable thereon to the Township for the
reasonable cost of the improvements not completed or corrected, and
the Township, either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds of the
performance guaranty, may complete such improvements.
E. When all of the required improvements have been completed, the
obligor shall notify the administrative officer, in writing, by certified
mail, with a copy to the Municipal Clerk, of the completion of such
improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Township Engineer.
Upon receipt of this notice, the Township Engineer shall inspect all of
the improvements and shall file a detailed report within 45 days, in
writing, with the Administrative Officer, indicating either approval,
partial approval or rejection of the improvements with a statement of
reasons for rejection. If partial approval is indicated, the cost of the
improvements rejected shall be set forth.
F. The Township Committee shall either approve, partially approve or
reject the improvements on the basis of the report of the Township
Engineer and shall notify the obligor, in writing, by certified mail, of the
contents of the Township Engineer's report and the action of the
Township Committee with relation thereto not later than 45 days after
receipt of the notice from the obligor of the completion of the
improvements. Where partial approval is granted, the obligor shall be
released from all liability pursuant to the performance guaranty except
for that portion adequately sufficient to secure completion of the
18-400 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-400
AO:924
18-401. Maintenance Guarantees.
improvements not yet approved. Failure of the Township Committee to
send or provide such notification to the obligor within 45 days shall be
deemed to constitute approval of the improvements and the obligor and
surety, if any, subject to the requirements of § 18-401 below, shall be
released from all liability pursuant to such performance guaranty.
G. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the obligor
shall complete such improvements, and, upon completion, the same
procedure of notification as set forth in this section shall be followed.
H. The obligor shall reimburse the Township for all reasonable inspection
fees paid to the Township Engineer for the foregoing inspection of
improvements, pursuant to § 18-401 below.
A. As a condition of the final release of all performance guaranties posted
by an applicant with respect to any development approval within the
Township, the applicant shall deliver to the Township Clerk, for the
purpose of assuring that all improvements installed in accordance with
such development approval have been installed in a good and
workmanlike manner and that all materials are fit for their intended
purpose, a maintenance guarantee in accordance with the following
standards:
1. The maintenance guarantee shall be for a period of two years
commencing on the date that the Township Committee finally
accepts the improvements as being complete, in an amount not to
exceed 15% of the total cost of the improvements as set forth on the
Township Engineer's estimate for such improvements completed
with § 18-400A1. In the event that other governmental agencies or
public utilities automatically will own the utilities or improvements
which are installed or the improvements are covered by a
maintenance guaranty provided by the applicant to another
governmental agency, no maintenance guaranty in favor of the
Township shall be required for such utilities or improvements. Such
maintenance guaranty shall be in the form of a surety bond issued
by a surety licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey and
rated A+ or better by A.M. Best, or a letter of credit issued by a
banking institution licensed to do business in the State of New
Jersey. Such maintenance guaranty shall be approved and accepted
by the Township Committee.
2. If at any time prior to the expiration of the maintenance guaranty,
the Township Committee has reasonable cause to doubt the value,
legality, enforceability or effectiveness of such guaranty, the obligor
must deliver to the Township Clerk a substitute guaranty,
equivalent to the guaranty which was required to be in place at the
time the status of the original guaranty was questioned. By way of
illustration and not limitation, the following shall be instances of
18-400 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-401
AO:925
18-402. Escrows.
reasonable cause to doubt the value, legality, enforceability or
effectiveness of such guaranties:
a. The company issuing the bond shall cease to do business,
declare insolvency or bankruptcy or be forced into involuntary
bankruptcy.
b. The bank, savings and loan, credit union, mortgage banking
company or other banking or banking-like entity issuing a
letter of credit shall become insolvent, be taken over by any
governmental or quasi-governmental agency or company, or
otherwise cease to do business.
B. If the Township determines that any improvements which are covered
by such maintenance guaranty have not been completed in a good and
workmanlike manner, or that any materials which were incorporated
into such improvements are not fit for their intended purpose and the
obligor, under such maintenance guaranty, has not corrected the
improvements to the satisfaction of the Township Engineer within 30
days after written notice of such defect, the obligor and the surety shall
be liable on such guaranty to the Township for the reasonable cost of
correcting and/or replacing such improvements, and the Township,
either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds of such guaranty,
shall have the right, but not the obligation, to complete corrective work
or replacements of such improvements which may be required.
A. Application Escrow.
1. All fees other than application fees, inspection escrows and
miscellaneous fees shall be escrow fees to pay the services of any
professional personnel employed by the Reviewing Board or the
Township Committee to process, review, inspect, study or make
recommendations to such Reviewing Board or the Township
Committee concerning the nature and substance of the applicants
application and/or to pay the services of any such professional
personnel and the costs and expenses incurred by such
professional personnel, the Reviewing Board and/or the Township
Committee to create, amend or modify, including, but not limited
to, the costs and expenses to draft, finalize and publish, the official
Tax Map and/or Zoning Map of the Township, which creation,
amendment and/or modification is necessitated by the approval of
the applicant's application.
2. If during the existence of this escrow account the balance of funds
held by the Township shall be insufficient to cover vouchers
submitted by the professionals, the applicant shall deposit
additional sums with the Township to voucher the amount of the
deficit and the anticipated amount to cover all remaining work
within 10 days after receipt of written notice from the Township of
18-401 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-402
AO:926
the amounts owed. In the event that an applicant fails to deposit
the additional escrow moneys as required within the time set forth
in this subsection, the Township, through its agents and employees,
shall take whatever action it deems necessary in order to compel
the payment of the escrow amount. In addition, the professional
personnel may take any action individually as they deem necessary
to satisfy the vouchers submitted. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
any applicant who does not deposit such additional escrow moneys
within 30 days after receipt of written notice from the Township of
the amounts owed shall be charged a late fee equal to 10% times
the amounts owed from the date such sums were due pursuant to
such notice until paid in full (including all accrued late fees). No
permit, approval or certificate shall be issued to any applicant or
property owner by the Reviewing Board, Zoning Officer, Township
Committee, Township Clerk or any other agency of the Township
unless all amounts owed pursuant to this section by such applicant
or owner or with respect to the subject property are paid in full.
3. All excess moneys in the escrow account will be returned to the
applicant after the approving authority has granted final approval
and signed the subdivision plat or site plan in accordance with the
procedures specified in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.2.d., with a statement of
money expended against the account. If at any time prior to final
approval the applicant elects to withdraw his request for approval
and abandon the project, any moneys remaining in the escrow
account, after all proper charges have been paid, will be returned
to the applicant with a statement of money expended against the
account.
B. Inspection Escrows
The cost of all inspections by the Township Engineer shall be the
responsibility of the applicant, and the applicant shall deposit the
necessary inspection fees with the Township prior to the issuance of
a building permit or zoning permit. The inspection escrow shall be in
addition to the amount of any required performance or maintenance
guarantees, application fees and application escrows and shall consist
of a sum equal to the greater of five hundred (500) dollars or 5% of the
total cost of the improvements as determined pursuant § 18-400 above.
If the calculated amount of inspection escrows is $10,000 or greater,
the applicant shall have the right to deliver the inspection escrows to
the Township in four installments, the initial amount deposited being
not less than 25% of the calculated escrow amount. When the balance
held in the escrow drops to 10% of the calculated amount due to the
fact that escrowed funds have been paid to the Township Engineer
for invoiced inspections which have occurred, the applicant shall make
additional deposits of 25% of the calculated amount. The Township
Engineer shall not perform any inspection if insufficient funds to pay
those inspections are not on deposit. Funds which are unexpended shall
be returned to the applicant upon request, in writing, to the Reviewing
18-402 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-402
AO:927
18-403. Developers Agreements. [Ord. No. 2010-28 § 1]
Board in accordance with the procedures specified in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.2.d. The applicant shall immediately pay upon demand all
additional site inspection costs as are necessary and reasonable.
A. As a condition to major subdivision or major site plan approval, the
Township may require the developer enter into an agreement with the
Township at resolution compliance, setting forth the implementation
requirements for a development. The substance of the developer's
agreement shall be consistent with the laws of the State of New Jersey,
this chapter 18 and the conditions and standards applicable to
developments. The developer's agreement shall be in a form
satisfactory to the Township Attorney and Township Committee and
shall include, but may not be limited to, conditions of approval listed in
the final resolution of approval and provisions relating to the following:
1. The disposition of lands required to be set aside for public,
semipublic and/or open space and outdoor recreation uses.
2. The phasing, financing and extent of off-tract traffic improvements.
3. Public approvals and municipal and developer actions required to
implement public infrastructure improvements, such as public
sewers and stormwater control.
4. The developer's obligation to maintain the development and comply
with site plan approval conditions dealing with signage, building
exteriors, landscaping, drainage, retention/detention basins,
security, buffer areas and open spaces, trash removal and internal
roadways.
5. Cleanup of any environmentally contaminated area.
6. Consideration of municipal impacts.
7. The timing of the construction of recreational facilities including
parks, playgrounds, clubhouses and pools.
8. Open space area. The amount of the gross acreage that shall be
open space area, which areas shall not include paved roadways or
parking areas.
9. Buffer areas as required by the development approval.
18-402 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-403
AO:928
ARTICLE V
OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS
This article is intended to ensure a pro-rata allocation of the costs for offtract
improvements necessitated by new development
18-500. Off-Tract Improvements Required.
As a condition of final major subdivision or site plan approval, the Reviewing
Board may require an applicant to pay his pro-rata share of the cost of
providing only reasonable and necessary off-tract improvements. These
costs may include but, are not limited to, the costs of street improvements,
water, sewerage and drainage facilities, and easements therefore, located
outside the property limits of the development but necessitated or required
by construction or improvements within such development. The
proportionate or pro-rata amount of the cost of such facilities that shall be
borne by each developer or owner within a related or common area shall be
based on the criteria established herein.
18-501. Improvements to be Constructed at the Sole Expense of the
Developer.
Full Allocation. In cases where the reasonable and necessary off tract
improvement or improvements are necessitated or required by the
proposed development and where no other property owners receive a
special benefit thereby, the applicant may be required, as a condition of
approval, at the applicant's sole expense, to provide for and construct such
improvements as if such were an on tract improvement in the manner
provided hereafter and otherwise provided by law.
18-502. Other Improvements.
In cases where the need for any off-tract improvement is necessitated by
the proposed development application and where it is determined that
properties outside of the development will also be specially benefited by
the improvement, the following criteria shall be utilized in determining the
proportionate share of such improvements to the developer.
A. Sanitary Sewers. Distribution facilities including the installation,
relocation or replacement of collector, trunk and interceptor sewers,
and the installation, relocation or replacement of other appurtenances
associated therewith; the applicant's proportionate share shall be
computed as follows:
1. The capacity and the design of the sanitary sewer system shall be
based on "Rules and Regulations for the Preparation and
Submission of Plans for Sewerage Systems," New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection, except where governed
by the Residential Site Improvement Standards, N.J.A.C. 5:21-6,
and all Lakewood Township sewer design standards including
18-500 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-502
AO:929
infiltration standards, and all other Township sanitary sewer
standards.
2. The capacity of the existing system to service the entire improved
drainage area shall be computed. If the system is able to carry the
total developed drainage basin, no improvement or enlargement
cost will be assigned to the developer. If the existing system does
not have adequate capacity for the total developed drainage basin,
the prorated enlargement or improvement share shall be computed
as follows:
Total enlargement or improved cost = Total tributary gpd.
Developer's cost = Development gpd.
If it is necessary to construct a new system or upgrade the existing
system in order to service the proposed development, the prorated
enlargement share to the developer shall be computed as follows:
Total tributary gpd.
Total project cost = to new system
Developer's cost = Developer's tributary gpd.
The plans for the improved system or extended system shall be
prepared by the developer's engineer. All work and costs shall
be calculated by the developer and approved by the Township
Engineer.
B. Roadways. Street widening, alignment, channelization of intersections,
construction of barriers, new or improved traffic signalization, signs,
curbs, sidewalks, trees, utility improvements not covered elsewhere,
the construction or reconstruction of new or existing streets and other
associated street or traffic improvements, the applicant's proportionate
cost shall be computed as follows:
1. The Township Engineer or Planner shall provide the applicant with
the existing and anticipated future peak hour flows for the off-tract
improvement.
2. The applicant shall furnish a plan for the proposed off tract
improvement which shall include the estimated peak hour traffic
generated by the proposed development. The ratio of the peak hour
traffic generated by the proposed development to the future
additional peak hour traffic anticipated to impact the proposed off
tract improvement shall form the basis of the proportionate share.
The proportionate share shall be computed as follows:
18-502 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-502
AO:930
18-503. Escrow Accounts for Future Improvements.
Where the proposed off-tract improvement is to be undertaken at some
future date, the monies required for the improvement shall be deposited to
the credit of the Township in a separate interest bearing account until such
time as the improvement is constructed. If the off-tract improvement is not
begun within five years of deposit or term of approval, whichever is earlier,
all monies and interest shall be returned to the applicant.
Developer's
Cost
= Total cost of
the off-tract
improvement
X Future peak hour
traffic generated by the
developer(%)
Future additional peak
hour traffic
3. Where the property which is the subject matter of a development
application falls within a designated transportation improvement
district, as reflected in the circulation element of the Township's
Master Plan, the standards to be applied shall be in accordance
with § 18-815 of this chapter.
C. Drainage improvements. Storm water and drainage improvements
including the installation, relocation or replacement of storm drains,
culverts, catch basins, manholes, rip rap or improved drainage ditches
and appurtenances thereto and relocation or replacement of other
storm drainage facility or appurtenances associated therewith, the
applicant's proportionate share shall be determined as follows:
1. The capacity and the drainage system design to accommodate
storm water runoff shall be based on a method described in "Urban
Hydrology for Small Watershed Technical Release 55", Soil
Conservation Service USDA, current issue, computed by the
developer's engineer and approved by the Township Engineer.
2. The capacity of the enlarged, extended or improved system
required for the subdivision and areas outside of the developer's
tributary to the drainage system shall be determined by the
developer's engineer subject to approval of the Township Engineer.
The plans for the improved system shall be prepared by the
developer's engineer and the estimated cost or the enlarged system
shall be calculated by the Township Engineer. The pro-rated share
for the proposed improvement shall be computed as follows:
Total enlargement or improvement cost of drainage facilities =
Total tributary cfs
Developer's cost = Developer's cfs
18-502 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-504
AO:931
18-504. Computation of Pro-rata Share.
In any case in which an applicant does not provide the approving authority
with estimates from a traffic consultant and/or consulting engineer
regarding estimated improvement costs and all other information necessary
to proportion costs, the approving authority may rely on estimates of the
Township Engineer and Planner to determine pro-rata costs.
18-505. Transportation Improvement District. [Ord. No. 2014-85;
Ord. No. 2017-17]
A. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to ensure that
infrastructure, including, but not limited to off-tract road and related
drainage, lighting, sidewalks, signage, traffic control devices and the
like could be maintained and created to accommodate new
development. The Township of Lakewood's Transportation
Improvement Districts ("TID's") are designed to achieve the following
purposes:
1. To encourage safe and efficient traffic flow and pedestrian access
along the roadway systems serving the Township;
2. To maintain satisfactory levels of traffic service throughout the
Township during peak travel times;
3. To assess future development its fair share of the cost of reasonable
and necessary off-tract improvements that are a direct
consequence of such new development rather than arising from
existing development;
4. To raise revenues that will be managed and expended in such a
manner and time that the development paying the fee will receive a
direct benefit from the improved roads and related facilities;
5. To encourage development that is compatible with and, whenever
possible, carries out the land use and circulation objectives of the
Lakewood Township Master Plan and other regional planning
incentives that match Lakewood Township's community goals;
6. To accomplish the foregoing objectives through thoughtful and
cooperative planning between all levels of government and the
private sector for the benefit of all residents and businesses in the
Township;
7. It is the intent of this subsection to effectuate its terms consistent
with the goals and objectives of the County of Ocean and the
agencies of the State of New Jersey through policy and project
agreements now or hereafter formulated or consummated.
B. Identification of Districts. The following TID's are hereby established,
as described in the "Township of Lakewood Capital Improvement Plan
for Transportation Infrastructures" (the TID Plan") dated August 12,
18-504 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-505
AO:932
2014, prepared by T & M Associates, attached as Exhibit A (Exhibit A is
on file with Ord. No. 2014-85 in the Township Offices.):
1. Transportation Improvement Districts 1 & 2 (TID 1 & 2) comprised
of the area set forth on the attached map64 drawn by T & M
Associates entitled "Transportation Improvement Districts I & 2
Lakewood New Jersey". TID 1 is generally bounded by Route 9 to
the east, Watering Place Brook to the north and the Township's
municipal boundary to the east and south. TID 2 is bounded by
Route 9 to the west, New Hampshire Avenue (CR 623) to the east,
Lake Shenandoah County Park and the Metedeconk Recreation
Area to the north and the Township's municipal boundary to the
south.
C. Roadway Improvements. The improvements to be made within each
established TID are set forth in the TID Plan or as amended in the
future. Improvements to be made within the TID may include but are
not limited to the construction or reconstruction of new or existing
streets, right-of-way, acquisition, engineering, and other associated
street or traffic improvements such as street widening, alignment,
channelization of intersections, construction of barriers, new or
improved traffic signalizations, signs, curbs, sidewalks, street drainage,
road culverts, lighting, landscaping, utility relocation and the like.
D. Impact Fees.
1. The pro-rata share of TID impact fees ("TID Impact Fees") to be
Collected from a developer having an application for development
within an established TID shall be adopted from time to time by the
Township Committee with recommendations of the Planning Board
or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, and the County
of Ocean, (to the extent that egress from or ingress upon a County
roadway is involved). The current impact fees are to be calculated
in accordance with the formula set forth in Exhibit B65 attached
hereto. [Ord. No. 2017-17]
2. The purposes of the TID impact fee is to satisfy the developer's
proportionate and pro-rate contribution to the cost of reasonable
and necessary off-tract roadway improvements and necessitated by
new development (to include, but not be limited to: the
construction or reconstruction of new or existing streets, rights-ofway,
acquisition, engineering, and other associated street or traffic
improvements such as street widening, alignment, channelization
of intersections, construction of barriers, new or improved traffic
signalization, signs, curbs, sidewalks, street drainage, road
culverts, lighting, landscaping, utility relocation and the like) to be
borne by developers within a related and common area of an
established TID.
64.Editor's Note: The map may be found in the Township offices with Ord. No. 2014-85.
65.Editor's Note: Exhibit B may be found as an attachment to this chapter.
18-505 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-505
AO:933
3. The data upon which TID impact fees are determined shall be
adjusted from time to time as is reasonably deemed appropriate by
the Township Committee and the County to account for
modifications to projected roadway improvement costs resulting
from detailed engineering field studies and inflation, adjusted
development projections, actual costs of TID program maintenance
and administration, land acquisition costs and necessary changes
in the scope of roadway improvements.
4. Where an applicant pays the amount determined as his pro-rata
share under protest, he shall institute a legal action within one year
of such payment in order to preserve the right to judicial
determination as to the fairness and reasonableness of such
amount. In the event such applicant fails to institute such legal
action within one year of such payment, such applicant shall have
been deemed to waive any right to challenge such pro-rata share.
E. Implementation of TID Impact Fees through Developers Agreements.
1. Developers of developments within an established TID shall be
required to enter into an agreement with the Township (and with
Ocean County, to the extent that egress from and ingress upon a
County roadway is involved) for the payment of the required TID
impact fee; and the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, (after
receiving input from County or State agencies for developments
located along roads under the jurisdiction of these agencies, if
County or State road improvements are to be undertaken) as the
case may be, in deliberations with respect to any applications for
preliminary approval of development located within an established
TID, shall make findings and recommendations as to items to be
addressed by the agreement. A condition to any final approval shall
be that the developer enter into the said agreement with the
Township (and with Ocean County, to the extent that egress from or
ingress upon a County roadway is involved). The agreement shall
be in proper form for recording and, once duly signed and
acknowledged by all parties thereto, shall be recorded by the
developer in the Ocean County Clerk's Office.
2. The agreement shall take into consideration the applicable Board's
findings of fact, recommendations and conditions of approval and
shall, at a minimum, provide for the following;
(a) Payment of an impact fee representing the applicant's fair
share of road and street (Township, County and State)
improvements, inclusive of land acquisition costs, if any, in
accordance with the standards set forth in this subsection and
the TID Plan. Unless an installment payment schedule is
approved, the TID impact fee shall be paid prior to the issuance
of any building permits.
18-505 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-505
AO:934
(b) Where the development is phased, an installment payment
schedule, if requested by the developer, based upon the
phasing of the development as agreed to by the Township
Committee with respect to the collection of the fee determined.
With any installment payment plan, full payment shall be
required prior to the issuance of the final building permit for
the project or phase thereof subject to such installment
payments. The applicable Board may require that the
developer posts a letter of credit or other appropriate financial
guarantee to ensure the receipt of any such installment
payments.
(c) The limit of the developer's future off-tract traffic improvement
liability upon full or partial payment of the TID impact fee.
(d) A description of on-tract or off-tract road and related traffic
improvements to be made by or at the expense of the
developer, in lieu of a TID impact fee, contribution or some
combination thereof, if any, and the timing or sequencing of
such installation.
(e) A description of any credits or repayment due the developer as
a result of voluntary construction or payments in excess of the
developer's fair share based upon the standards set forth in the
TID Plan.
(f) Where the proposed off-tract improvement is to be undertaken
at some future date, the monies required for the improvement
shall be deposited in a separate interest-bearing account to the
credit of the Township (or, in the case of a County road, in the
joint interest bearing account established or to be established
between the Township and the County) until such time as the
improvement is constructed.
(g) Such other matters as may be recommended by the applicable
Board or the Township Committee.
3. Use of Funds Collected. Any funds collected by way of the TID
impact fee shall be maintained in a separate escrow account
credited to the Township or in a separate escrow account of the
County (if a County road is involved). Such funds shall be used only
for improvements referred to in the TID Plan and as adopted as
part of the Township's capital improvement program. Any funds
held in the account of the County shall be distributed and utilized in
accordance with an agreement between the County and the
Township regarding the distribution and utilization of such funds.
The mutual consent of the County and the Township shall be
required prior to the release of any funds held by the County in its
escrow account for purposes of capital expenditures to any county
road within an established TID.
18-505 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-505
AO:935
18-506. Oak Street Corridor Improvement District.66
18-506.1. Findings and Declarations. [Ord. No. 2016-43 § 1]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 et seq., a municipality may under take various
works as a "local improvement," the cost of which may be assessed upon the
lands in the vicinity thereof benefited thereby.
The Oak Street Corridor Improvement District ("District") is to be developed
as a residential community including houses of worship, schools, shuls, and
residential units, including duplex and single-family residential structures.
The District is comprised of various parcels of property identified on
Schedule A67 attached hereto.
The development of the District as a residential community will require the
installation of certain improvements identified on a plan prepared by FWH
entitled "Oak Street Corridor Improvements Plan," dated August 2, 2014, as
may be revised from time to time, consisting of 13 Sheets ("Improvement
Plan").
The District is to be developed as a residential community by an
unincorporated joint venture comprised of persons and/or entities who are
record owners of properties located in the District, which unincorporated
joint venture is known as the Oak Street Core Group Joint Venture
("Developer").
The Developer has petitioned the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-3,
to make various improvements as envisioned by N.J.S.A. 40:56-1 et seq.
There are certain record owners of property located in the District who are
not members of the Oak Street Core Group ("Non-Developers").
Pursuant to a separate agreement entered into with between the Township
and the Developer ("Developers Agreement") dated March 17, 2016, the
Developer will undertake the installation of the improvements defined
herein and identified on the Improvement Plan at its cost and expense.
4. Exemption for Public Buildings. Development applications made by
a municipal agency for the construction of a public building shall be
exempt from the requirements of the payment of a TID impact fee
as set forth herein, provided that the Township Committee finds
that the proposed building will serve a public purpose and promote
the public health, safety and welfare. Rather, the traffic impact, if
any, of such public building shall be considered as part of the
general sector share.
66.Editor's Note: Prior ordinance history: Ordinance No. 2015-61.
67.Editor's Note: Schedule A may be found in the Township offices.
18-505 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-506.1
AO:936
As a result of the redevelopment and improvement of the District, the
Township has incurred and will continue to incur costs and expenses
associated with same.
The purpose of adopting this section is to provide a mechanism to recapture
the costs associated with the improvements from Non-Developers that will
benefit from same and to deliver same to the Developer and to recapture
the Township costs from Non-Developers and Developers.
18-506.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2016-43 § 2]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall
have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
CERTIFIED DEVELOPER COSTS — An accounting of the actual Developer
Costs incurred by the Developer provided to the Township following the
completion of the installation of the Improvements and the acceptance of
same by Township.
DEVELOPER — The joint venture known as the Oak Street Core Group Joint
Venture formed for the purposes of developing the District as a residential
community.
DEVELOPER COSTS — The actual costs incurred by the Developer to
design and construct the Improvements, which costs shall include but not
be limited to the costs associated with design, surveying, engineering,
environmental studies, insurance premiums, management fees,
consultation fees, land acquisition costs, remedial work for tree restoration
and wildlife habitat, construction, legal fees, application fees and escrow
funding.
DEVELOPERS AGREEMENT — The agreement dated March 16, 2016,
entered into between the Township and the Developer pursuant to which
the Developer has agreed to construct and install the Improvements and
the Township has agreed to recapture the Developer Costs of same from
subsequent Non-Developers.
DISTRICT YIELD — The potential number of residential units which could
be constructed is 407.5 units, where a duplex is considered 2 units and
where each detached single family dwelling unit is considered 1.25 units for
purposes of calculating the pro-rata share under this section.
ESCROW AGENT — The Law Firm of Heilbrunn Pape, LLC, with offices at
516 Route 33, Millstone Township, New Jersey 08535.
ESTIMATED COSTS — $14,000,000 which amount represents the best
estimate of the Developer costs calculated by the Developer at the time of
the adoption of this section.68
IMPROVEMENTS — The improvements identified on the Improvement Plan
including but not limited to stormwater management facilities,
68.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2016-43, codified herein, was adopted September 15, 2016.
18-506.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-506.2
AO:937
appurtenances and systems; sanitary sewer lines, appurtenances and
systems; water lines, appurtenances and systems; roadways, curbs,
sidewalks, street lighting, recreation elements, all other utilities such as
electric, cable, natural gas, telephone, off-site land acquisitions and
specifically including improvements to the intersection of Route 9 and
Broadway including the installation and/or improvement to a traffic signal.
NON-DEVELOPER — Any person or entity that owns property located in the
District and seeks to utilize or develop that property but which person or
entity is not part of the Oak Street Core Group Joint Venture. Non-Developer
shall also mean any Developer in default of its obligations pursuant to the
Oak Street Core Group Joint Venture agreement as determined therein.
PRO-RATA SHARE — An amount calculated in accordance with this section
required to be paid by a Non-Developer to the Township, which funds shall
be utilized to reimburse the Developer for the Developer Costs pursuant
to Subsection 18-506.3 hereof or the Township for the Township costs
pursuant to Subsection 18-506.4 hereof.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lakewood, Ocean County, New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP COSTS — Shall mean and include, but not limited to, appraisal
fees, engineering costs, administrative fees, land acquisition and deed
restriction costs, and bonding costs incurred by the Township as a result of
the improvements to the District as contemplated by this section.
18-506.3. Reimbursement Required as to Developers. [Ord. No.
2016-43 § 3]
A. Any Non-Developer seeking to develop property located in the District
shall be required to pay its pro-rata share to the escrow agent. The prorata
share collected by the escrow agent shall be transferred to the
Developer as provided for herein.
B. The pro-rata share of developer costs to be paid by a Non-Developer
pursuant to this section shall be an amount equal to a fraction of the
certified developer costs incurred by the Developer. The pro-rata share
shall be calculated by multiplying the certified developer costs by a
fraction, the numerator of which is the number of residential units
proposed by the Non-Developer ("non-developer units") and the
denominator of which is the district yield. For purposes of this
calculation a duplex shall be considered 2 residential units and a singlefamily
detached dwelling shall be considered 1.25 residential units. The
formula for same shall be:
Non-Developer Units
District Yield
X Certified Developer Costs = Pro-rata
Share
The foregoing calculation of the pro-rata share for developer costs is
subject to the following:
18-506.2 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-506.3
AO:938
1. Upon the completion of the improvements, the Developer shall
provide the Township with the certified developer costs incurred by
the Developer pursuant to this section.
2. Until such time as the Developer has provided the Township with
the certified developer costs following the completion of
construction, the escrow agent shall utilize the estimated costs to
determine the pro-rata share of a Non-Developer.
3. All pro-rata shares collected by Township based upon the estimated
costs shall be held in escrow by the escrow agent until such time as
the Developer provides the Township with the certified developer
costs at which time the pro-rata shares shall be distributed as
follows:
a. In the event the certified developer costs exceed the estimated
costs, the escrow agent shall release all of the funds held
pursuant to the above and shall notify all Non-Developers that
paid a pro-rata share based upon the estimated costs of the
additional pro-rata share that must be paid. Non-Developers
notified pursuant to this subsection and required to pay an
additional pro-rata shall pay same as directed by the escrow
agent within 60 days of such notice. In the event that a Non-
Developer fails or refuses to pay the additional pro-rata share
required by this subsection, same may be treated in the same
manner as failure to pay a municipal tax and shall become a
lien on the property of the Non-Developer which is the subject
of this section.
b. In the event the certified developer costs are less than the
estimated costs, the escrow agent shall release to the
Developer the pro-rata share to which it is entitled pursuant to
this section and return the balance of same to the Non-
Developer.
C. In order to encourage funding by Non-Developers of their pro-rata
share as early as possible in the installation and construction of the
improvements the pro-rata share shall include interest in the amount of
4% per annum, which interest shall accrue from the date of final
adoption of this section until the date of payment.69
D. A Non-Developer required to pay a pro-rata share pursuant to this
section shall pay same to the escrow agent upon the earlier of any of the
following occurrences:
1. Within 60 days after the issuance of a final approval for the
proposed development of the Non-Developer to which this section
applies. In the event the Non-Developer fails to timely pay the prorata
share, the final approval shall become null and void. The
69.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2016-43, codified herein, was adopted September 15, 2016.
18-506.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-506.3
AO:939
18-506.4. Reimbursement Required as to Township Costs.
condition of the final approval requiring the payment of the prorata
share shall include the amount of the pro-rata share; or
2. As a condition of the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, or
earlier as elected by the Non-Developer.
E. The payment of a pro-rata share pursuant to this section shall not
relieve a Non-Developer from paying any other charges or fees required
by the Township pursuant to any other statute, ordinance or regulation.
A. Any Developer or Non-Developer seeking to develop property located in
the District shall be required to pay its pro-rata share to the Township
to reimburse the Township for the Township costs.
B. The pro-rata share of Township costs to be paid pursuant to this section
shall be an amount equal to a fraction of the Township costs. The prorata
share shall be calculated by multiplying the Township costs by a
fraction, the numerator of which is the number of residential units
proposed by the Developer or the Non-Developer making application
for a building permit ("project units") and the denominator of which is
the district yield. For purposes of this calculation a duplex shall be
considered 2 residential units and a single-family detached dwelling
shall be considered 1.25 residential units. The formula for same shall
be:
Project Units
District Yield
X Township Costs = Pro-rata Share
In the event a house of worship, a private educational facility, or any
other non-residential use is proposed to be developed on any property
within the Oak Street Core in lieu of residential development, by either
a Developer or a Non-Developer, it will be designated as having the
maximum number of residential units developable on the property in
question based upon its area, and shall be required to pay its pro-rata
share for Township's costs in accordance with this section.
The foregoing calculation of the pro-rata share of Township costs is
subject to the following:
1. The Township costs shall be established by the Township
Committee and amend from time to time with recommendations
from the Township Engineer, Planner and Attorney as determined
necessary by the Township Committee.
2. The data upon which the Township costs are determined shall be
adjusted from time to time as is reasonably deemed appropriate by
the Township Committee to account for modifications to the
18-506.3 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-506.4
AO:940
development of the District and the costs incurred by the Township
relating to same.
3. The Township costs shall be subject to the following:
a. The costs and expenses incurred by the Township to date have
been calculated at $250,000;
b. The total Township Costs shall be the $250,000 referenced in
Subsection B3a above, plus the value of the lands made
available by the Township of Lakewood for storm drainage
improvements and tree preservation, which valuation shall be
made effective January 24, 2014, as set forth in the Gagliano
and Company appraisal dated July 28, 2016, in the amount of
$1,705,000, plus any other costs or expenses incurred by the
Township from the date of the adoption of this section
forward.70 In no event shall the total Township Costs, inclusive
of the $1,955,000 referenced in this subsection, exceed an
amount equal to $10,000 per dwelling unit benefitted by said
improvements. In the event the cost per dwelling unit
exceeded $10,000, said additional cost would be borne solely
by the Oak Street Core Joint Venture Group.
C. The pro-rata share of Township costs pursuant to this section shall be
paid to the Township upon the earlier of any of the following
occurrences:
1. Within 60 days after the issuance of a final approval for the
proposed development to which this section applies. In the event
the Developer or Non-Developer fails to timely pay the pro-rata
share pursuant to this section, the final approval shall become null
and void. The condition of the final approval requiring the payment
of the pro-rata share shall include the amount of the pro-rata share;
or
2. As a condition of the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, or
earlier as elected by the Developer or Non-Developer.
D. The payment of a pro-rata share pursuant to this section shall not
relieve a Developer or Non-Developer from paying any other charges or
fees required by the Township pursuant to any other statute, ordinance
or regulation, including, but not limited to the Detention Facilities:
Maintenance and repair fees required by § 18-815(B)(4) of the Township
Land Development Ordinance. § 18-815(B)(4) requires that the
following fees shall be paid in addition to the pro-rata share paid
pursuant to this section:
For all proposed drainage basins serving a residential community, the
Township shall be responsible for all maintenance (both annual and
perpetual). The following one-time maintenance fees shall be assessed
70.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2016-43, codified herein, was adopted September 15, 2016.
18-506.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-506.4
AO:941
18-506.5. Escrow Agent Requirements. [Ord. No. 2016-43 § 6]
All funds payable by a Non-Developer pursuant to this section, shall be
delivered to the escrow agent. The escrow agent shall maintain said funds
in a non-interest bearing segregated trust account. No funds, other than
funds collected pursuant to this section, shall be held in said account. The
escrow agent, by this section, be required to provide notice to the Township
Manager and Chief Financial Officer within five days of receipt of any funds.
Said notice shall expressly identify the parties paying same, the amount
paid, and the calculation that supported the amount paid. In the event that
there is any dispute with regard to the amount to be paid, the escrow
agent shall bring same to the attention of the Township Manager and Chief
Financial Officer and shall be bound by their final determination as to the
amount that should be paid.
All monies shall be held by the escrow agent, in trust, unless and until
such time as: (a) the certified developer costs, as same are defined herein,
have been determined; and (b) the escrow agent shall have received express
written authorization from the Township of Lakewood Governing Body in
the form of resolution, expressly authorizing the release of funds to the
Developer.
Absent express authorization from the Township Governing Body by
resolution or by Order of a Court of competent jurisdiction, the escrow
agent shall have no authority to disburse funds.
per unit and put in a separate and dedicated fund, which shall be
used by the Township exclusively for maintenance and repair of such
drainage facilities within the Township:
1. Single family detached dwellings: $750
2. Single family attached dwellings: $500
3. Multi-family dwellings: $300
18-506.4 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-506.5
AO:942
ARTICLE VI
SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLANS
18-600. General Requirements.
No development shall take place within the Township nor shall any land
be significantly cleared or altered, nor any use or change in the use of
any building or other structure nor shall any watercourse be diverted or
its channel or floodplain dredged or filled, nor shall any parking areas,
accessory or otherwise, or access ways thereto, be constructed, installed or
enlarged, nor shall any building permit, certificate of occupancy or other
required permit be issued with respect to any such structure, land or
parking area, except in accordance with an approval of such development
granted pursuant to this section, unless exempted in § 18-601 and related
subsections.
18-601. Exceptions to Application Requirements.
The rules, regulations and standards set forth in this section shall be
considered the minimum requirements for the protection of the public
health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Township. However, if
the applicant can clearly demonstrate that, because peculiar conditions
pertaining to the subject parcel, the literal enforcement of this section is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship, the Planning Board may permit
such exemption(s) and waiver(s) as may be reasonable within the general
purpose and intent of the rules, regulations and standards established by
this section.
18-601.01. Subdivision Exceptions.
A. A building permit or certificate of occupancy may be issued if all
improvements have been installed or completed except the finish
course of the road and the Township Engineer warrants that completion
of the road is in the Township's interest after the subdivider has
completed construction of dwellings and structures. The maintenance
guaranty required shall not begin until the finish course has been
installed.
B. The Construction Official may also authorize the issuance of a
temporary certificate of occupancy if the following improvements have
been bonded but not yet installed: landscaping, sidewalks, other similar
improvements.
C. The Planning/Zoning Board when acting upon an application which
includes provisions for low and moderate income housing, shall waive
those portions of the design standards which create barriers to the
construction of low or moderate income housing and which are not
necessary to protect public health and safety.
D. The following shall not be considered subdivisions within the meaning
of this act, if no new streets are created:
18-600 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-601.01
AO:943
18-601.02. Site Plan Exceptions. [Ord. No. 2010-54; Ord. No.
2016-30]
1. Divisions of land found by the Planning Board, or Subdivision
Committee thereof appointed by the Chairman, to be for
agricultural purposes where all resulting parcels are five acres or
larger in size;
2. Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
3. Divisions of property upon court order; and
4. Conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or other
instrument.
5. The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of
land, owned by the same person or persons and all of which are
found and certified by the administrative officer to conform to the
requirements of the municipal development regulations and are
shown and designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax
map or atlas of the municipality.
A. Single or two family dwelling(s) including accessory uses and/or
structures permitted as of right under applicable zoning districts, but
this shall not limit the requirements for submission and approval of
subdivision plats as otherwise required by Township ordinances.
B. Provided the change of use is not a change from a residential use to a
nonresidential use or the addition to a residential lot of a nonresidential
accessory use, the change of one permitted use to another permitted
use, or the addition of a permitted accessory use shall be exempt from
the site plan application requirements of this chapter provided that the
change of use does not require any variances.
The change of a residential use to a nonresidential use shall specifically
not be exempt from the site plan requirements of this chapter and
any such change of use shall require the submission of a change of
use application. The change of use application shall be submitted to
the Zoning Officer. If the Zoning Officer determines that the requested
change of use is from a residential to nonresidential use, then the
applicant must submit the following to the Planning Board for
administrative review:
1. A copy of the site plan;
2. An executed Site Plan Exemption Checklist, together with all the
items listed in Section A "Administrative Data" of the Site Plan
Exemption Checklist;
3. An application fee of $250; and
4. An escrow fee of $1,900.
18-601.01 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-601.02
AO:944
The Planning Board Engineer will review the Site Plan Exemption Checklist
to determine whether the application should be exempt from the full site
plan review and approval process.
If the Planning Board Engineer determines that the application is exempt,
the Planning Board will hold a hearing to give all property owners within
200 feet the opportunity to comment on the application. The applicant shall
notify all property owners within 200 feet of the date of the hearing and
the nature of the application.
If the Planning Board Engineer determines that the application is not
exempt then the applicant will be required to apply to the Planning Board
for formal site plan approval.
C. An addition of not more than 1,500 square feet to a previously approved
site plan or use, or minor site plan improvements, and which meets the
following requirements:
1. The use must be a permitted use.
2. The addition does not result in a variance from the parking
requirements of this chapter.
3. There shall be no intrusion into any buffer area designated for that
purpose on a previously approved site plan or as required by this
chapter.
4. There shall be no substantial alterations of the existing drainage
involving construction of new facilities, new grading or
construction to be performed which would substantially change the
path, direction of quantity of surface water flow except as may be
approved by the Township Engineer.
5. The work involved shall not negate any condition of a previously
approved site plan as created by the approving Board except as set
forth above.
6. The proposed addition or alteration shall not violate any zoning
ordinance requirements. The Administrative Officer may grant an
administrative site plan approval to an applicant when there exists
on the subject property preexisting conditions which would
ordinarily require variances, so long as the addition or alteration
sought does not itself violate any zoning ordinance or create the
need for additional variances.
7. Other approvals and permits required by law or regulation shall be
obtained and copies submitted to the Administrative Officer.
8. The property maintenance code and all other applicable ordinances
of the Township of Lakewood shall be fully adhered to. [Ord. No.
2016-30]
18-601.02 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-601.02
AO:945
18-602. Procedure for Approval.
All subdivisions and/or site plans other than those exempted in § 18-601
and related subsections, shall be formally reviewed except as noted herein
in two stages, preliminary and final. Preliminary and final approval may be
requested simultaneously or as individual applications.
At the request of the developer, the Planning Board shall grant an informal
review of a concept plan for a development for which the developer intends
to prepare and submit an application for development. The amount of any
fees for such an informal review shall be a credit toward fees for review of
an application for development. The developer shall not be bound by any
concept plan for which review is requested, and the Planning Board shall
not be bound by any such review.
This section is adopted pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.) and subsequent amendments and supplements thereto in
order to establish rules, regulations, standards and procedures for approval
of all development other than those which are exempted in § 18-601 and
related subsections.
D. Accessory buildings that are 400 square feet or less, on commercial
properties, provided that the accessory building meets all setback,
height and impervious lot coverage requirements; and the building will
not be used to store hazardous materials as regulated by the NJDEP for
commercial and industrial land uses.
E. Customary agricultural buildings such as barns, silos, storage sheds
and related structures on an approved farm.
F. Normal maintenance or replacement such as a new roof, painting, new
siding or similar activity.
G. Temporary construction and/or temporary sales trailers if designed in
accordance with § 18-819.
H. All Sukkah and similar temporary structures used for religious
purposes.
A. Preserve existing natural resources and give proper consideration to
the physical constraints of the land.
B. Provide for safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
C. Provide for screening, landscaping, signing and lighting.
D. Ensure efficient, safe and aesthetic land development.
E. Provide for compliance with appropriate design standards to ensure
adequate light and air, proper building arrangements, and minimum
adverse effect on surrounding property.
18-601.02 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-602
AO:946
18-603. Filing, Referral, Classification and Completeness
Procedures.
F. Develop proper safeguards to minimize the impact on the environment
including but not limited to soil erosion and sedimentation and air and
water pollution.
G. Ensure the provision of adequate water supply, drainage and storm
water management, sanitary facilities, and other utilities and services.
H. Provide for recreation, open space and public use areas.
I. The applicant or their agent shall appear at all regular and special
meetings of the Planning Board or Zoning Board whenever the
application is being considered. Failure to appear shall give the
Planning Board or Zoning Board the right to postpone action on the
application for that particular meeting or deny and dismiss the
application without prejudice if applicant or his agent's absence
deprives the Planning Board or Zoning Board of information necessary
to make a decision
A. Filing. The applicant shall initially submit two copies of the required
exhibits as set forth under the appropriate subdivision/site plan review
stage of this article together with the application form, checklist,
applicable ownership forms, and application and escrow fees to the
Board Secretary. Upon receipt of the submission package an
administrative and checklist compliance review letter will be prepared
by the Board Secretary/professional staff within 45 days of the receipt
of the application, with the exception of applications for schools and
non-profit entity, for a not-for-profit use, which shall be prepared by the
Board Secretary/professional staff within 30 days of receipt of the
application. The time for the Board's review shall not begin to run until
the receipt of a certified complete application with the required fee is
issued.
B. Classification. The Planning Board Secretary shall preliminarily
determine whether the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustments
has approval jurisdiction on the application. The Board Secretary may
confer with the Zoning Officer and/or appropriate Board Attorney or
Township Attorney in making this determination. The Planning Board
Secretary shall classify the application as either a minor or major
subdivision. These determinations and classifications by the Secretary
are subject to review and final decision by the respective Boards.
C. Submission Checklist. § 18-1112 of this chapter shall constitute the
official Submission Checklist of the Township, which specifies the
information that must accompany all applications under this chapter.
No application shall be deemed complete under N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3
unless these requirements have been met or waived from same
requested by the applicant.
18-602 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-603
AO:947
D. Waiver of Requested Information. The applicant may request a waiver
of a Checklist item in appropriate cases. Request for such waivers shall
accompany the initial submission of the development application, along
with a brief narrative to justify the granting of the requested waiver.
After the Board or its designee approves/denies the waiver request, a
revised submission package shall be submitted to the Board Secretary
and shall include 13 sets of development plans. The package will be
reviewed for compliance to the Administrative and Checklist
Compliance within 45 days of receipt of the package or 30 days as noted
in § 18-603 and related subsections.
E. Completeness. An application for development shall be complete for
purposes of commencing the applicable time period for action by a
municipal agency when so certified by the above. In the event that the
application is not certified to be complete within 45 days or 30 days as
noted in § 18-603 and related subsections of the date of its submission,
the application shall be deemed complete upon the expiration of the
date of the 45 day or 30 days period noted in § 18-603 and related
subsections, for purposes of commencing the applicable time period
unless: (a) the application lacks information indicated on the official
Submission Checklist as set forth in § 18-1112 of this chapter and
provided to the applicant; and (b) the municipal agency has notified the
applicant, in writing, of the deficiencies in the application. The
applicant must request that one or more of the submission
requirements be waived, in which event the agency or its authorized
committee shall grant or deny the request within 45 days or 30 days as
noted in § 18-603 and related subsections.
Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the applicant's
obligation to prove in the application process that they are entitled to
approval of the application. The municipal agency may subsequently
require correction of information found to be in error and submission
of additional information not specified in the ordinance or any revisions
in the accompanying documents, as are reasonably necessary to make
an informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
approval of the application for development have been met. The
application shall be deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional
information or any revisions in the accompanying documents so
required by the municipal agency.
F. Other information. The Board may require such additional information
not specified in this section, or any revisions in the accompanying
documents, as are reasonably necessary to make an informed decision
as to whether the requirements necessary for approval of the
application for development have been met. The application shall not be
deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information or any
revisions in the accompanying documents so required by the municipal
agency.
18-603 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-603
AO:948
18-604. Requirements Common to Concept, Preliminary and/or
Final Plat Stages.
G. Referral. The Board Secretary, upon receipt of a completed application,
shall forward a copy of the application, development plans and
pertinent data to the following:
Board Engineer
Board Planner
Board Attorney
Environmental Commission
Board of Fire Commissioners
Industrial Commission (where applicable)
Shade Tree Commission (If the application requires the submission of
a Tree Protection Management Plan pursuant to § 18-803H)
Board of Education
A. Map Details. All maps or other documents submitted for subdivision
plat or site plan review shall contain the following information in
addition to specific plat/plan details as required for each review stage
noted herein and on the checklist:
1. Title and location of the property.
2. Name and address of landowner and applicant. If a corporation is a
landowner or applicant, the principal office and name of president
and secretary shall be included.
3. Name, address and professional license number and seal of the
professional preparing documents and drawings. All plats or plans,
except those prepared at the sketch stage, shall be signed and
sealed by either a licensed Professional Engineer, Architect,
Planner, or Land Surveyor of the State of New Jersey.
4. Place for signature of the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning
Board or their designee.
5. Date of plat and any modifications thereto.
B. Certifications Required on Plans. (If the plan is being submitted to the
Zoning Board, substitute Zoning Board where applicable)
1. Minor Subdivisions
The undersigned hereby declares that they are the owner of the
subject parcel delineated hereon and hereby consent to the filing
of this map.
Owner
Owner
18-603 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-604
AO:949
Notary Public
Date
APPROVED BY
LAKEWOOD TOWNSHIP PLANNING BOARD
On __________ By Resolution # __________
Chairperson
Date
Secretary
Date
Engineer
Date
I have carefully examined this map and to the best of my
knowledge and belief find it conforms with the provisions of "The
Map filing Law", resolution of approval and municipal ordinances
and requirements applicable hereto.
Municipal Engineer
Date
This is to certify that the Lakewood Township Planning Board
is the proper authority to approve, and has approved, this map,
and that this map complies with all the provisions of N.J.S.A.
46:23-9.9 known as "The Map Filing Law". This map shall be filed
in the Ocean County Clerk's Office on or before the ______ day
of __________, (Insert Year), which is 190 days from the date the
resolution is adopted.
Secretary
Date
2. Preliminary Major Subdivision and Preliminary and Final Site Plan
APPROVED BY
LAKEWOOD TOWNSHIP PLANNING BOARD
On __________ By Resolution # __________
Chairperson
Date
Secretary
Date
18-604 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-604
AO:950
Engineer
Date
3. Final Plat Major Subdivision
The undersigned hereby declares that they are the owner of the
subject parcel delineated hereon and hereby consent to the filing
of this map.
Owner
Owner
Notary Public
Date
APPROVED BY
LAKEWOOD TOWNSHIP PLANNING BOARD
On __________ By Resolution # __________
Chairperson
Date
Secretary
Date
Engineer
Date
I have carefully examined this map and to the best of my
knowledge and belief find it conforms with the provisions of "The
Map filing Law", resolution of approval and municipal ordinances
and requirements applicable hereto.
Municipal Engineer
Date
I certify that the Lakewood Township Planning Board has
approved this map for filing in the Ocean County Clerk's Office
and that it complies with the provisions of the "Map Filing Law"
provided that this map is filed in the Office of the County Clerk on
or before _________________ which date is 95 days after the signing
of the map.
Secretary
Date
18-604 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-604
AO:951
18-605. Compliance With Other Ordinances.
18-606. General Development Plan Requirements.
The monuments shown on this map shall be set within an
appropriate time limit as provided for in the "Municipal Land Use
Law," P.L. 1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-1 et seq.) or local ordinance.
I certify that a bond has been given to the municipality,
guaranteeing the future setting of the monuments shown on this
map and so designated.
Municipal Clerk Date
Date
I certify that the Lakewood Township Planning Board has
approved the layout of the streets as shown on this map. However
this approval does not constitute acceptance or in any way
obligate the Township to maintain or exercise jurisdiction over the
streets indicated thereon.
Municipal Clerk Date
Date
C. Expiration of Approval.
1. Use variance: 10 years (as long as construction commences within
10 year period).
2. All other approvals, with the exception of General Development
Plan approval as specified in § 18-606D5, shall not expire provided
that construction commences on the premises.
Note: Deed to perfect a minor subdivision must be filed with
County Clerk within 190 days of date of adoption of resolutions of
Board approval.
A. Information and documents required for other Township codes and
ordinances such as soil erosion and sedimentation plans or storm water
management plans shall be submitted as part of an application for
subdivision approval and may be used to comply with subdivision
submission requirements for particular stages as applicable.
A. Applicants of planned developments of at least 100 acres comprised of a
minimum of 75 dwelling units, or 150,000 square feet of nonresidential
building area shall have the option of bifurcating preliminary approval
into two phases: Phase One General Development Plan and Phase Two -
Preliminary Approval.
An applicant may seek variances for density, nonresidential square
footage or use at the time of Phase One submission. All other variances
shall be sought at Phase Two.
18-604 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-606
AO:952
B. An applicant for Planned Unit Development (PUD), Planned Residential
Development (PRD), or Planned Industrial Development (PID) approval
shall first submit a General Development Plan (GDP), for approval by
the Planning Board. The GDP shall follow generally the procedures and
submission requirements contained in the New Jersey enabling statutes
of the Municipal Land Use Law, and in this chapter. 15 copies of the
GDP shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer and shall contain
the following information:
1. A general land use plan at a scale not less than 1" = 200' indicating
the tract area and general locations of the land uses to be included
in the planned development. The total number of dwelling units and
amount of nonresidential floor area to be provided and proposed
land area to be devoted to residential and nonresidential use shall
be set forth. In addition, the proposed types of nonresidential uses
to be included in the planned development shall be set forth and
the land area to be occupied by each proposed use shall be
estimated. The density and intensity of the use of the entire
planned development shall be set forth, and a residential density
and a nonresidential floor area ratio shall be provided;
2. Circulation plan showing the general location and types of
transportation facilities, including facilities for pedestrian access
within the planned development and any proposed improvements
to the existing transportation system outside the planned
development;
3. An open space plan showing the proposed land area and general
location of parks and any other land areas to be set aside for
conversation and recreational purposes and a general description
of improvements proposed to be made thereon, including a plan for
the operation and maintenance of said lands;
4. A utility plan indicating the need for and showing the proposed
location of sewage and water lines, any drainage facilities
necessitated by the physical characteristics of the site, proposed
methods for handling solid waste disposal and a plan for the
operation and maintenance of proposed utilities;
5. A stormwater management plan setting forth the proposed method
of controlling and managing stormwater on the site;
6. An environmental inventory including a general description of the
vegetation, soils, topography, geology, surface hydrology, climate
and cultural resources of the site existing man-made structures or
features and the probable impact of the development on the
environmental attributes of the site;
7. A community facility plan indicating the scope and type of
supporting community facilities which may include, but not be
limited to, educational or cultural facilities, historic sites, libraries,
18-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-606
AO:953
hospitals, firehouses and police stations; houses of worship and
other religious facilities;
8. A housing plan outlining the number of housing units to be
provided and the extent to which any housing obligation assigned
to the municipality pursuant to P.L. 1985, c. 222 will be fulfilled by
the development;
9. A local service plan indicating those public services which the
applicant proposes to provide and which may include, but not be
limited to, water, sewer, cable and solid waste disposal;
10. A fiscal report describing the anticipated demand on municipal
services to be generated by the planned development and any other
financial impacts to be faced by municipality or school districts as a
result of the completion of the planned development. The fiscal
report shall also include a detailed projection or property tax
revenues which will accrue to the County, municipality and school
districts according to the timing schedule provided under
Subsection 11 of this subsection, and following the completion of
the planned development in its entirety;
11. A proposed timing schedule in the case of a planned development
whose construction is contemplated over a period of years,
including any terms or conditions which are intended to protect the
interests of the public and of the residents who occupy any
subsection of the planned development prior to the completion of
the development in its entirety; and
12. A municipal development agreement, which shall mean a written
agreement between a municipality and a developer relating to the
planned development.
C. General Development Plan (GDP) Approval Procedure
1. Any developer of a parcel of land greater than 100 acres in size for
which the developer is seeking approval of a planned development
shall submit a general development plan to the Planning Board
prior to the granting of preliminary approval of that development
by the Planning Board pursuant to Article VI.
2. The Planning Board shall grant or deny general development
approval within 95 days after submission of a complete application
to the Administrative Officer, or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the Planning Board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute GDP approval of the
planned development.
D. General Development Plan; Timing Schedule; Modification:
1. If, after the approval of a GDP, the applicant wishes to revise the
timing schedule, or wishes to make any variation in the location of
18-606 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-606
AO:954
land uses within the development, or to increase the density of
residential development or the floor area ratio of nonresidential
development in any section of the development, the applicant shall
be required to gain the prior approval of the Reviewing Board,
except that the applicant may reduce the number of residential
units or amount of nonresidential floor space by no more than 15%,
or reduce the residential density or nonresidential floor area ratio
by no more than 15% provided, however, that a applicant may not
reduce the number of low and moderate income residential units
to be provided, if any, without the prior approval of the Reviewing
Board, and provided further there shall be no reduction in the level
of improvements, off-tract contributions, or similar conditions of
the General Development Plan (GDP) without prior approval of the
Board.
2. A revision to the timing schedule shall be reviewed by the
Reviewing Board and the granting or denial of any extensions of
time shall be based on the degree to which matters are judged to
be, or to have been, within the reasonable control of the applicant,
or the degree to which matters may have been beyond the control
of the applicant.
3. Upon acquiring a certificate of occupancy for each section of the
development as set forth in the approved GDP, the applicant shall
notify the Administrative Officer, by certified mail, as evidence that
the applicant is fulfilling his obligations under the approved GDP. If
the Township does not receive such notification at the completion
of any section of the development, the Township shall notify the
applicant, by certified mail, in order to determine whether the
terms of the approved plan are being complied with.
4. If the applicant does not complete any section of development
within eight months of the date provided for in the approved GDP,
or if at any time the Township has cause to believe that the
applicant is not fulfilling their obligations pursuant to the approved
GDP, the Township shall notify the applicant, by certified mail, and
the applicant shall have 10 days within which to give evidence that
they are fulfilling their obligations pursuant to the approved GDP.
The Township thereafter shall conduct a hearing to determine
whether the applicant is in violation of the approved GDP. If after
the hearing, the Township finds good cause to terminate the
approval, it shall provide written notice of same to the applicant
and the approval shall be terminated 30 days thereafter.
5. In the event that a applicant who has GDP approval does not apply
for preliminary site plan or subdivision approval for the planned
development which is the subject of the GDP approval within five
years of the date upon which the GDP has been approved by the
Reviewing Board, the Township shall have cause to terminate the
approval. For purposes of this article, the application for
preliminary approval within the five year period as required herein
18-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-606
AO:955
will be satisfied by submitting one or more applications for one or
more sections of a phased development within this five year period,
and will remain in compliance provided subsequent preliminary
plat submissions for further sections of the development are
submitted in a timely manner consistent with the timing schedule
approved as part of the General Development Plan (GDP).
6. In the event that a development which is the subject of an approved
GDP is completed before the end of the term of the approval, the
approval shall terminate and the development shall be considered
complete on the date upon which the certificate of occupancy has
been issued for the final residential and nonresidential structure in
the last section of the development in accordance with the timing
schedule set forth in the approved GDP and the applicant has
fulfilled all his obligations pursuant to the approval.
E. General Development Plan hearing on modifications required.
1. Except as provided hereunder, the developer shall be required to
gain the prior approval of the Planning Board if, after approval of
the GDP, the developer wishes to make any modification in the
location of land uses within the planned development or to increase
the density of residential development or the floor area ration of
nonresidential development in any section of the planned
development.
2. Any modification in the location of land uses or increase in density
or floor area ratio proposed in reaction to a negative decision of, or
condition of development approval by the New Jersey Department
of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) shall be approved by the
Planning Board if the developer can demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the Planning Board, that the modification being proposed is a
direct result of such determination by the NJDEP.
F. General Development Plan (GDP) certification upon completion:
General development plan failure to complete or comply: GDP
termination of approval:
1. Upon the completion of each section of the development as set
forth in the approved GDP, the developer shall notify the Board
Secretary by certified mail as evidence that the developer is
fulfilling his obligations under the approved plan. For the purpose
of this section "completion" of any section of the development shall
mean that the developer has acquired a certificate of occupancy for
every residential unit or every nonresidential structure, as set forth
in the approved GDP. If the municipality does not receive such
notification at the completion of any section of the development,
the municipality shall notify the developer, by certified mail, in
order to determine whether or not terms of the approved plan are
being complied with. If a developer does not complete any section
of the development within eight months of the date provided for in
18-606 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-606
AO:956
18-607. Concept Plans: Minor or Major Site Plans and Subdivisions.
the approved plan, or if at any time the municipality has caused to
believe that the developer is not fulfilling their obligations pursuant
to the approved plan, the municipality shall notify the developer, by
certified mail, and the developer shall have 10 days within which
to give evidence that they are fulfilling their obligation pursuant
to the approved plan. The municipality thereafter shall conduct a
hearing to determine whether the developer is in violation of the
approved plan. If, after such a hearing, the municipality finds good
cause to terminate the approval, it shall provide written notice of
same to the developer and the approval shall be terminated 30 days
thereafter.
2. In the event that a developer who has General Development Plan
(GDP) approval does not apply for preliminary approval for the
planned development which is subject of that GDP approval within
five years of the date upon which the GDP has been approved by
the Planning Board, the municipality shall have cause to terminate
the approval.
3. GDP satisfactory completion: In the event that a development
which is the subject of an approved GDP is completed before the
end of the term of the approval, the approval shall terminate with
the completion of the development. For the purpose of this section,
a development shall be considered complete on the date upon
which a certificate of occupancy has been issued for the final
residential or nonresidential structure in the last section of the
development in accordance with the timing schedule set forth in
the approved GDP and the developer has fulfilled all of his
obligations pursuant to the approval.
A. Objectives of Review. Applicants for preliminary approval may submit
for review by the Planning or Zoning Board concept plans for informal
discussions and recommendations. The concept plan shall be reviewed
to determine the proposals compliance with applicable Township
ordinances and the general site design concept, including but not
limited use, location and bulk; buildings and improvements; density;
open space; traffic and pedestrian patterns; and, other general design
components.
B. Concept plans shall be used as a basis for changes and redesign so as to
avoid undue expense and delay in preparing more detailed plans and
specifications in subsequent review stages. The Planning or Zoning
Board shall not be governed by any statutory time limits in its review of
concept plans and it is expressly understood that compliance with the
Board recommendations shall not bind the Board in subsequent
deliberations.
C. The applicant should provide a set of informal plans and applicable
escrow fees.
18-606 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-608
AO:957
18-608. Minor Subdivision Plats.
A. Minor Subdivision Plat. In addition to the information required for a
zoning permit, all minor subdivision plans shall fulfill the information
requirements of this section prior to review by the Reviewing Board,
which shall be set forth in a Checklist and provided to each applicant.
(See § 18-603C) All minor subdivision plats shall be prepared by a New
Jersey licensed land surveyor.
B. Distribution. See § 18-603G.
C. Action. The Planning or Zoning Board shall act within 45 days, of the
application being certified as a complete application for a minor
subdivision or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant. If a variance is required in conjunction with the minor
subdivision, the Board shall act within 120 days. Failure of the
Reviewing Board to act within the prescribed time period shall
constitute approval of the application.
The Board shall have the right to approve or change the classification
of the subdivision by a majority vote.
D. If rejected, the reasons for rejection shall be noted in the resolution
adopted by the Board. The Planning or Zoning Board may attach
conditions of approval to any minor subdivision.
E. Filing with County Recording Officer. If approved as a minor
subdivision, a plat drawn in compliance with Chapter 141 of the Laws of
1960 or a deed or map signed by the Planning Board or Zoning Board
Chairperson and Secretary shall be filed by the subdivider with the
County Recording Officer and Township Engineer within 190 days from
the date on which the Resolution of Approval was adopted. If not filed
within this period said subdivision approval shall expire unless
extended by the Board.
F. Approved Minor Subdivisions; Municipal Distribution. Before the
Construction Official issues a building permit for the approved minor
subdivision, the applicant shall provide the applicable Board Secretary
with a certificate of filing from the County Clerk's office and eight
copies of the approved subdivision map reflecting the recording data
from the Ocean County Clerk's Office. The Board Secretary shall
distribute copies of the approved subdivision to each of the following:
Township Engineer 2 prints
Tax Assessor 1 print
Zoning Officer 1 print
Applicant 1 print
Planning Board File 1 print
Construction Official 1 print for each lot & block
18-608 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-608
AO:958
18-609. Preliminary Approval; Major Subdivision.
G. Effect of Minor Subdivision Approval. The granting of minor subdivision
approval shall guaranty the zoning requirements and general terms and
conditions, whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor
subdivision approval was granted, shall not be changed for a period of
two years after the date the adoption of Resolution of Approval;
provided the minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded as
provided herein. Applicants shall be responsible for necessary
approvals prior to development as may be required by other Township
codes and ordinances.
A. Objectives of Review. The preliminary plat shall be reviewed to
determine the acceptability of the detailed design concept and shall be
in sufficient detail to enable the Board to ascertain compliance with the
performance standards and other standards of this section as well as
applicable Township ordinances.
All plans shall fulfill the information requirements of this section prior
to review by the Reviewing Board, which shall be set forth in a checklist
and provided to each applicant.
Applications for Planned Unit Developments or major plans shall have
the option of bifurcating preliminary approval into two phases: Phase
One - General Development Plan, and Phase Two - Preliminary
Approval. An applicant may seek variances for density, nonresidential
square footage or use along with Phase One. All other variances shall
be sought at Phase Two.
B. Filing. See § 18-603A.
C. Preliminary Plat Details. Pursuant to the Checklist requirements (See §
18-603)
D. Preliminary Plat Review. Within 45 days of the submission to the Board
Secretary of a certified complete subdivision plat application for 10 lots
or less; within 95 days of submission of a certified complete application
for a subdivision application of more than 10 lots; within 120 days if a
variance is required; or within such further time as may be agreed upon
by the developer that the Planning Board shall act upon the application.
E. Distribution. See § 18-603G.
F. Preliminary Plat Hearing. All actions of the Planning Board on
preliminary subdivision plats shall be after a public hearing. Public
notice of an application as provided in this chapter shall be required for
all major subdivision plats. Applicants for major subdivision plats
requiring variances by the Planning Board shall also be required to
provide public notice of application.
18-608 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-609
AO:959
G. Effect of Preliminary Approval. Preliminary approval of a subdivision
plat shall confer upon the applicant the following rights for a three year
period from the date of the preliminary approval:
1. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed including but not
limited to use requirements, layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks, lot size; yard dimension and on-site
and off tract improvements; and any requirements peculiar to the
specific subdivision plat. The Township may modify by ordinance
such general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as they
relate to public health and safety.
2. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval, the whole, or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or simultaneously with
submission for preliminary approval.
H. Extension of Preliminary Approval. The applicant may apply for and the
Planning Board may grant extensions on such preliminary approval for
additional periods of at least one year but not to exceed a total
extension of two years provided that if the design standards have been
revised by ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
In the case of a subdivision plat for an area of 50 acres or more,
the Planning Board may grant the rights referred to above for such
period of time, longer than three years, as shall be determined by
the Planning Board to be reasonable taking into consideration (1) the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under preliminary approval; (2) economic conditions; and, (3) the
comprehensiveness of the development. The applicant may apply for
thereafter and the Planning Board may thereafter grant an extension
to preliminary approval for such additional period of time as shall
be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable taking into
consideration: (1) the number of dwelling units and nonresidential
floor area permissible under preliminary approval; (2) the potential
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the section
or sections awaiting final approval; (3) economic conditions; and, (4)
the comprehensiveness of the development; provided that if the design
standards have been revised, such revised standards may govern.
I. Approved Preliminary Plat: Municipal Distribution. The Board
Secretary shall distribute copies of the approved preliminary plat with
construction plans to each of the following:
Township Engineer 1 print
Planning Board File 1 print
Applicant 1 print
Lakewood Fire Co. 1 print
18-609 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-610
AO:960
18-610. Preliminary Site Plan Approval.
A. Filing. See § 18-603A.
B. Preliminary Plan Details. Pursuant to Checklist requirements. (See §
18-603C)
C. Preliminary Plan Review. Within 45 days of receipt by the Planning
Board Secretary of a complete plan application for 10 acres of land or
less and 10 dwelling units or less; or within 95 days of receipt of a
complete application for a plan of more than 10 acres or more than 10
dwelling units; within 120 days if a variance is required; or within such
further time as may be agreed upon by the developer, the Planning
Board shall act upon the application.
D. Distribution. See § 18-603G.
E. Preliminary Plan Hearing. All actions of the Planning Board on
preliminary plans shall be at a public hearing. Public notice of an
application as provided in § 18-701 of this chapter shall be required.
F. Decisions of Planning Board. See § 18-702 of this chapter for decisions
on site plan applications under varying procedural conditions.
G. Effect of Preliminary Approval. Preliminary approval of a plan shall
confer upon the applicant the following rights for a three year period
from the date of the preliminary approval:
1. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and on site
and off tract improvements; and any requirements peculiar to the
specific plan. The Township Committee may modify by ordinance
such general terms and conditions of preliminary approval as they
relate to public health and safety provided such modifications are
in accord with amendments adopted by ordinance subsequent to
approval.
2. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary plan.
H. Extension of Preliminary Approval. The applicant may apply for and the
Planning Board may grant extensions on such preliminary approval for
additional periods of at least one year but not to exceed a total
extension of two years provided that if the design standards have been
revised by ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
In the case of a plan for an area of 50 acres or more, the Planning Board
may grant the rights referred to above for such period of time, longer
than three (3) years, as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be
reasonable taking into consideration: (1) the number of dwelling units
18-610 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-610
AO:961
18-611. Final Plat Approval: Major Subdivision.
and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary approval;
(2) economic conditions; and, (3) the comprehensiveness of the
development. The applicant may apply for thereafter and the Planning
Board may thereafter grant an extension to preliminary approval for
such additional period of time as shall be determined by the Planning
Board to be reasonable taking into consideration: (1) the number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under
preliminary approval; (2) the potential number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area of the section or sections awaiting final
approval; (3) economic conditions; and, (4) the comprehensiveness of
the development; provided that if the design standards have been
revised, such revised standards may govern.
A. Objectives of Review. The final plat shall be reviewed to determine
whether it substantially conforms to the approved preliminary plat and
to the conditions of preliminary approval and the Map Filing Law, and
to assure proper posting of performance and maintenance bonds.
All plans shall fulfill the information requirements of this section prior
to review by the Reviewing Board, which shall be set forth in a checklist
and provided to each applicant.
B. Filing. See § 18-603A.
C. Final Plat Details. Pursuant to checklist requirements. (See § 18-603C)
D. Final Plat Review. Within 45 days after the final plat application has
been certified as complete, within 120 days if a variance is requested
that was not approved under preliminary approval, or within such
further time as may be agreed upon by the applicant, the Planning
Board shall approve the application for final plat approval with or
without conditions, provided the following requirements are met:
1. That the detailed drawings and specifications meet all applicable
Township codes and ordinances;
2. That the final plats are substantially the same as the approved
preliminary plats;
3. (Reserved)
4. That the applicant agrees in writing to all conditions of final
approval;
5. That proof has been submitted that all taxes and assessments for
local improvements on the property have been paid.
E. Distribution. See § 18-603G.
Submission of a major development subdivision application shall be
reviewed and acted upon by the Planning Board according to § 18-609.
18-610 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-611
AO:962
F. Final Major Subdivision Hearing. Board action shall take place at a
public meeting. No public notice of application shall be required (unless
a variance is requested in conjunction with final approval).
G. Decision of Planning Board. As set forth in § 18-609 of this chapter for
decisions on subdivision applications under varying procedural
conditions.
H. Effect of Final Approval. Final approval shall terminate the time period
of preliminary approval for the section granted final approval and shall
guaranty the applicant that the zoning requirements applicable to the
preliminary approval and all other rights conferred upon applicant as
part of preliminary approval shall not be changed for a period of two
years after the date of final approval, provided that these rights shall
expire if the plat has not been duly recorded within the time prescribed
in § 18-611K herein.
I. Time Limit for Final Approval and Extensions. The Planning Board shall
grant an extension of final approval for a period determined by the
Board but not exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the
expiration date, if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of
the board that the developer was barred or prevented, directly or
indirectly from proceeding with the development because of delays in
legally obtaining the required approvals from governmental agencies
and that the developer applied promptly and diligently pursued these
approvals. A developer shall apply for the extension before (1) what
would otherwise be the expiration date of the final approval or (2) the
ninety-first (91st) day after the developer receives the last legally
required approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs
later.
J. County Planning Board Approval. Any plat, which requires County
Planning Board approval, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27 6.2, shall be
forwarded to the County Planning Board for its action. The Planning or
Zoning Board may grant final approval subject to approval by the
County Planning Board.
K. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date
of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall have been
duly filed by the developer with the County Recording Officer. The
Planning Board may for good cause shown extend the period for
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date
of signing of the plat. The Planning Board may extend the 95 day or 190
day period if the developer proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Planning Board (1) that the developer was barred or prevented, directly
or indirectly, from filing because of delays in obtaining legally required
approvals from other governmental or quasi-governmental entities and
(2) that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the
required approvals. The length of the extension shall be equal to the
period of delay caused by the wait for the required approvals, as
18-611 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-611
AO:963
18-612. Final Site Plan Approval.
determined by the planning board. The developer may apply for an
extension either before or after the original expiration date.
No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the County Recording
Officer until it has been approved by the Planning Board as indicated
on the instrument by the signature of the Chairman and Secretary of
the Planning Board or a certificate has been issued pursuant to sections
35, 38, 44, 48, 54 or 63 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-47, 40:55D-50,
40:55D-56, 40:55D-61, 40:55D-67, 40:55D-76). The signatures of the
Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Board shall not be affixed until
the developer has posted the guarantees required pursuant to section
41 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-53). If the County Recording Officer
records any plat without such approval, such recording shall be deemed
null and void, and upon request of the municipality, the plat shall be
expunged from the official records.
It shall be the duty of the County Recording Officer to notify the
Planning Board in writing within (7) seven days of the filing of any
plat, identifying such instrument by its title, date of filing, and official
number.
L. Approved Final Plat; Municipal Distribution. Before the Board
Secretary returns any approved final plat to the subdivider or the
construction official issues a building permit for the subdivision, the
applicant shall provide the Board Secretary with a certificate of filing
from the County Clerk's office and 10 copies of the approved final
subdivision map reflecting the recording data from the Ocean County
Clerk's Office.
The Board Secretary shall distribute copies of the approved final plat as
follows:
Township Engineer 2 prints
Tax Assessor 1 print
Construction Official 1 print
Township Clerk 1 print
Board File 1 print
Lakewood Fire Company 1 print
Zoning Officer 2 prints
BOE Transportation 1 print
A. Objectives of Review. The final plan shall be reviewed to ascertain
whether the construction documents to be utilized in construction of
the project substantially conform to the approved preliminary plan.
18-611 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-612
AO:964
All plans shall fulfill the information requirements of this section prior
to review by the Reviewing Board, which shall be set forth in a checklist
and provided to each applicant.
B. Filing. See § 18-603A.
C. Final Plan Details. Pursuant to checklist requirements. (See § 18-603C
and § 18-1112)
D. Final Site Plan Review. Within 45 days from submission of a certified
complete final plan application, within 120 days if a variance is required
which was not approved under preliminary approval, or within such
further time as may be agreed upon by the applicant, the Planning
Board shall approve the application for final plan approval with or
without conditions, provided the following requirements are met:
1. That the detailed drawings and specifications meet all applicable
codes and ordinances;
2. That the final plans are substantially the same as the approved
preliminary plans;
3. (Reserved)
4. That proof has been submitted that all taxes and assessments for
local improvements on the property have been paid.
E. Distribution. See § 18-603G.
F. Final Plan Hearing. Planning or Zoning Board action shall take place at
a hearing. No public notice of application shall be required, unless a
variance is required that was not granted under preliminary approval.
G. Decision of Planning or Zoning Board. As set forth in Subsection J of
this section for decisions on plan applications under varying procedural
conditions.
H. Effect of Final Approval. Final approval shall terminate the time period
of preliminary approval for the section granted final approval and shall
guaranty the applicant that the zoning requirements applicable to the
preliminary approval and all other rights conferred upon applicant as
part of preliminary approval shall not be changed for a period of two
years after the date of final approval.
I. Time Limit for Final Approval and Extensions. Final approval shall
expire two years from the date of final approval unless the applicant has
secured a building permit to commence construction. The Planning
Board may extend final approval, and the protection offered under §
18-611 Subsection I herein, for one year.
J. Effect of final approval of a site plan or major subdivision.
1. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval
first granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer
18-612 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-612
AO:965
pursuant to section 37 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-49), whether
conditionally or otherwise, shall not be changed for a period of two
years after the date on which the resolution of final approval is
adopted; provided that in the case of a major subdivision the rights
conferred by this section shall expire if the plat has not been duly
recorded within the time period provided in section 42 of P.L.1975,
c.291 (C.40:55D-54). If the developer has followed the standards
prescribed for final approval, and, in the case of a subdivision,
has duly recorded the plat as required in section 42 of P.L.1975,
c.291 (C.40:55D-54), the Planning Board may extend such period
of protection for extensions of one year but not to exceed three
extensions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this act, the
granting of final approval terminates the time period of preliminary
approval pursuant to section 37 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-49)
for the section granted final approval.
2. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned development
of 50 acres or more, conventional subdivision or site plan for 150
acres or more, or site plan for development of a nonresidential floor
area of 200,000 square feet or more, the Planning Board may grant
the rights referred to in Subsection 1 of this section for such period
of time, longer than two years, as shall be determined by the
Planning Board to be reasonable taking into consideration (1) the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under final approval, (2) economic conditions and (3) the
comprehensiveness of the development. The developer may apply
for thereafter, and the planning board may thereafter grant, an
extension of final approval for such additional period of time as
shall be determined by the planning board to be reasonable taking
into consideration (1) the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area permissible under final approval, (2) the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area remaining
to be developed, (3) economic conditions and (4) the
comprehensiveness of the development.
3. Whenever the Planning Board grants an extension of final approval
pursuant to Subsection 1 or 2 of this section and final approval has
expired before the date on which the extension is granted, the
extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the expiration
date. The developer may apply for the extension either before or
after what would otherwise be the expiration date.
The Planning Board shall grant an extension of final approval for
a period determined by the Board but not exceeding one year
from what would otherwise be the expiration date, if the developer
proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the
developer was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from
proceeding with the development because of delays in obtaining
legally required approvals from other governmental entities and
that the developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued
18-612 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-612
AO:966
18-613. Certificates Showing Approval.
these approvals. A developer shall apply for the extension before
(1) what would otherwise be the expiration date of final approval
or (2) the 91st day after the developer receives the last legally
required approval from other governmental entities, whichever
occurs later. An extension granted pursuant to this subsection
shall not preclude the Planning Board from granting an extension
pursuant to Subsections A or B of this section.
K. Conditions of Final Approval. The Planning or Zoning Board may as a
condition of final approval:
1. Condition the granting of a certificate of occupancy subject to the
applicant or developer or subsequent heirs or assignees meeting
certain requirements within a designated period of time, not to
exceed two years, from the date of issuance of the certificate of
occupancy. This may include, but is not limited to, such items as:
the installation of landscaping, erection of signs, installation of
improvements, or reevaluation of circulation patterns.
A. Prospective purchasers or mortgagees, or any other person interested
in any land which forms, or formed, part of a subdivision three years
preceding the effective date of this chapter, may apply in writing to the
Board Secretary, for the issuance of a certificate stating whether such
subdivision has been approved by the Board. Such application shall
contain a diagram showing the location and dimension of the land to be
covered by the certificate and the name of the owner thereof.
B. The Board Secretary shall make and issue such certificate within 15
days after the receipt of such written application and the fees therefore.
Said Secretary shall keep a duplicate copy of each certificate,
consecutively numbered, including a statement of the fee charged, in a
binder as a permanent record in their office.
C. Each such certificate shall be designated a "certificate as to approval of
subdivision of land," and shall certify:
1. Whether there exists in said municipality a duly established
Planning Board and whether there is an ordinance controlling
subdivision of land adopted under the authority of this article.
2. Whether the subdivision, as it relates to the land shown in said
application, has been approved by the Board, and, if so, the date of
such approval and any extensions and terms thereof, showing that
subdivision of which the lands are a part is a validly existing
subdivision.
3. Whether such subdivision, if the same has not been approved, is
statutorily exempt from the requirement of approval as provided in
this act.
18-612 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-613
AO:967
D. The Administrative Officer shall be entitled to receive for such
certificate issued, a fee as stipulated in the Township's Fee Ordinance.
18-613 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-613
AO:968
ARTICLE VII
PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO SITE PLANS AND SUBDIVISIONS
18-700. Simultaneous Review.
The Board shall have the power to review and either approve or deny
conditional uses or plans simultaneously with review for subdivision
approval without the developer being required to make further application
to the Board, or the Board being required to hold further hearings. The
longest time period for action by the Board, whether it be for subdivision,
conditional use or plan approval, shall apply.
18-701. Hearings and Notices.
A. Hearings shall be required as part of approval for all applications for
development.
B. Maps and Documents and Exhibits on File. A complete set of maps,
documents and exhibits shall be on file at the office of the Board at least
10 days prior to the date of the noticed hearing.
C. Public Notice of Application.
1. Public notice of a hearing shall be given for an extension of
approvals for five or more years under Subsection d of section 37 of
P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-49) and Subsection b of section 40 of
P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-52); for modification or elimination of a
significant condition or conditions in a memorializing resolution in
any situation wherein the application for development for which
the memorializing resolution is proposed for adoption required
public notice, and for any other applications for development, with
the following exceptions: (1) minor site plan review, (2) minor
subdivisions pursuant to section 35 of P.L.1975, c.291
(C.40:55D-47) or (3) final approval pursuant to section 38 of
P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-50). Notice shall be required for all
preliminary major site plan and subdivision applications, for
appeals of determinations of administrative officers pursuant to
Subsection a of section 57 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-70), and for
requests for interpretation pursuant to Subsection b of section 57
of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-70). Public notice shall also be given
in the event that relief is requested pursuant to section 47 or 63 of
P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D- 60 or C.40:55D-76) as part of an
application for development otherwise excepted herein from public
notice. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official
newspaper of the Township or in a newspaper of general circulation
in the Township.
2. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice pursuant to Subsection
1 of this section shall be given to the owners of all real property as
shown on the current tax duplicates, located in the State and within
200 feet in all directions of the property which is the subject of such
18-700 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-701
AO:969
hearing; provided that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied
by notice to the (1) condominium association, in the case of any
unit owner whose unit has a unit above or below it, or (2) horizontal
property regime, in the case of any co-owner whose apartment
has an apartment above or below it. Notice shall be given by: (1)
serving a copy thereof on the property owner as shown on the said
current tax duplicate, or his agent in charge of the property, or (2)
mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the property owner at
his address as shown on the said current tax duplicate.
3. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any
partner. Notice to a corporate owner may be made by service upon
its president, a vice president, secretary or other person authorized
by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of the
corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal
property regime, community trust or homeowners' association,
because of its ownership of common elements or areas located
within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of the hearing,
may be made in the same manner as to a corporation without
further notice to unit owners, co-owners, or homeowners on
account of such common elements or areas.
4. Upon the written request of an applicant, the administrative officer
of a municipality shall, within seven days, make and certify a list
from said current tax duplicates of names and addresses of owners
to whom the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to
Subsection 2 of this section. In addition, the administrative officer
shall include on the list the names, addresses and positions of those
persons who, not less than seven days prior to the date on which
the applicant requested the list, have registered to receive notice
pursuant to Subsection 9 of this section. The applicant shall be
entitled to rely upon the information contained in such list, and
failure to give notice to any owner or to any public utility, cable
television company, or local utility not on the list shall not
invalidate any hearing or proceeding. A sum not to exceed twentyfive
($0.25) cents per name, or $10, whichever is greater, may be
charged for such list.
5. Notice of hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall
be given by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of such
municipality.
6. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
county Planning Board of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to an existing county road or
proposed road shown on the official county map or on the county
master plan, adjoining other county land or situated within 200 feet
of a municipal boundary.
18-701 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-701
AO:970
18-702. Decisions on Applications for Development.
7. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a State highway.
8. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
State Planning Commission of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. The notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the Municipal Clerk pursuant to
Subsection b of section 6 of P.L.1975, c.291 (C.40:55D-10).
9. Notice of hearings on applications for approval of a major
subdivision or a site plan not defined as a minor site plan under this
act requiring public notice pursuant to Subsection a of this section
shall be given, in the case of a public utility, cable television
company or local utility which possesses a right-of-way or easement
within the municipality and which has registered with the
municipality in accordance with section 5 of P.L.1991, c.412
(C.40:55D-12.1), by (1) serving a copy of the notice on the person
whose name appears on the registration form on behalf of the
public utility, cable television company or local utility or (2) mailing
a copy thereof by certified mail to the person whose name appears
on the registration form at the address shown on that form.
10. The applicant shall file an affidavit of proof of service with the
municipal agency holding the hearing on the application for
development in the event that the applicant is required to give
notice pursuant to this section.
11. Notice pursuant to Subsections 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 of this section shall
not be deemed to be required, unless public notice pursuant to
Subsection 1 and notice pursuant to Subsection 2 of this section
are required.
D. The municipal agency shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means.
The municipal agency shall furnish a transcript, or duplicate recording
in lieu thereof, on request to any interested party at their expense;
provided that the governing body may provide by ordinance for the
municipality to assume the expense of any transcripts necessary for
appeal to the governing body, pursuant to Article III, of decisions by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to said article, up to a maximum
amount as specified by ordinance.
The municipal agency, in furnishing a transcript or tape of the
proceedings to an interested party at his expense, shall not charge such
interested party more than the actual cost of preparing the transcript
or tape. Transcripts shall be certified in writing by the transcriber to be
accurate.
18-701 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-702
AO:971
A. The municipal agency shall include findings of fact and conclusions
based thereon in each decision on any application for development and
shall reduce the decision to writing. The municipal agency shall provide
the findings and conclusions through:
1. A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later
than 45 a days after the date of the meeting at which the municipal
agency voted to grant or deny approval. Only the members of the
municipal agency who voted for the action taken may vote on the
memorializing resolution, and the vote of a majority of such
members present at the meeting at which the resolution is
presented for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt the resolution. If
only one member who voted for the action attends the meeting at
which the resolution is presented for adoption, the resolution may
be adopted upon the vote of that member. An action pursuant to
Section 5 of the Act (C.40:55D-9) (resulting from failure of a motion
to approve an application) shall be memorialized by resolution as
provided above, with those members voting against the motion for
approval being the members eligible to vote on the memorializing
resolution. The vote on any such resolution shall be deemed to be a
memorialization of the action of the municipal agency and not to be
an action of the municipal agency; however, the date of the
adoption of the resolution shall constitute the date of the decision
for purposes of the mailings, filings and publications required by
Subsections h and i of P.L. 1975 C.40:55D-10. If the municipal
agency fails to adopt a resolution or memorializing resolution as
herein above specified, any interested party may apply to the
Superior Court in a summary manner for an order compelling the
municipal agency to reduce its findings and conclusions to writing
within a stated time, and the cost of the application, including
attorney's fees, shall be assessed against the municipality.
B. County Planning Board Approval. Whenever review or approval of any
application by the County Planning Board is required, the Board shall
condition any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable
report on the application by the County Planning Board or upon County
Planning Board approval by default for failure to report thereon within
the required time period.
C. Developments Barred by Administrative or Judicial Order. In the event
that a developer submits an application for development proposing a
development that is barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, by a
legal action instituted by any State agency, political subdivision or court
of competent jurisdiction to protect the public health and welfare, the
Board shall process such application for development in accordance
with this article, and if such application complies with the requirements
of this article, the Board shall approve such application conditioned on
removal of such legal barrier to development.
D. Approval by Other Governmental Agencies. In the event that
development proposed by an application for development requires an
18-702 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-702
AO:972
approval by a governmental agency other than the Board, the Board
shall, in appropriate instances, condition its approval upon the
subsequent approval of such governmental agency. The Board may
recommend that construction permits be issued consistent with the
resolution of approval while outside agency approval is pending, so long
as the applicant proceeds at their own risk.
E. Decisions to be furnished to Applicant and Others. A copy of each
decision shall be mailed by the Board, within 10 days after the date of
decision, to the applicant, or if represented then to their attorney,
without separate charge, and to all others upon request for a fee as
noted in this chapter.
F. Filing in Office of Board Secretary. A copy of each decision shall also be
filed by the Board in the office of the Board Secretary who shall make a
copy of the filed decision available to any interested party for a fee as
noted in this chapter and available for public inspection at their office
during reasonable hours.
G. Publication. A brief notice of each decision shall be published by the
Board Secretary and the Township may make a reasonable charge for
such publication. The applicant, also, may cause such publication to be
made if they so desires. The time for appeal from the decision shall run
from the first publication, whether made by the Board Secretary or the
applicant.
H. Time for Decision on Applications to Board for Preliminary Approval of
Site Plans and Major Subdivisions. Preliminary approval shall be
granted or denied on applications to the Board for a plan of 10 acres or
less or for a major subdivision of 10 or fewer lots within 45 days, and for
a site plan of more than 10 acres or for a major subdivision of more than
10 lots within 95 days, after the date of submission of a complete
application to the Board Secretary except as otherwise provided in §§
18-702J through M.
I. Time for Decision on Applications to Board for Minor Subdivision
Approval and Final Approval of Plans and Major Subdivisions. Final
approval of plans, major subdivisions, and approval of minor
subdivisions shall be granted or denied on applications to the Board
within 45 days after the date of submission of a complete application to
the Board Secretary except as otherwise provided in §§ 18-702J through
M.
J. Time for Decision When Board Reviews Conditional Uses or Plans
Simultaneously with Subdivisions. Whenever the Board reviews
conditional uses or plans simultaneously with subdivisions, the longer
or longest period of time for action in any such case shall apply to all
such cases.
K. Time for Decision When Board Reviews Applications for Subdivision,
Plan or Conditional Use Approval That Includes Request for Variance.
Whenever an application to the Board for approval of a subdivision plat,
18-702 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-702
AO:973
18-703. Application by Corporation, Partnership or Limited Liability
Company.
plan or conditional use includes a request for a variance pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60, the Board shall grant or deny approval of the
application within 120 days after the date of submission of a certified
complete application to the Board Secretary. In the event that the
developer elects to submit separate consecutive applications, the
aforesaid provision shall apply to the application for approval of the
variance or direction for issuance of a permit. The period for granting
or denying and subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in
this chapter.
L. Time for Decision When Board Reviews Application for Conditional Use
That Includes Request for Plan Approval. Whenever the Board reviews
an application for conditional use that includes a request for plan
approval, the Board shall grant or deny approval of the application
within 95 days after the date of submission of a certified complete
application to the Board Secretary.
M. Time for Decision When Board of Adjustment Reviews Subdivision, Plan
or Conditional Use in Conjunction With Use Variance. Whenever an
application is made to the Board of Adjustment for subdivision, plan or
conditional use approval in conjunction with the Board's review of a use
variance, the Board of Adjustment shall grant or deny approval of the
application within 120 days after the date of submission of a certified
complete application to the Board Secretary.
N. Extension of Time for Decision. Any time period for action by the Board
may be extended with the consent of the applicant or appellant.
O. Failure to Make Decision within Time. The failure of the Board to act
within such time period or extension thereof shall constitute a decision
favorable to the applicant or appellant. A certificate of the Board
Secretary as to such failure shall be issued on request of the applicant
or appellant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of written endorsement or
other evidence of approval required by this section and shall be
accepted as such by the County Clerk for purposes of filing subdivision
plats.
A. A corporation, partnership, or limited liability company (LLC) applying
to the Planning Board or the Board of Adjustment for approval to
subdivide a parcel of land or for approval of a site to be used for
commercial or industrial purposes shall be represented by an attorney,
and shall list the names and addresses of all stockholders, members or
individual partners owning at least 10% of its stock of any class or at
least 10% of the interest in the partnership, as the case may be.
B. Disclosure of 10% ownership interest of corporation or partnership
which is 10% of applying corporation or partnership. If a corporation or
partnership owns 10% or more of the stock of a corporation, or 10% or
18-702 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-703
AO:974
18-704. Inspection and Escrow Fees.
greater interest in a partnership, subject to disclosure pursuant to
§ 18-703A, that corporation or partnership shall list the names and
addresses of its stockholders or members holding 10% or more of its
stock or of 10% or greater interest in the partnership, as the case
may be, and this requirement shall be followed by every corporate
stockholder or partner in a partnership, until the names and addresses
of the non-corporate stockholders and individual partners, exceeding
the 10% ownership criterion established in this act, have been listed.
C. Disapproval of Application. The Planning Board, Board of Adjustment or
governing body shall not approve the application of any corporation or
partnership which does not comply with §§ 18-703A or 18-703B.
D. Penalty. Any corporation or partnership, which conceals the names of
the stockholders owning 10% or more of its stock, or of the individual
partners owning a 10% or greater interest in the partnership, as the
case may be, shall be subject to a fine of $1,000 to $10,000, which shall
be recovered in the name of the municipality in any court of record in
the State in a summary manner pursuant to "The Penalty Enforcement
Law" (N.J.S.A. 2A:58 1 et seq.).
A. As a condition of final approval and prior to starting any construction of
the required improvements, the developer must submit final detailed
construction plans to the Township Engineer for their review and
approval and shall pay to the Township Treasurer, by cash or certified
check, the inspection escrow fee which shall be determined by the
Township Municipal Engineer for both private and public
improvements.
B. All of the required public improvements for a development, during and
upon completion of their construction, shall be subject to inspection
and approval by the Township Engineer or Township Planner, who shall
be notified by the developer at least 24-hours prior to the start of
construction. On site private improvements relating to drainage,
landscaping and circulation as shown on an approved final development
plan, shall also be subject to inspection and approval by the Township
Engineer or Township Planner.
C. No underground installations shall be covered until inspected and
approved by the Township Engineer or the relevant Township
construction sub-code official. At a minimum, the Township Engineer or
the relevant Township construction sub-code official will make the
following inspections:
1. Roadway subgrade prior to placing subbase material and/or
bituminous stabilized base course material.
18-703 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-704
AO:975
18-705. Acceptance of Streets and Improvements.
2. The bituminous stabilized base course material after complete
compaction and prior to applying bituminous material tack coat for
the bituminous concrete surface course.
3. Bituminous concrete surface course materials while it is being laid.
4. Finished bituminous concrete surface course pavement.
5. Concrete curb and sidewalks, when the forms are laid and the
subgrade is leveled and tamped prior to placing concrete, also
during the placing and finishing of the concrete.
6. Such inspections as the Township Engineer or the relevant
Township construction sub-code official shall deem necessary of the
pipe drains, inlets, municipal utilities lines and appurtenances, etc.
while pipes, etc. are being laid and prior to backfilling trenches,
inlets and manholes while being constructed.
D. Approval or reasons for withholding approval for either public or
private improvements shall be given promptly, and in any event within
45 days after inspection. If work proceeds without such approval or not
in compliance therewith, the Township Engineer or the relevant
Township construction sub-code official, in addition to any other
remedies available to the municipality, may issue an order requiring
immediate cessation of the affected work and prohibiting resumption
thereof until approval is obtained or noncompliance corrected.
A. Prior to the acceptance by the Township of any street or other
improvement in a subdivision, or release of performance bond covering
same, there shall be filed with the Township Engineer a deed of
dedication containing a metes and bounds description of all easements,
two paper prints, plus "as-built" plans and profiles drawn to a scale of
one inch equals five feet vertically, which plans and profiles shall be
based, on a final survey and shall be the United States Coast and
Geodetic Control Survey datum. Such drawing shall show how streets
and other improvements were actually constructed or installed. The
following data must be shown with measurements from the property
lines:
1. Plans and profiles of the streets showing elevations as constructed
and reference bench marks.
2. Plans and profiles of sanitary storm sewers showing elevations of
inverts of manholes and catch basins and elevations of inlet
gratings and manhole rims; also locations of sanitary sewer,
laterals dimensioned from main and reference dimensions to "T" or
"V" connections from manholes. Acceptance of streets and
improvements by the Township and release of any performance
guaranty shall be in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55-53.
18-704 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-705
AO:976
18-706. Impact Fees. [Ord. No. 2013-62]
B. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued while an applicant,
owner, or developer is awaiting approval and acceptance of the
roadway or access way. The temporary certificate of occupancy shall be
revoked if the Township public works department or any municipal
service is blocked from access on said roadway.
A. Purpose and intent. This section is enacted to establish the mechanism
for the imposition of impact fees upon development to finance the
capital costs of acquiring, establishing, upgrading, expanding, and
constructing public facilities that are necessary to accommodate such
development. This section is intended to assure that development bears
an appropriate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary to
provide such public facilities within the Township of Lakewood and its
service areas as are required to serve the needs arising out of
development, as well as to comply with the Municipal Land Use Act,
N.J.S.A. 40A:55D-1 et seq. ("MLUL"). The Township of Lakewood, by
adopting this section, is not intending to limit its authority to finance
public facilities by any other means authorized by law.
B. Definitions. Unless otherwise defined in this section, all words shall
have the same meanings as set forth in the MLUL or The Lakewood
Township Unified Development Ordinance of 2005 ("UDO"). As of the
date of passage of this section, those terms and definitions are as
follows:
1. CAPITAL COSTS – The cost to construct, expand or improve public
facilities, including the cost of land and legal, engineering and
design costs to construct, expand or improve public facilities,
including legal, engineering and design costs. "Capital costs" do
not include other non-capital costs to construct, expand or improve
public facilities, or vehicles, or the costs of such equipment as the
Township may acquire, rent or use to construct, expand or improve
public facilities for which an impact fee is being collected.
2. DEVELOPER – A person or business entity that constructs or
creates a land development.
3. IMPACT FEES – Contributions of cash, land or interests in land, or
any other items of value that are required of developers by the
Township.
4. LAND DEVELOPMENT OR DEVELOPMENT – The construction, or
modification, of improvements to real property in the Township that
adds residential dwelling units in the Township; or that results in
nonresidential uses that create the need for new, expanded or
improved public facilities in the Township.
5. PUBLIC FACILITIES – Streets, other transportation facilities,
traffic control devices, facilities that collect and treat sewage,
18-705 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-706
AO:977
facilities to collect and treat storm and surface water, facilities
to pump, store and distribute water, parks, playgrounds, land on
which athletic fields will be located, solid waste and recycling
facilities, fire protection facilities, law enforcement facilities,
emergency medical facilities and libraries. "Public facilities" does
not include facilities owned by school districts.
6. RESIDENTIAL EQUIVALENT UNIT (REU) – Is the unit of measure
for calculating impact fees. One REU is equivalent to one dwelling
unit. Impact fees are charged on a "per REU" basis.
7. SERVICE AREA – A Geographic area delineated by the Township
within which there are public facilities. The service area of the
Township is equivalent to the full geographic area of the Township.
8. SERVICE STANDARD – A certain quantity or quality of public
facilities relative to a certain number of persons, parcels of land or
other appropriate measure. The same service standard is in place
through the entire Township.
9. TOWNSHIP – The Township of Lakewood.
C. Establishment of Impact Fees. The following impact fees are
established by the Township:
1. Transportation Impact Fees;
2. Parks and Recreation Impact Fees; and
3. Public Facilities Impact Fees.
The impact fees created in this section shall apply to all development in
the Township, whether the property is owned privately or by any political
corporation, governmental subdivision or agency thereof, or any nonprofit
organization, including any religious or other eleemosynary organization.
Impact fees are created and intended to permit the Township to recover
from developers a fair share of the capital costs necessary to accommodate
land development and maintain current levels of service to those
developing areas of the Township.
D. Documentation Required. Certain Township documents contain and
support needs assessments for the impact fees established in this
section. The following documents shall be kept on file and available for
public inspection in the office of the Township Clerk:
Township of Lakewood Comprehensive Master Plan and Smart Growth
Plan, as amended. These documents shall be revised and/or updated
as growth and other circumstances in the Township make updating
appropriate.
E. Segregated Accounts Required. Revenues collected by the Township as
impact fees shall be placed by the Township in segregated interestbearing
accounts and shall be accounted for separately from other
18-706 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-706
AO:978
funds of the Township. Funds collected from impact fees shall be used
solely for the purpose of paying the proportionate costs of providing
public facilities that may become necessary due to development. These
costs may include debt service on bonds or similar debt instruments,
when the debt has been incurred for the purpose of proceeding with
designated public facilities projects prior to the collection of all
anticipated impact fees for that project, reimbursement of the Township
for advances of other funds or reserved where the advance is made for
the purpose of proceeding with designated public facility projects prior
to the collection of all anticipated impact fees for that project, and for
such other purposes as are first approved by the Township Committee.
F. Reduction in Impact Fee for Low Cost Housing. The Township
Committee may, in its sole discretion; act to lessen the size of the
impact fees imposed on land development that will provide low-cost
housing. Impact fees so reduced shall not be shifted to or collected from
any other development in the Township.
G. Review and Standards. The Township Committee shall periodically
review its public facilities needs assessment and amount of the impact
fees established herein and modify them as necessary to account for
changing facility needs, inflation, revised cost estimates, capital
improvements, changes in other funding sources applicable to public
facility projects and other relevant factors.
All Impact Fees imposed:
1. Shall bear a rational relationship to the need for new, expanded or
improved public facilities required to serve land development.
2. Shall not exceed the proportionate share of the capital costs
required to serve land development, as compared to existing uses
of land within the Township.
3. Shall be based upon actual capital costs or reasonable estimates of
capital costs for new, expanded or improved public facilities.
4. Shall be reduced to compensate for other capital costs imposed by
the Township with respect to land development to provide or pay
for public facilities, including special assessments, special charges,
land dedications or fees in lieu of land dedications under MLUL,
UDO or any other items of value.
5. Shall be reduced to compensate for monies received from the
federal or state government specifically to provide or pay for the
public facilities for which the impact fees are imposed.
6. Shall not include amounts necessary to address existing
deficiencies in public facilities.
H. Severability. If any section of this ordinance or portion thereof shall be
declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, unlawful or
18-706 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-706
AO:979
18-707. (Reserved)71
unenforceable, such decision shall apply only to the specific section or
portion thereof directly specified in the decision, and shall not affect
the validity of any other sections or portions of this ordinance. The
remainder of the ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.
71.Editor's Note: Former § 18-707, Tax Map/GIS Database Update Fees containing portions of
Ordinance No. 2014-53 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2015-33. See Volume
I, § 2-76 for these fees.
18-706 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-707
AO:980
ARTICLE VIII
DESIGN STANDARDS
18-800. General.
No plan shall be approved by the Board unless the use meets the
performance standards herein set forth and such State or Federal standards
as may be more stringent than those set forth herein. Failure to comply with
the performance standards at any time after the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy shall be cause for revocation of such certificate. In reviewing
any plan, the Board shall consider those elements as specifically noted in §§
18-801 to 18-817.
18-801. Easements.
18-802. Height Exceptions.
18-803. Landscaping and Buffers. [Ord. No. 06-30 § 2; Ord. No.
2012-26; Ord. No. 2013-17; Ord. No. 2018-65]
When buffer areas are required as part of a site plan, they shall be in
accordance with the following, unless otherwise specified in this chapter:
A. Easements must be provided by the applicant when required by the
Township, utility company or applicable agencies.
A. The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to spires, belfries,
or cupolas not used for human occupancy; bridges, residential
chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks, bulkheads, similar
features and necessary mechanical appurtenances, usually carried
above the roof level. Such features shall be erected only to such height
as is necessary to accomplish the purpose they are to serve.
B. Under particular circumstances, all rooftop equipment shall be
reasonably screened.
A. General design requirements.
1. Buffer areas shall be developed in an aesthetic manner for the
primary purposes of screening views. Buffer widths shall be
measured perpendicularly to lot and street lines. No structure,
storage of materials or parking of vehicles shall be permitted in a
buffer area unless otherwise permitted herein. The standards for
the location and design of buffer areas are intended to provide
flexibility in order to provide effective buffers. The location and
design of buffers shall consider the use of the portion of the
property being screened; the distance between the use and the
adjoining property line; differences in elevations; the type of buffer
such as dense planting, existing woods, a wall or fence; buffer
height; buffer width; and other combinations of man-made and
natural features.
18-800 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-803
AO:981
B. General standards.
1. All buffer areas shall consist of either grass or ground cover,
together with a screen of live shrubs or scattered planting of live
trees, shrubs or other plant material meeting the following
requirements:
a. The preservation of all natural wooded tracts shall be an
integral part of all site plans and may be calculated as part of
the required buffer area, provided that the growth is of a
density and the area has sufficient width to serve the purpose
of a buffer. Where additional plantings are necessary to
establish an appropriate tone for an effective buffer, said
plantings may be required.
b. Plant materials used in screen planting for parking areas and
driveways shall be at least three feet in height when planted
and be of such density as will obscure, throughout the full
course of the year, the glare of automobile headlights emitted
from the premises.
c. Trees shall be at least six to eight feet in height and two inches
in caliper when planted and be of a species common to the
area, and listed on the approved plant species list incorporated
herein, and be of balled and burlapped nursery stock and be
free of insect and disease.
d. At any time, any plant material which does not live and which
diminishes the integrity of the buffer shall be replaced within
one (1) year or one growing season, as determined by the
Municipal Engineer.
e. Screen plantings and landscaping shall be broken at points of
vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress to assure a clear
sight triangle at all street and driveway intersections.
C. Landscaping-General.
Landscape plans shall conform to the following general design
principles.
1. Landscaping shall be provided as part of site plan and subdivision
design. It shall be conceived in a total pattern throughout the site,
integrating the various elements of site design creating a pleasing
site character.
2. Landscaping shall include plant materials such as trees, shrubs,
groundcover, perennials, and annuals and other materials such as
rocks, water, sculpture, art, walls, fences and building and paving
materials.
18-803 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-803
AO:982
3. Use landscaping to accent and complement buildings. For example,
groupings of tall trees to break up long, low buildings and lower
plantings for taller buildings.
4. Provide for a variety and mixture of landscaping. The variety shall
consider susceptibility to disease, colors, season, textures, shapes,
blossoms, and foliage.
5. Local soil conditions and water availability shall be considered in
the choice of landscaping.
6. Consider the impact of any proposed landscaping plan at various
time intervals so that, for example, shrubs do not grow and
eventually block sight distances or encroach upon roads or
sidewalks.
7. All landscape plants shall be specimens conforming to the
American Association of Nurserymen Standards and/or Landscape
Plans and Specifications for Quality and Installation.
8. Assure that no aspect of the landscape design inhibits access to the
development by emergency vehicles.
9. A landscape plan, when required, shall be submitted with each plan
application, unless an exception is granted by the approving
authority. The plan shall identify existing and proposed trees as
required by ordinance, shrubs, groundcover, natural features and
other landscaping elements. The plan should show where they are
or will be located and planting and/or construction details. When
existing natural growth is proposed to remain, applicant shall
include in the plans proposed methods to protect existing trees and
growth during and after construction.
10. Site Protection and General Planting Requirements:
a. Topsoil Preservation. Topsoil moved during the course of
construction shall be redistributed on all regraded surfaces so
as to provide at least four inches of even cover to all disturbed
areas of the development and shall be stabilized by seeding,
sod or planting.
b. Removal of Debris. All stumps and other tree parts, litter,
brush, weeds; excess or scrap building materials, or other
debris shall be removed from the site and disposed of in
accordance with the law. No tree stumps, portions of tree
trunks or limbs shall be buried anywhere in the development.
All dead or dying trees, as determined by the Municipal
Engineer, standing or fallen, shall be removed from the site. If
trees and limbs are reduced to chips, they may, subject to
approval of the Municipal Engineer, be used as mulch in
landscaped areas.
18-803 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-803
AO:983
c. Protection of Existing Plantings. An effort should be made to
save specimen trees identified. Whenever feasible, material or
temporary soil deposits shall not be placed within four feet of
shrubs or 10 feet of trees designated to be retained on the
preliminary and/or final plat. During construction, protective
barriers or tree wells shall be installed around each plant and/
or group of plants that are to remain on the site. Barriers shall
not be supported by the plants they are protecting, but shall be
self supporting. They shall be a minimum of four feet high and
constructed of a durable material that will last until
construction is completed. Snow fences and silt fences are
examples of acceptable barriers.
d. Slope Plantings. Landscaping of the area of all cuts and fills
and/or trenches shall be sufficient to prevent erosion and all
roadways slopes steeper than one foot vertically to three feet
horizontally shall be planted with groundcovers appropriate
for the purpose and soil conditions, water availability and
environment.
e. Additional Landscaping. In residential developments, besides
the screening and street trees required, additional plantings or
landscaping elements shall be required throughout the
subdivision where necessary for privacy or for aesthetic
reasons in accordance with a planting plan approved by the
Board. In nonresidential developments, all areas of the site not
occupied by buildings and required improvements shall be
landscaped by the planting of grass or other groundcover,
shrubs, and trees or kept in a natural state, as part of a plan
approved by the Board.
f. Planting Specifications. Deciduous trees shall have a minimum
of at least a two inch caliper at planting. Size of evergreens and
shrubs shall be allowed to vary depending on setting and type
of shrub. Only nursery grown plant materials shall be
acceptable; and all plantings shall be according to accepted
horticultural standards. Dead or dying plants shall be replaced
by the developer within the same planting season as long as
the maintenance and performance bonds are in place.
g. Plant Species. The plant species selected should be hardy for
the particular climatic zone in which the development is
located and appropriate in terms of function and size.
D. Street Trees
1. Location. Street trees shall be installed on both sides of all streets
in accordance with the approved landscape plan. Trees shall either
be massed at critical points or spaced evenly along the street. All
developments shall provide a shade tree easement.
18-803 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-803
AO:984
When trees are planted at predetermined intervals along streets,
spacing shall depend on tree size as follows:
Tree Size (height in feet at maturity)
Planting Interval (in feet)
a. Medium Trees (30 - 40): 40 - 50
b. Small Trees (to 30): 30 - 40
When the spacing interval exceeds 40 feet, small ornamental trees
can be spaced between the large trees. Trees shall be planted so as
not to interfere with utilities, roadways, sidewalks, sight easements, or
street lights. Tree location, landscaping design and spacing plan shall
be approved by the Board as part of the landscape plan.
2. Tree Type. Tree type shall vary depending on overall effect desired.
Selection of tree type shall be approved by the Board.
3. Planting Specifications. All trees shall have a minimum caliper of
two inches of substantially uniform size and shape, and have
straight trunks. Trees shall be properly planted and staked and
provision made by the applicant for regular watering and
maintenance until they are established. Dead or dying trees shall
be replaced by the applicant during the same planting season.
4. All street trees shall be located so as not to interfere with
underground or overhead utility lines and any well or septic
systems.
E. Buffering
1. All areas not devoted to structures, parking areas, or other
required uses shall be appropriately landscaped and maintained.
Whenever reasonable, natural features shall be preserved
2. Buffering shall be required when topographical or other barriers do
not provide reasonable screening and when the Board determines
that there is a need to shield the site from adjacent properties and
to minimize adverse impacts such as incompatible land uses, noise,
glaring light, and traffic. In small lot developments, when building
design and siting do not provide privacy, the Board may require
landscaping, fences or walls to ensure privacy.
a. Except as otherwise stated in this chapter, non-residential
development shall provide a minimum 25 foot wide buffer area
as measured from the property line toward the proposed use.
Except as otherwise stated in this chapter, the buffer shall be
increased to 50 feet wide where the non-residential
development is adjacent to an existing single-family residential
development or an area zoned for residential land uses.
18-803 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-803
AO:985
b. Multi-family or townhouse adjacent to an existing single-family
residential development or an area zoned for single-family
residential land uses shall provide a buffer area of at least 30
feet in width, as measured from the property line toward the
proposed use. The Board may reduce the required buffer to 15
feet in width if the developer provides a dense landscaping
screen.
c. Proposed major residential subdivisions adjacent to an existing
commercial use shall provide a buffer area of at least 30 feet in
width, as measured from the property line toward the proposed
use. The Board may reduce the required buffer to 15 feet in
width if the developer provides a dense landscaping screen.
d. Garbage and recycling collection and utility areas, and loading
and unloading areas shall be screened wherever reasonable
and appropriate. Garbage and recycling collection areas shall
be designed in accordance with the requirements of § 18-809.
e. Where residential subdivisions abut higher order streets
(collectors or arterials), adjacent lots should front on lower
order streets, and a landscaped buffer area shall be provided
along the property line abutting the higher order road. The
buffer strip shall be a minimum of 25 feet wide or wider where
necessary for the health and safety of the residents and include
both trees and shrubs. The Board may reduce the required
buffer to twelve and one half (12.5) feet in width if the
developer provides a dense landscaping screen.
f. In the HD6 and HD7 zoning districts, residential development
fronting on a State Highway shall provide a hundred (100) foot
front yard setback and buffer to the State Highway right-ofway.
This setback and buffer shall be preserved in its natural
state. On those sites where no existing vegetation is present or
existing vegetation is inadequate to provide screening, the
applicant shall suitably grade and plant a screen in the setback
area, such that this planting shall provide an adequate screen
of at least six feet in height so as to continually obscure the
view. All development except access roads, drives,
underground drainage and utilities within the setback and
buffer area is prohibited.
g. In the HD6 and HD7 zoning districts commercial development
fronting on a State Highway shall provide a 150 foot front yard
building setback to the State Highway right-of-way.
Development shall be permitted within this setback area up to
100 feet from the property line.
h. For the purpose of this section, existing single-family
residential development shall be defined as six or more
detached single-family dwellings fronting on residential access
18-803 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-803
AO:986
roadways as defined in the Residential Site Improvement
Standards (NJAC 5:21). The increased buffer will be required
even if only one of the dwellings in the single-family residential
development is adjacent to the proposed development,
provided that the said residential dwelling is part of a singlefamily
residential development as defined above.
i. Schools, Houses of Worship and other facilities listed in §
18-905 and 18-906 shall provide buffers in accordance with
those sections.
3. Design.
a. All setback requirements in the HD6 and HD7 zoning districts,
other than front yard setbacks, shall be imposed onto the
established buffer area identified within the project site,
except in those cases where the front yard setback of 100 feet
from a State Highway is imposed. In that case, development
shall only be allowed beyond that 100 foot setback line.
b. The required buffer area shall be suitably graded and planted
or attractively surfaced, and shall contain within such width
massed evergreen plantings that shall produce a screen of at
least six feet in height so as to continually restrict a view
beyond the buffer strip.
c. On those sites where no existing vegetation is present or if
existing vegetation is inadequate for screening, the applicant
shall provide adequate grading and planting, which shall
include evergreen plantings that shall produce a screen of at
least six feet in height.
4. Maintenance.
a. At any time, any plant material which does not live and which
diminishes the integrity of the buffer shall be replaced within
one year or one growing season, as determined by the
Municipal Engineer.
b. Landscaped areas shall be maintained at the expense of the
owner.
c. The entire buffer area, as defined by 18-803E2 above, shall be
maintained in its natural state through the establishment of a
conservation restriction on the property. This deed-restricted
area shall be free of development.
d. In those cases where the conservation restricted area is
located within a proposed commercial development or major
site plan or subdivision, the conservation area may be enforced
by the municipality or a homeowners' association.
18-803 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-803
AO:987
e. Plantings shall be watered regularly and in a manner
appropriate for the specific plant species through the first
growing season, and dead or dying plants shall be replaced by
the applicant during the next planting season, so long as
performance or maintenance bonds remain in effect.
f. No building, structures, storage of materials or parking shall
be permitted within the buffer area, unless specifically
permitted by the Board; buffer areas shall be maintained and
kept free of all debris, rubbish, weeds and tall grass.
F. Paving Materials, Walls and Fences.
1. Paving Materials. Design and choice of paving materials used in
pedestrian areas shall consider the following factors: cost,
maintenance, use, characteristics of users, appearance, safety,
availability, glare, heat, drainage, noise, compatibility with
surroundings, decorative quality and aesthetic appeal. Acceptable
materials shall include but are not limited to concrete, brick,
cement pavers, asphalt and stone.
2. Walls and fences shall be erected where required for privacy,
screening, separation, security or to serve other necessary
functions and shall comply with the provisions included in this
subsection.
3. All applications for a permit shall be accompanied with a drawing
of the proposed fence design which meets the following standards
and provides the following information:
a. The drawing shall be neatly and accurately drawn at an
appropriate scale.
b. The drawing shall show all dimensions and shall be clearly
marked.
c. The drawing shall show all easements.
4. A fence or fencing shall be defined as any wood, glass, resin,
plastic, masonry, stone or metal or any wall or hedge constructed
on the front, side or rear yard and designed to shield, screen or
protect a lot(s) or a portion of a lot(s).
5. A fence within the front yard setback area of any lot, except a
corner lot, shall not exceed four feet in height. In the case of a
corner lot, the fence in the front yard setback area designated by
the property owner as a "side yard" may not exceed six feet in
height.
Unless more stringent regulations are provided by other provisions
of this chapter, at the intersection of two or more streets, no hedge,
fence, screening strip, planting, structure or wall higher than 30
inches above curb level and no obstruction to vision, other than
18-803 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-803
AO:988
a post not exceeding one foot in diameter, shall be permitted on
any lot within the site triangle as defined by the Residential Site
Improvement Standards. Trees shall be exempt from this section
unless found specifically to present a traffic hazard.
6. Any fence located at the corner of a corner lot shall be placed at 45
degrees to each side line for a distance of 10 feet back from the
intersection of the fence line along both street sides of the lot. In
addition, any fence constructed along the street sides of a corner
lot shall meet the requirements provided for in Subsection 5 above.
No fence shall be erected in the public right-of-way.
7. No fence shall be located less than eight feet from the pavement or
cartway of any street, whether public or private.
8. No fence may be installed which exceeds eight feet in height,
however the height of the fence may be increased by one foot for
every five feet that it is set back from the property line. Fences
within the front yard setback shall be limited to the requirements
identified in Subsection 5 above.
9. No fences shall be erected so as to encroach upon adjacent
properties or public rights of way. Fence gates shall be designed to
prevent the open swing of the gate from encroaching upon adjacent
properties or public rights of way.
10. All fences shall be constructed with the face, or finished side, away
from the property and the structural side toward the interior of the
lot(s) on which it is erected.
11. All fencing shall be in conformance with the requirements for
visibility at intersections.
12. Living fences, hedges or screen plantings shall not encroach into
any sight triangle. All living fences, hedges or screen plantings
shall be maintained in a neatly trimmed condition on the property
so planted and shall be kept clear from all sidewalks and walkways.
13. All fences and walls shall be maintained in a safe, sound and
upright condition.
14. If the Zoning Officer, upon inspection, determines that any fence or
portion thereof is not being maintained in a safe, sound or upright
condition, he shall notify the owner of such fence in writing of his
findings and state briefly the reasons for such findings and order
such fence repaired or removed within 30 days of the date of the
written notice.
15. Fencing may not be erected in any yard if it acts to inhibit access to
Township fire, police and emergency medical services.
16. These restrictions shall not be applied so as to restrict the erection
of a wall for the purpose of retaining earth.
18-803 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-803
AO:989
17. These restrictions shall not be applied so as to restrict the erection,
alteration or reconstruction of fences used in connection with
farms and farm operations except insofar as such fences might
affect the public safety.
18. Temporary fences such as snow fences, expandable fences,
collapsible fences, canvas, and cloth fences may be permitted upon
a determination by the Zoning Officer that such fencing is
necessary to inhibit the dispersal of airborne material during
construction activity. These fences must be removed and not left
on-site after the activity requiring such fence is completed prior to
any bonds being released.
19. The following fences are prohibited in all residential districts:
barbed wire, razor wire, electric and other similar type fences.
20. Fences made of tarps and other similar type fences are expressly
prohibited in all zoning districts except as provided in Subsection
18 above.
21. Private Fences for Pools. In certain and limited cases, the Zoning
Officer may issue a zoning permit for a privacy fence for pools
exceeding eight feet in height, provided the proposed fence meets
the following criteria and the applicant follows the procedure
outlined below:
a. The purpose of the fence is to provide visual screening of the
pool area.
b. The owners of all of the contiguous properties confirm in
writing that they have no objection to the proposed fence.
c. The fence is located and designed so as to have the least
impact on adjacent properties.
d. The applicant shall submit to the Zoning Officer a letter signed
by a licensed engineer or architect certifying that the proposed
fence is structurally sound and does not pose a safety hazard.
e. In no case shall the fence height exceed 14 feet.
f. The proposed fence complies with all other Lakewood
Township fence requirements.
g. Application Procedure. An application for a Lakewood
Township Construction Permit for the proposed fence is
required.
h. Notification. At the time of the application to the Zoning Officer
for the permit, the applicant shall notify all contiguous
property owners by certified mail of the application. The notice
shall indicate the nature of the application and the fact that
comments or objections regarding the application may be
18-803 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-803
AO:990
submitted to the Zoning Officer within 10 days of the receipt
of the certified notice. Copies of the mail receipts shall be
provided to the Zoning Officer.
22. No improvements such as fences or buffer landscaping shall be
permitted within any drainage easement.
G. Landscape Maintenance. A landscape management/maintenance
specification shall be provided in conjunction with all approved major
subdivisions as to street trees, common open space, and areas to be
dedicated to the public and all approved major site plans.
1. Installation and Inspection of Landscaping. The following
installation and performance and inspection principles and
procedures should be applied to all landscape installations.
a. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued prior to the
submission of an approved landscaping plan. The proposed
landscape as shown on the approved landscape plan must be
installed, inspected, and approved or bonded prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
b. If changes to the approved plan are made prior to or during
construction, revised or record drawings must be submitted to
the Township Engineer, who may approve such amendments,
for approval. Such revisions shall be indicated by a formal
letter of request with the reasons for the modification to the
Township with a copy to the Township Engineer. If the
Township Engineer, in his/her professional judgment,
determines that the change in the landscaping plan is
substantial, the application or plan should be referred to the
appropriate Board for approval. If the Township Engineer
determines that unapproved or inadequate landscape is
implemented, then appropriate replacement shall be required
prior to the release of any performance bonds.
c. Subsequent to landscape installation and until release of
performance and/or maintenance bonds, the Township shall
have the right to inspect all landscape areas for conformance
to the approved plans, proper installation and maintenance,
and performance of landscape material.
H. Tree protection.
1. Purpose.
The purpose of this section is to establish protective regulations for
trees within the Township of Lakewood in order to control problems
of flooding, soil erosion, air and noise pollution, water quality; to
protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizenry of the
Township; and to promote quality development in the Township.
The intent of this section is to encourage the protection of the
18-803 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-803
AO:991
greatest number of trees within the tree protection zone and of
large specimen trees throughout the Township, regardless of
location. Tree removal shall be in accordance with this subsection
and Chapter 19 of the Code of Lakewood (Protection of Trees). A
permit shall be obtained from the Township prior to the removal
of any trees pursuant to Chapter 19. Violations of Chapter 19 are
subject to penalty by the Township as set forth in that chapter.
2. Definitions.
a. AESTHETIC IMPROVEMENT CUT – The removal, to the
minimum extent possible, of the smallest and poorest trees so
as to permit land development while retaining the maximum
number of larger and healthier trees.
b. CLEAR CUTTING – The removal of all standing trees on a lot or
portion of a lot.
c. CROWN – The branches and foliage of a tree; the upper portion
of a tree.
d. DISTURBANCE ZONE – That portion of a lot covered by
existing or proposed buildings, structures or improvements
and within a certain distance around same as noted below:
(1) House or building - 20 feet (averaged around all sides)
(2) Detached Garage or Accessory Structures - 15 feet
(3) Pool - 15 feet
(4) Driveway/ sidewalk - five feet
(5) Septic fields — As required by Ocean County Board of
Health
(6) Underground utility - five feet
(7) Paved parking/drive aisle - five feet
(8) Improvement (other) - five feet
e. DRIP LINE – The perimeter line on the ground measured from
the outermost edge of the vertical plane established by the
branches of the tree.
f. FORESTER, PROFESSIONAL – A person who has a B.S. degree
from a four-year School of Forestry accredited by the Society of
American Foresters.
g. NON-SPECIMEN TREE – Any tree not included under
Subsection i below.
h. SELECTIVE CUTTING – The removal of larger trees on an
individual basis while leaving trees of a lesser size.
18-803 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-803
AO:992
i. SPECIMEN TREE – Any tree from the following list with a
diameter exceeding the size specified:
Tree species, cultivar or
variety
Diameter Exceeding
A. concolor 18"
Acer negundo 18"
A. nigrum 25"
A. platanoides 29"
A. rubrum 30"
A. saccharinum 35"
A. saccharum 25"
Betula nigra 30
Carya ovata 15"
Catalpa sepciosa 25"
Cedrus atlantica glauca 15"
Celtis Occidentalis 13"
Cryptomeria japonica 13"
Cornus florida 13"
Fagus grandiflora 13"
Fraxinus americana 26"
F. pennsylvanica 25"
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis 24"
Gymnocladus dioicus 27"
Ilex opaca 12"
Juglans nigra 29"
Juniperus virginiana 12"
Liquidambar styraciflua 25"
Liriodendron tulipifera 40"
Magnolia virginiana 16"
Malus Varieties 15"
Nyssa sylvatica 25"
Oxydendrum arboretum 12"
Picea abies 25"
P. pungens 'Glauca' 18"
Pinus echinata 20"
18-803 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-803
AO:993
Tree species, cultivar or
variety
Diameter Exceeding
P. strobus 24"
Platanus occidentalis 30"
Populus deltoides 21"
Prunus serotina 20"
Quercus alba 20"
Q. bicolor 25"
Q. coccinea 25"
Q. palustris 25"
Q. phellos 25"
Q. prinus 24"
Q. rubra 24"
Q. stellata 24"
Q. veluntia 25"
Sciadopitys verticillata 15"
Taxodium distichum 24"
Ulmus americana 34"
j. THINNING – The removal of undesirable, competitive,
diseased or damaged trees so as to cultivate and improve the
development of remaining trees on the lot.
k. TREE – Any woody perennial plant usually having one main
stem or trunk and a more or less definitely formed crown, and
which has the potential based on its genus and species to grow
to a height of 10 feet or more.
l. TREE DIAMETER – The width of a tree, equal to 7/22 of the
circumference, measured four and a half (4.5) feet above the
ground.
m. TREE MASS – A group of trees represented by a line depicting
a common drip line.
n. TREE PROTECTION ZONE – That portion of a lot outside of the
Disturbance Zone.
o. TREE REMOVAL – The cutting down of a tree, the
transplanting of a tree to a site other than that under
development, or the infliction of damage to a tree which is of
such severity as to show evidence of irreparable harm, within
two years, leading to the ultimate death of a tree. Examples of
said serious damage include, but are not limited to: damage
18-803 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-803
AO:994
inflicted to the root system by machinery, storage of materials,
and soil compaction; changing the natural grade above or
below the root system and around the trunk; damage inflicted
on the tree permitting fungus infection or pest infestation;
excessive pruning; excessive thinning; paving with concrete,
asphalt, or other impervious material within such proximity.
p. TREE ROOT AREA – The area under a tree extending from the
trunk to the drip line.
3. Applicability.
a. On major site plan and major subdivision applications larger
than five acres the applicant may chose to prepare an
averaging plan, wherein the existing trees in a sample area of
one-quarter (1/4) acre are used as the basis for determining
the estimated number of trees and their diameter to be
removed for the entire site. The location of the sample area
shall represent the average density be to the approval of the
Board Planner and Engineer.
b. At the time of a preliminary major subdivision or site plan
application submitted pursuant to this chapter, a Tree
Protection Management Plan must be submitted if there are 10
or more total non-specimen trees (12" in caliper or greater) or
three or more total specimen trees, cut or removed or
proposed to be cut or removed.
c. The standards contained herein shall be considered the
minimum standards to be met and maintained. Standards
established by other Township ordinances, or by State and
Federal rules and regulations shall apply where those
standards are more restrictive than the standards set forth
herein.
d. Plans for the harvesting of timber and or silviculture shall be in
accordance with the standards and recommendations of the
New Jersey State Bureau of Forestry. A copy of such plan must
be filed with the Shade Tree Commission of Lakewood at least
15 days prior to the harvesting of timber and/or silviculture for
informational purposes.
e. Any person claiming that he has conducted harvesting of
timber in accordance with the standards and recommendations
of the New Jersey State Bureau of Forestry prior to the date of
adoption of this chapter, within 60 days after the adoption of
this chapter, make application to the Planning Board for a
certificate of prior use. The applicant shall provide the
Planning Board with a copy of an approved forestry
management plan by the New Jersey State Bureau of Forestry.
If deemed acceptable, the Planning Board shall issue a
certificate of prior use relieving the applicant of an obligation
18-803 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-803
AO:995
to secure a tree removal permit for continued operations of
said timber harvesting. Failure of the Board to act within 90
days shall be deemed to be an approval of the request for a
certificate of prior use. Any person who does not file for such a
certificate within 60 days of the date of adoption of this chapter
shall conclusively be presumed to be bound by the terms of this
section.
f. No tree shall be removed from a conservation easement unless
approved by the Township Engineer.
4. Requirements of a Tree Protection Management Plan.
If required by this section, the submission of a Tree Protection
Management Plan should indicate the following information on a
plot plan:
a. Applicant's name, street address, telephone number;
b. Lot owner's name, street address, telephone number;
c. Block and Lot number;
d. Location of all existing or proposed buildings, driveways,
septic fields, easements, underground utility lines, and other
improvements;
e. Existing or proposed rights of way;
f. Location of all proposed trees having a diameter of ten (10")
inches or greater or as per the averaging plan indicated in
Subsection 3a above, to be cut, removed, or damaged in such a
way as to cause a need for their removal, noting each tree by
its species, size and general health condition;
g. Specifications for the removal of existing trees and for the
protection of existing trees to be preserved;
h. Specific proposals for planting replacement trees, if
applicable;
i. Existing topography within 20 feet of the proposed disturbed
area and proposed grading, if any;
j. Location of existing water courses, wetlands, and floodplains.
5. Review of applications for a Tree Protection Management Plan.
a. All applications for a Tree Protection Management Plan shall
be immediately referred by the Administrative Officer to the
Environmental Commission, Shade Tree Commission and
Board.
18-803 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-803
AO:996
The Environmental and Shade Tree Commission shall provide
an advisory, non-binding, recommendation of approval or
denial of the Tree Protection Management Plan application
to the Board. Failure on the part of the Environmental
Commission or Shade Tree Commission to provide a
recommendation within 20 days, provided that the
Environmental Commission and Shade Tree Commission
receives the application at least 10 days in advance of its
regularly scheduled meeting, shall be deemed a
recommendation for approval. In the event that the
Environmental Commission or Shade Tree Commission
recommends denial of an application, they shall specify, in
writing, the reason(s) for their recommendation. The Board
shall review and consider the recommendations of the
Environmental Commission and Shade Tree Commission and
the recommendations shall be made a part of the record before
either Board. The Board shall have the authority to approve or
to deny the Tree Protection Management Plan as part of the
subdivision and/or site plan review process.
b. The Board shall review the application for a Tree Protection
Management Plan and, if necessary, have the Township
Planner, Engineer, Professional Forester, and/or some other
consultant as may be required, review the application and
inspect the site. All reviews and inspections by the Township
Planner, Engineer, Professional Forester, and/or other
consultants shall be paid for by the applicant through the
deposit of escrow funds in accordance with a fee schedule
adopted by the Township Committee.
c. The Board or Environmental Commission or Shade Tree
Commission shall consider the following factors in reviewing
an application for a Tree Protection Management Plan and in
deciding whether to either recommend approval or denial, or
to approve or deny a Tree Protection Management Plan:
(1) Impact on the growth of remaining trees;
(2) Impact on existing drainage patterns;
(3) Impact on soil erosion or increased dust;
(4) Impact on the vegetative screening between adjacent land
uses; and
(5) Impact on woodland corridors, stream corridors,
greenways, and wildlife habitat.
d. There is hereby established a presumption that each and every
tree of 10 inches of diameter or as per the averaging plan
indicated in Subsection 3a above or greater located within the
tree protection zone shall be preserved at its location on the
18-803 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-803
AO:997
site. Each such tree located within the tree protection zone or
each specimen tree may be removed only if the Board finds
that the applicant has set forth:
(1) That it is a necessity to remove trees which pose a safety
hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or threatens to
cause disruption of public services.
(2) That it is a necessity to remove trees which pose a safety
hazard to a building.
(3) That it is a necessity to remove diseased trees, trees
infested with destructive insects liable to infect healthy
trees on the subject or adjacent property, or trees
weakened by age, fire or other injury.
(4) That it is a necessity to observe good forestry practices,
i.e., the number of healthy trees that a given parcel of land
will support when documented by a report prepared on
behalf of the applicant by a professional forester or a
certified landscape architect.
(5) That it is a necessity for compliance with other sections of
this chapter or with other codes, such as health and other
environmental ordinances.
(6) Other conditions which, in the judgment of the Board,
warrant the removal of a tree.
e. No building permit shall be issued until the applicant has
obtained approval of its Tree Protection Management Plan
application.
6. Planting of new trees - Replacement of specimen trees.
a. Where the Board, whichever has jurisdiction, determines that
it is impossible to retain specimen trees as defined by this
section, due to cutting, filling, or other construction activity,
the applicant shall plant one (1") inch of new deciduous tree
diameter for every four (4") inches of existing specimen tree
diameter removed. Replacement deciduous trees should have a
minimum diameter of two inches measured six inches above
the ground. Replacement evergreen trees shall have a
minimum height of six feet and shall be considered the
equivalent of a two inch deciduous tree. Replacement trees
should be shown on the Tree Protection Management Plan for
review. Replanting should be done according to the standards
specified by the American Nurserymen's Association. Trees
included as part of any required buffer may be considered
towards the applicant's replanting obligation.
18-803 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-803
AO:998
b. In lieu of replanting, the applicant may chose to make a
contribution to the Township in an amount equal to the value of
the required tree replacement. Such funds shall be placed in
an account specified for landscape improvements throughout
the Township. The value of the tree replacement shall be
determined based upon quantity take-off figures as used by the
Township Engineer or designee to prepare a bond estimate.
c. Where practical, replanting shall be encouraged on-site.
7. Criteria for the selection of new trees.
When an applicant is required to replace trees as described above,
the applicant should replace the trees with a similar species that
were removed or, with the approval of the Board, choose other
tree species, preferably native to Lakewood Township. In selecting
replacement trees, the following positive criteria should be used.
These guidelines should also be followed in choosing trees
proposed to be retained or cleared.
a. Species longevity;
b. Native to the area;
c. Hardiness (wind firmness, climate requirements,
characteristics of soil to hold tree);
d. Resistance to insect and disease attack and to pollution;
e. Aesthetic values (autumn, coloration, type of flowers or fruit,
form characteristics);
f. Low maintenance and care (pruning, etc.);
g. High wildlife values;
h. Comfort to surroundings;
i. Free of disease, rot, or other damage to tree;
j. Protection of pedestrians, vehicles, and buildings;
k. Size at maturity;
l. Effect of soil retention and erosion control; and
m. Value as a noise buffer.
8. Protection of existing specimen trees.
Applicants should exercise due care to protect specimen trees
to be retained from damage during construction. The following
procedures shall be observed in order to protect retained trees.
a. Protection from mechanical injury.
18-803 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-803
AO:999
(1) Prior to any grubbing or clearing, all trees to be retained
should be protected from equipment damage by enclosing
the drip lines of the trees with sections of silt fence,
orange snow fence, or boards, wired together. All exposed
roots and low hanging branches should be equally
protected. Groups of trees may be protected by fencing the
drip lines of the entire tree mass to be retained.
(2) Heavy equipment operators should not damage existing
tree trunks and roots. Feeder roots should not be cut
closer than the distance of the drip line from the tree
trunks and should be cut with pruning shears or other
tools which will make a clean cut.
(3) Specimen tree trunks and exposed roots accidentally
damaged during construction should be protected from
further damage. Damaged branches should be sawed off at
the branch collar. No shellac or pruning paint should be
used. When the portion of the tree to be removed is
diseased, the pruning equipment should be dipped in
alcohol or disinfectant prior to use on another tree to
prevent the spread of the disease.
(4) Specimen deciduous trees should be given an application
of liquid slow release, low nitrogen, all purpose fertilizer to
aid in their recovery from possible damage caused by
construction operations. Such application should be made
at a distance of one foot from the trunk to the drip line and
should be made as soon as construction is completed and
again one year after the first application has been made.
(5) Specimen trees should not be used for roping, cables,
signs or fencing. Nails and spikes should not be driven into
trees.
(6) Tree climbing spikes shall not be used by tree care
personnel on specimen trees.
(7) The area around the base of existing specimen trees
should be left open to provide access for water and
nutrients. Therefore, no impervious cover, storage of
equipment, materials, debris, or fill should be allowed
within the drip line of any existing tree to be retained.
b. Protection from grade change for specimen trees.
(1) If an increase of the grade is proposed that negatively
impacts a specimen tree, the applicant should install
either:
(a) A system of gravel and drain tiles at the old soil level
opening into a dry well built around the trunk and
18-803 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-803
AO:1000
designed for each tree, individually fitting the contour
of the land so that it drains water away from the tree
trunk.
(b) A retaining wall between the existing grade and the
higher grade. A detailed plan for each proposed
retaining wall should be provided.
(c) If a decrease of the grade is proposed that negatively
impacts a specimen tree, the applicant should initiate
one of the following methods to protect the trees:
i. Terracing the grade at the drip line and out from
the tree.
ii. A retaining wall between the existing grade and
the lower grade. A detailed plan for each
proposed retaining wall should be provided.
c. Protection from excavation.
(1) When digging trenches for utility lines and other similar
uses, the applicant should adhere to the following, listed in
order of preference:
(a) If possible, trenches should bypass the root area.
(b) If it is impossible for the trenches to bypass the root
area, trenches should be tunneled under the trees
where practicable.
(c) If trenches must be dug along the side of a tree, the
following precautions should be observed.
i. Trenches should be no closer to the trunk than
half the distance from the drip line.
ii. As few roots as possible should be cut.
iii. If roots are cut, they should be cut as cleanly as
possible.
iv. The trench should be backfilled as soon as
possible, avoiding soil compaction.
d. Protection during construction clean-up.
(1) All construction debris should be hauled away. No such
debris should be burned or buried.
(2) Fences and barriers around trees should be the last thing
to be removed from the site, prior to the installation of
additional landscaping or building occupancy.
9. Protection of tree save and buffer areas.
18-803 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-803
AO:1001
18-804. Lighting.
Prior to grubbing or clearing, all tree save and buffer areas shall be
protected by enclosing such area within an orange snow fence or
similar visible protective fencing.
A. The purpose of this section is to provide minimum standards and
regulations for lighting facilities for all sections and zones of the
Township that will afford safety, convenience, and the ability to
advertise, and at the same time, avoid needless light pollution, driving
hazards, non-compatible adjacent lighting plans, and annoyance to
neighboring property owners.
B. All lighting installations shall be designed to be energy efficient to the
degree consistent with both reasonable cost and the conservation of
non-renewable natural resources.
C. All lighting installations shall be designed to reflect the needs and
atmosphere of the general neighborhood, and adjacent existing
installations. Conflicts of lighting types, methods, and color
temperature are to be avoided wherever possible.
D. All applications for Board approval of commercial and residential site
plans and major subdivisions shall include a complete lighting plan,
including luminaire type, wattage, pole height and type, lighting levels
in foot-candles, and beam spread diagrams on 50 foot centers, and
point to point illumination diagrams, including perimeter levels.
E. Specific lighting requirements and minimum specifications are divided
into five categories as follows:
1. Street Lighting.
2. Parking Lot and Open Area Lighting.
3. Commercial Site Lighting.
4. Sign Lighting.
5. Residential Outdoor Lighting.
F. Illumination levels for various applications. The maintained footcandles
of illumination recommended are as indicated in the following
table:
Type of Area
Minimum
Intensity Footcandles
Average
Intensity Footcandles
Uniformity
Ratio (1)
General Street
Lighting
0.2 0.5 12:1
Shopping Center
Parking
0.4 0.8 12:1
18-803 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-804
AO:1002
18-804.01. Street Lighting.
Type of Area
Minimum
Intensity Footcandles
Average
Intensity Footcandles
Uniformity
Ratio (1)
Industrial Site
Parking
0.4 0.8 12:1
Commercial
Parking
0.5 1.0 15:1
Entrance and
Exit Roads
1.0 2.0 10:1
Residential Area
Parking and
Drive Areas
0.2 0.5 (2)
(1) The Uniformity Ratio equals the maximum lighting level over the
minimum lighting level.
(2) Minimum levels shall be required in residential use only for
townhouse, condominium, or other multifamily type of residential
use.
A. All street lighting plans shall conform to Federal, State, and County
requirements that pertain to the zone or area in question. In addition to
these requirements, the Township of Lakewood may require that type of
fixtures, poles, and lighting distribution conform to the type of area and
use involved. Wherever the Township of Lakewood requirements
directly conflict with the requirements of the aforementioned
authorities, the standards of the higher governing authority shall
prevail.
B. Whenever this section requires the installation of electric utility
installations underground, the applicant shall, in addition, provide for
the installation of underground service for street lighting.
C. Street lighting standards of a type and number approved by the
Township Engineer shall be installed at all street intersections, cul-desacs,
and elsewhere as deemed necessary.
D. The maximum distance between street lighting shall be 150 feet.
E. Street lighting standards:
1. Each applicant for development plan approval shall provide the
minimum adequate lighting to ensure safe movement of persons
and vehicles and for security purposes. Lighting standards shall be
of a type approved by the municipal agency.
18-804 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-804.01
AO:1003
18-804.02. Parking Lot and Open Area Lighting.
2. Each applicant for development plan approval shall provide within
the limits of practicability and feasibility, lighting consistent with
conservation of energy and use of renewable energy sources.
F. Luminaires shall be specified that are provided by the local utility.
A. The object of parking area lighting is to provide a safe level of
illumination to allow the orderly entrance and egress of vehicular
traffic, provide back-up maneuver vision, identify and illuminate
entrance and exit areas, and provide pedestrian and parking area
illumination that will discourage vandalism, theft, and assault. Parking
area lighting should not be used as an adjunct to advertising.
B. Luminaires. In general, the type of luminaire and pole to be used must
be matched to the area, zone, use, and size of the parking area to be lit.
The primary criteria should be light control; that is, providing a beam
spread pattern to produce an average lighting intensity as specified
above without producing areas of over intensity or below intensity
design; that is, a low uniformity ratio.
The design of luminaires for parking areas should include lamp
location, reflector type and refractor design to deliver light to areas
selected, and keep light spill from adjacent areas. A parking area
lighting design that produces "sky glow" is inefficient and an irritant to
residents, and will not be permitted.
1. Sharp cutoff type luminaires are recommended as the best
approach to lighting parking areas and the fixtures selected shall
be of the type that can be provided with sharp cutoff deflectors or
refractors. The shielding angle shall be selected to minimize
discomforting glare to an observer's eyes from the light source at
an angle below the set cutoff. Shielding shall also be employed to
prevent spillover of undesirable light to adjoining property.
2. The use of high pressure sodium or metal halide luminaires is
encouraged. Low pressure sodium luminaires may be considered in
isolated industrial areas remote from residential and commercial
zones where they will not be visible from the traveled way.
3. The maximum cutoff angle shall be used to shield light source glare
and unwanted light from adjacent properties and motorists
approaching on adjacent roads and highways. As improperly
designed or aimed lighting fixtures are an inherent danger to
motorists and pedestrians, special attention shall be given to all
site lighting designs that have boundaries that include public
vehicular traveled ways of any type, and private traveled ways that
are open to the public. All applications for site plan approval that
include site lighting, and that have traveled ways as boundaries,
shall include, in addition to the other requirements listed in this
18-804.01 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-804.02
AO:1004
18-804.03. Poles.
chapter, the details of the point to point, and beam spread
calculations for all lighting that will impinge on the traveled ways.
As even relatively low average footcandle intensities can blind
drivers who are within the focal point area of the luminaire, no
lighting plan will be acceptable where the central focus node of any
fixture is visible from any traveled way. In general, no fixture shall
be so aimed so that this center focus point is less than 20 degrees
off of the property boundary. This may require that additional
and lower wattage fixtures be utilized adjacent to roadways. The
plan submitted shall clearly indicate the methods used to prevent
roadway glare.
4. Where parking areas for commercial zone buildings are
immediately adjacent to a residential use zone, the design of the
parking area lighting shall be coordinated with the design of the
inter-zone buffer as required under other sections of this chapter.
The coordinated buffer/lighting plan submitted shall insure that
light spill from the parking lot shall not impinge on the residential
area in excess of 0.2 footcandle.
A. The type and height of all poles for mounting luminaires shall be
consistent with the general design of the application.
B. Utility type wood poles may be used only on parking areas of one acre
or less, except where parking lot illumination is provided by the electric
utility. All wood poles shall be pressure treated to resist rot and termite
damage, and the pole class shall result in a wind load rating as specified
in the BOCA Code.
C. Architectural wood poles shall be rated for the applicable wind load,
and shall have adequate wiring access as required by the National
Electric Code.
D. All poles shall be protected with concrete bases of sufficient height to
protect them from traffic setback from the curbline, or by four inch
concrete filled steel pipe bollards.
E. Maximum pole mounting height as follows:
1. For sites up to five acres: 25 feet.
2. For sites greater than five acres: 30 feet.
3. For sites designated as shopping malls, poles of greater height may
be approved by the Board on the submission of lighting design by a
Professional Engineer indicating that a greater height is required,
and that the greater height will not produce light spill to adjacent
areas above the limits hereinbefore listed.
18-804.02 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-804.03
AO:1005
18-804.04. Commercial Building and Outdoor Sales Site Lighting.
4. All mounting poles shall meet wind loading requirements as
specified in all applicable building codes.
A. The object of exterior lighting of a commercial building is to provide a
safe level of illumination to allow the orderly entrance and egress of
pedestrian traffic, identify and illuminate entrance and exit doors and
loading areas, and to provide illumination levels that will discourage
vandalism, theft, and assault. While it is recognized that commercial
building lighting is also used to attract and advertise the building
occupant's trade, this type of lighting shall be designed so that the
resulting illumination levels are not detrimental to adjacent property
owners and occupants.
B. Luminaires. In general, the type of luminaire and mounting method to
be used must be matched to the area, construction type, use, and size of
the building to be lit. The primary criteria should be light control; that
is, providing a beam spread pattern that will produce an average
lighting intensity desired without producing areas of either over
intensity or below intensity design.
C. Conflicts as to color temperature and lamp type with lighting of
adjacent properties shall be avoided. For example, if one or more
adjacent areas with established lighting systems are using mercury
vapor lamps, the submitted area shall conform to the same lamp type,
but not necessarily the same type luminaire.
The HID (High Intensity Discharge) type of lamp may be considered
when compelling reasons exist for employing such lamps and ample
proof that a suitable method can be employed to reduce color conflict.
D. Security lighting. All parking area walkways and appurtenant
passageways and driveways may be illuminated for safety and security
reasons between sunset to sunrise.
E. To insure that the proposed lighting plan conforms to the scope and
limitations of this chapter, the following data and information shall be
submitted with every application for site plan approval:
1. Type of luminaires.
2. Type and wattage of lamp.
3. Mounting height of luminaire.
4. Photometric data and isolux lines of the luminaire and lamp
proposed. Photometric curves shall be drawn to the same scale as
the site plan scale and shall show initial and maintained footcandle
levels of illumination.
F. Where building lighting is proposed to be provided via pole mounted
fixtures, the type and height of pole must also be submitted. Applicants
18-804.03 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-804.04
AO:1006
18-804.05. Sign Illumination.
Requirements for signs are provided in § 18-812 of the chapter, however all
signs including sections of building surfaces of any kind that are externally
or internally illuminated shall conform, in addition to all requirements of §
18-812, to the following requirements:
18-804.06. Lighting and Illumination in Residential Districts.
are encouraged to use architectural wooden or duranodic bronze
colored aluminum poles in keeping with the architecture of the building
and surrounding areas. The use of bollard down-light fixtures is
encouraged for exterior walkways. As the spherical globe type of
luminaire has a low coefficient of utilization, are therefore inherently
energy inefficient, and contribute to excessive "sky glow", their use is
to be discouraged.
G. Commercial recreational facilities such as driving ranges, stadiums,
outdoor arenas, etc. shall be illuminated as required by the site use,
however, all of the perimeter area lighting, light spillage, and
protection from glare on traveled roadways shall conform to the
requirements of §§ 18-804.01 and 18-804.02.
H. Outdoor sales facilities such as new and used automobile lots shall be
illuminated as required by the site use, however, all of the perimeter
area lighting, light spillage, and protection from glare on traveled
roadways shall conform to the requirements of §§ 18-804.01 and
18-804.02.
A. No illuminated sign that is visible from a traveled roadway or traveled
way used by motor vehicles shall have a degree of luminance that
causes visual discomfort to drivers. The degree of luminance allowable
is a factor of luminance ratio, (sign luminance to surrounding
luminance), and illumination color. In general, no sign shall have a
surface luminance greater than 750 footlamberts, or greater than a five
to one ratio between sign luminance and average surrounding
luminance.
B. Outdoor large scale advertising signs shall use an illumination source
that is not visible to either motorists or pedestrians when on normal
traveled roads, streets, or walkways.
C. No sign shall use a repetitive "on-off" design.
D. No sign shall incorporate strobe lamps.
E. No sign shall use animation by either mechanical, electrical, or
electronic means.
F. All interior signs that are within six feet of glass show windows shall
conform to Subsections 18-804.05C, D and E above.
18-804.04 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-804.06
AO:1007
A. The intent of this section is to promote a safe, healthy, and attractive
place to live in the Township of Lakewood. All exterior lighting in
residential areas should be designed and installed with the rights and
interests of adjacent property owners in mind.
B. Residential street lighting shall conform to § 18-804 of this chapter. The
primary goal of street lighting in residential districts is vehicular traffic
control and pedestrian safety, and as a general deterrent to crime. In
overhead utility districts, street lighting from wood utility poles is
acceptable.
In residential districts, all street lighting wiring shall be underground.
C. Exterior lighting at parks, recreational facilities, ball fields, and
municipal parking lots shall conform to the requirements of
Subsections 18-804.05B and C above.
D. Lighting of residential plots to the extent required for discouragement
of theft, break-and-entry, and vandalism may require additional exterior
lighting. Where this type of exterior lighting is desired by the home
owner, the installation must reflect consideration for adjacent property
owners. Where owners wish to light the exterior of homes with dusk to
dawn lighting, the preferred method for safety and keeping light spill to
a minimum is low voltage wall washers set in the ground, and with
reflectors that direct all light towards the building. The watt intensity
shall be such that the light intensity reflected from the building does
not exceed 100 footlamberts.
1. All exterior residential lighting shall be so designed and installed so
that the resultant light spill skyward is minimal, and light
impingement levels on adjacent properties shall not exceed onehalf
(.5) footcandle at the property line.
2. Flood lighting fixtures for residential lighting shall be used only
where plot size requires larger watt intensities. Flood fixtures shall
be selected with care, and fixtures using a box type body, recessed
lamp, and a flush refractor are the preferred type of fixture. This
type of fixture, with the lens positioned downward, and as close to
the perpendicular as possible will result in the best light utilization,
and the least light spill skyward and to adjacent properties.
Exterior "PAR Reflector Flood" type of fixtures are to be used only
for intermittent use, and where small areas of lighting at relatively
high intensity is required. This type of fixture has a high "point
source" footlambert level, and can easily blind drivers and
pedestrians when pointed toward traveled ways. When their use is
required by circumstances, the fixtures should never be pointed
toward driveways, streets, or walkways.
All exterior lighting fixtures and luminaires that are controlled
by "dusk to dawn" controllers shall be installed with shields or
otherwise designed so that lighting intensity at the property line is
one-half (0.5) footcandle or less. Lighting fixtures arranged so that
18-804.06 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-804.06
AO:1008
18-805. Lots. [Ord. No. 2009-51 § 2]
the light source, (lamp and reflector), is directed to adjacent homes
are prohibited.
E. Where exterior fixtures are controlled by infrared, (or other type) or
heat sensitive device or proximity device, the control must be regulated
to prevent repetitive "on-off" operation due to wind, door movement,
tree branch movement, or anything other than the presence of a human
or large animal.
A. Lot Size. Minimum lot size shall be governed by this chapter based on
the zoning district in which the lot is located. Lots requiring septic
systems shall be of sufficient size to achieve required separation
distances in accordance with New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection septic design regulations (N.J.A.C. 7:9A).
B. Lot Numbers. Lot numbers shall be assigned each lot by the Tax
Assessor.
C. Side Lot Lines. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right
angles to straight streets and radial to curved streets.
D. Lot Line on Widened Streets. Where extra width is provided for the
widening of existing streets, for undeveloped lots, lot measurements
shall begin at the new right-of-way line and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line unless otherwise provided by this chapter. For
developed lots, the measurements shall remain unaffected by the new
right-of-way line.
E. Unsuitable Lots. All lots shall be suitable for the purpose of the
application. In order to prevent the use of lots which are not suitable
because of adverse topography, rock formations, flood conditions,
wetlands designations, environmental conditions or similar
circumstances, the Board may require such revisions in the layout of
the subdivisions as will accomplish one of the following:
1. That the area of the unsuitable lots is included in other lots by
increasing the size of the remaining lots.
2. That the area is to be deeded to the municipality or a homeowners'
association and held in its natural state for conservation and/or
passive or active recreation purposes; or
3. That some other suitable arrangement, such as common ownership
made permanent by deed covenants running with the land, is made.
Such conditions, where present on a portion of a lot shall not be excluded
when calculating the square footage required in any zoning district in
order to satisfy the minimum lot size, and shall not deem the lot as
unsuitable for development.
18-804.06 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-805
AO:1009
18-806. Nonconforming Uses and Lots. [Ord. No. 2009-19 § 1; Ord.
No. 2009-28 § 1; Ord. No. 2013-29; Ord. No. 2014-10]
F. Thru-lots. All residential units located on thru-lots shall, where
practical, have access from the lower order road frontage. All units
shall be oriented so that the front of the unit is toward the same road
frontage as the majority of the units in the existing neighborhood. In the
case of an application for subdivision, the unit orientation shall be
dependant upon the characteristics of the existing neighborhood. All
newly created thru-lots shall provide a landscaped buffer along the
secondary frontage. The width and depth of the buffer shall be
determined by the Board based upon the characteristics of the existing
neighborhood. In no case shall a buffer be less than five feet.
G. Flag Lots.
1. A "flag lot" shall be defined as "a lot not satisfying the conventional
minimum lot frontage requirements of the zone district, generally
configured in the shape of a flag, with its road frontage provided by
a strip of land referred to as the 'flag staf' portion of the lot."
2. Flag lots as defined in § 18-805G1 shall not be permitted in any
residential zoning district.
A. Continuance.
1. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the lawful use of land
or buildings existing at the date of adoption of this chapter may be
continued although such use or building does not conform to the
regulations specified by this chapter for the zone in which such
land or building is located; provided, however:
a. That no lot nonconforming to the standards set forth in its
zoning district shall be further reduced by the owner;
b. That no nonconforming nonresidential building shall be
enlarged, extended or increased unless such enlargement does
not increase the degree of nonconformance or does not expand
upon the existing footprint of the building.
c. That an existing single residential building, with or without
basement apartment, on any lot, may be replaced, extended or
increased in size provided that the residential building as
altered, does not increase the degree of existing nonconformity
and meets all of the existing conforming setback, lot coverage
and height requirements of the then current zone.
d. That in zones where duplexes are a permitted use, when there
exists on any lot, two separate residential buildings, each
having a certificate of occupancy, the two buildings may be
replaced with one duplex provided the duplex, does not
increase the degree of existing nonconformity and meets all of
18-805 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-806
AO:1010
18-807. Off-Street Parking, Loading and Circulation. [Ord. No.
2006-16 § 1; Ord. No. 2010-62]
the existing conforming setback, lot coverage and height
requirements, of the then current zone;
e. That no conforming use may be expanded, except as permitted
by this § 18-806.
f. That a single-family residential dwelling may be constructed on
a vacant nonconforming lot provided the single-family
residential building meets all of the setback and height
requirements of the then current zone. The maximum lot
coverage requirement for nonconforming, single-family
residential lots shall be 35%.
B. Abandonment. A nonconforming nonresidential use shall be adjudged
as abandoned when there occurs a cessation of any use or activity by an
apparent act or failure to act on the part of the tenant or owner to
reinstate such use within a period of one year from the date of cessation
or discontinuance.
C. Restoration. If any nonconforming building shall be destroyed or
demolished by any reason of windstorm, fire, explosion or other event
or the public enemy or the voluntary act of the owner such building may
be rebuilt, restored or repaired providing that the construction does not
increase the prior degree of nonconformance (except as to residential
buildings as provided in Subsection 18-806A1c or d above). Nothing in
this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe
condition of any wall, floor or roof which has been declared unsafe by
the Building Inspector.
D. Reversion. No nonconforming use shall, if once changed into a
conforming use, be changed back again into a nonconforming use.
E. District Changes. Whenever the boundaries of a district shall be
changed so as to transfer an area from one district to another of a
different classification, the foregoing provisions shall also apply to any
nonconforming uses existing therein or created thereby.
A. Minimum Standards: Off-street parking space, together with
appropriate access thereto, shall be provided in accordance with the
following minimum standards:
1. Residential developments shall provide parking in accordance with
the requirements of the Residential Site Improvement Standards
for single-family detached dwellings with up to five bedrooms. The
parking requirements for single-family detached dwellings with six
or more bedrooms shall be as follows:
6 Bedroom 3.5 (4 spaces)
7 Bedroom 4.0 (4 spaces)
18-806 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-807
AO:1011
8 Bedroom 4.5 (4 spaces)
9 Bedroom 5.0 (5 spaces)
10 Bedroom 5.5 (5 spaces)
Note: Basements shall be considered two bedrooms in
determining the number of bedrooms in a dwelling and habitable
attics shall be considered one bedroom in determining the number
of bedrooms in a dwelling. [Ord. No. 2017-27 § 2]
2. Public or private schools: See § 18-906.
3. Religious facilities and houses of worship: See § 18-905.
4. Other public buildings: one space for each 400 square feet of gross
floor area.
B. Business uses shall comply with the following standards, but in no case
shall less than three spaces be provided:
1. Retail trade or personal service establishments, other than in a
shopping center of 100,000 square feet or more: one space for each
200 square feet of gross floor area.
2. Shopping center of 100,000 square feet or more: one space for
each 225 square feet of gross floor area.
3. Business and professional offices and banks, other than medical or
dental: one space for each 250 square feet of gross floor area.
[Ord. No. 2017-28; Ord. No. 2017-51 § 1; Ord. No. 2019-15]
4. Medical or dental office: one space for each 150 square feet of
gross floor area.
5. Community Based Health Care Facilities: one and one-quarter
(1.25) spaces for every examination room.
6. Wholesale trade establishments: one space for each 300 square
feet of sales floor or display area and one space for every 1,000
square feet devoted to the warehouse.
7. Restaurants: one space per 50 square feet of floor area devoted to
patron use.
8. Theaters: one space for each two public seats.
9. All nonresidential uses below the third (3) floor/ level in the B-2
zoning district are exempt from the parking requirements of this
section. [Ord. No. 2017-51 § 1]
C. Design, construction and location.
1. Required parking areas shall be on the same lot as the principal
building or premises for which such parking spaces are provided.
18-807 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-807
AO:1012
The applicant may provide the parking on another parcel, which
may or may not be contiguous to the parcel, provided that the
parking lot is within 1,000 feet from the parcel in which the
principal building is located and provides assurances acceptable to
the appropriate Board that the parking will remain available in the
future. Each parking space shall have minimum dimensions of nine
feet by 18 feet.
2. Parking areas where shopping carts are provided shall provide one
or more cart corrals.
3. Parking areas shall be suitably drained, maintained in good
condition and have adequate means of ingress and egress. Offstreet
parking required in conjunction with nonresidential uses
shall be adequately paved and drained in accordance with
Township specifications.
4. Not more than two driveways, of not less than 20 feet nor more
than 30 feet in width, used as a means of ingress and egress for
nonresidential off-street parking areas, shall be permitted for each
three (300) feet of frontage upon a public street, nor shall any
driveway be located closer than 30 feet to the intersection of two
public streets.
5. All nonresidential use off-street parking areas shall be adequately
lighted, and such lighting shall be focused downward in such a way
as not to cause light glare onto adjacent properties.
6. Parking facilities in the M-1, B4, BP1, BP2 and BP3 zones may be
located in any yard space but shall not be closer than 20 feet from
any street line where not in conflict with § 18-803.
7. Handicap parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of the New Jersey Barrier-Free Subcode.
8. Facilities that require bus parking shall design spaces in
accordance with the following:
a. Full size bus parking spaces shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide
by 40 feet long; or
b. Mini bus parking spaces shall be a minimum of 10 feet wide by
20 feet long.
9. Where a residential subdivision is designed so as to not permit onstreet
parking in accordance with the Residential Site
Improvement Standards, the developer shall post "No Parking"
signs throughout the development.
D. Commercial Vehicles Prohibited During Certain Hours.
1. No commercially-registered vehicles with more than one and onehalf
(1-1/2) ton payload capacity or more than four wheels (two
18-807 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-807
AO:1013
18-808. Provisions for Park and Recreation Areas.
axles) shall be parked out-of-doors between 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
in any residential zone. This prohibition shall apply to driveways,
parking areas and streets. The parking of light utility trailers of the
type used to transport lawn care equipment also shall be prohibited
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in any residential
zone district.
2. No more than one commercially-registered vehicle with a payload
capacity of one and one-half (1-1/2) tons or less and no more than
four wheels may be parked overnight in a residential zone district
so long as such vehicle is parked in a garage, driveway or a
resident's designated parking area, but not on a public street.
A. The following standards for the provision of common open space
pertain to any major subdivision or site plan of residential development
in the Township.
1. Not less than 5% of land area of every residential major subdivision
or residential site plan consisting of 25 or more units shall be
preserved as common open space or shall be dedicated to active
recreational or community facilities.
a. With the exception of the provisions of § 18-904 below, the
required open space area shall be contiguous, free of
environmental constraints such as flood plains, wetlands,
bodies of water, storm water drainageways and basins
(exclusive of underground facilities), or steep slopes. This land
shall be utilized for passive or active recreation, community
facilities or left as undisturbed open space and/or wildlife
habitat.
b. A plan outlining the cleaning of debris and dead brush and,
when required, the selective thinning and removal of diseased,
dying or undesirable vegetation to be approved by the
Township Engineer.
2. Buildings or uses for non-commercial recreation, or agricultural
purposes compatible with the open space objectives may be
permitted only with the express approval of the Board, following
the approval of the building and site plans by the Board.
3. Any land set aside as open space shall be made subject to
covenants in a form acceptable to the Board and duly recorded in
the office of the County Clerk of Ocean County. All documents
pertaining to the conveyance and maintenance of the open space
shall meet the approval of the Board as to legal form and effect.
4. Methods of conveyance: All open space shall be conveyed in
accordance with one of the following methods:
18-807 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-808
AO:1014
a. Dedication in fee-simple: The Township may, at the discretion
of the Township Committee, accept any portion or portions of
the open space provided:
(1) It is determined by the Board that such land is suitable in
size, shape, location, and access and the Township
Committee may determine that such lands will benefit the
general public of the municipality;
(2) The Township agrees to and has access to maintain such
lands;
(3) The titles are conveyed to the Township without cost;
b. Conveyance of title to a conservancy, corporation, homeowners
association, funded community trust, condominium
corporation, individual or other legal entity, provided that:
(1) The terms of such instrument of conveyance shall include
provisions suitable to the municipality assuming such
organization will warrant:
(a) The continued use of such land for the intended
purpose in perpetuity;
(b) Continuity of proper maintenance;
(c) Adequate insurance protection;
(d) Provision for payment of applicable taxes;
(e) The right of the Township to enter upon and maintain
such property at the expense of the organization in the
event the organization falls to maintain the property;
and,
(f) Such other covenants and/or easements necessary to
fulfill the purposes and intent of this section.
B. Lands set aside for open space shall contain active or passive
recreational facilities to service the needs of the residential population
in each development. Active and passive recreational facilities can
include but not be limited to the following: ball fields, multipurpose
fields, tennis courts, multipurpose court areas, children's play areas,
passive picnic or sitting areas, swimming pools, bicycle paths and
walking or jogging trails.
C. The requirements of this section relating to the active or passive
recreation facilities and the total percentage of open space required
within a development may be modified and/or waived by the Board.
For any project consisting of less than or equal to 30 dwelling units, it
is recognized as impractical that recreational facilities be constructed
18-808 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-808
AO:1015
18-809. Recycling and Trash Receptacles.
and the payment in-lieu-of-construction is encouraged. For any project
over 30 dwelling units the above recreation standards shall apply.
D. The amount of the contribution required pursuant hereto shall be
determined by the estimated cost of the passive or active recreation
facilities and equipment that would otherwise be required by the
proposed development and shall be prorated over the total number of
building lots, as shown on the preliminary plans approved by the Board,
in order to determine a per lot amount. The maximum contribution per
dwelling unit shall not be more than $500.
E. The cash bequest shall be used exclusively for park and recreation
purposes and shall be placed in the current budget line item designated
"parks and playgrounds, other expenses." Lakewood Township reserves
the right to use said funds for the above referenced purposes anywhere
within the Township of Lakewood.
F. The following are prerequisites for a condominium corporation,
homeowners association, or similar entity:
1. Designation of the open space must be approved by the Board,
prior to final plan approval, and the final plats recorded before any
dwelling units are sold, leased, or otherwise conveyed;
2. Membership must be mandatory for each buyer and/or lessee. The
organizational papers shall set forth the voting rights and the
manner and time of transference of the organization and its assets
from developer to homeowner;
3. It must be responsible for liability insurance, taxes, recovery for
loss sustained by casualty, condemnation or otherwise, and the
maintenance of recreational and other facilities;
4. Members or beneficiaries must pay their pro-rata share of the
costs, and the assessment levied can become a lien on the property,
including any maintenance and associated administrative costs
incurred by the municipality;
5. Such corporation or association shall not be dissolved nor shall it
dispose of the open space by sale or otherwise, except to an
organization conceived and established to own and maintain the
open space. The corporation or association must first offer to
dedicate the open space to the Township before any such sale or
disposition of open space.
6. The dedication of open space, streets, or other lands in common
ownership of the corporation, association, individual, or other legal
entity or the Township shall be absolute and not subject to
reversion for possible future use for further development.
18-808 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-809
AO:1016
18-810. (Reserved)
18-811. Sanitary Sewers/Residential Site Improvement Standards
(in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:21-6 and the following).
A. There shall be included in any new multi-family or townhouses in excess
than 10 units, or commercial development an indoor or outdoor
recycling and trash receptacle area(s) for the collection and storage of
materials. The dimensions of the recycling and trash receptacle area(s)
shall be sufficient to accommodate recycling and trash bins or
containers which are of adequate size and number, and which are
consistent with anticipated usage and with current methods of
collection in the area(s) in which the project is located. The dimensions
of the recycling and trash receptacle area and the size and number of
bins or containers shall be determined in consultation with the
Department of Public Works. The walls of the enclosures should match
the façade of the proposed buildings.
B. Any common area recycling and trash receptacle area shall be well lit,
and shall be safely and easily accessible by personnel and vehicles.
Collection vehicles shall be able to access such common the recycling
and trash receptacle area without interference from parked cars or
other obstacles.
C. Any bins or containers which are used for the collection of recyclable
paper or cardboard, and which are located in a common outdoor
recycling area, shall be equipped with a lid, or otherwise covered, so as
to keep the paper or cardboard dry.
D. Signs clearly identifying the common recycling and trash receptacle
area and the materials accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all
points of access to the recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall
be equipped with signs indicating the materials to be placed therein.
E. Any common recycling and trash receptacle area must be enclosed
behind a wall at least five feet in height, with an opaque self-closing
gate. The exterior finish material of the enclosure must be compatible
with that of the exterior of the principal structure.
A. If a public treatment and collection system is accessible, the subdivider
shall construct facilities in such manner as to make adequate sewage
treatment available to each lot within the subdivision from said
treatment and distribution system. The subdivider may be required to
install dry sewers designed to tie into the proposed Township facility.
B. Any treatment plant and collection system, including individual on-lot
septic systems, shall be designed in accordance with the requirements
of the State Health Department or Township ordinances enforced by the
County Board of Health, whichever is more restrictive, and shall be
subject to review and approval by the Township Board of Health and the
18-809 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-811
AO:1017
18-812. Signs. [Ord. No. 2013-51; Ord. No. 2015-43; Ord. No.
2016-11 § 3]
Each development application shall include a sign plan showing the specific
design, location, size, height, construction and illumination of proposed
signs in accordance with the following regulations and § 18-804.05:
Township Municipal Utilities Authority or New Jersey American Water
Company and the Township Board.
C. Where required by the Board, sanitary sewers including service laterals
and cleanouts at curb side, shall be installed in all streets and
easements before the base materials for the streets are in place or the
fine grading of the easement is complete, whether such sewers can be
put to immediate use.
D. Where, in the opinion of the Board of Health so expressed to the Board,
the subsurface soil characteristics and/or the percolation rate are such
to permit subsurface disposal of sewage from individual dwellings as a
temporary expedient until the sewers installed in the streets can be
connected to the Township sewer system, such temporary subsurface
disposal facilities may be permitted and constructed in addition to the
sewers in the streets and easements. Sewerage facilities for individual
dwellings shall conform with the New Jersey Department of Health
code, Chapter 199, P.L. 1954, and current Township regulations and
health code.
E. Sewers in the streets and easements shall be constructed in accordance
with the requirements of the Lakewood Township Municipal Utilities
Authority or New Jersey American Water Company and in accordance
with the Residential Site Improvement Standards shall apply (N.J.A.C.
5:21-6).
A. General Regulation.
1. Any sign hereafter erected in Lakewood Township which is exposed
to public view shall conform with the provisions of this chapter and
any other ordinance or regulation of Lakewood Township or the
County, State or Federal government relating to the erection, or
maintenance of signs. In the event of conflicting regulations, the
most restrictive regulation shall prevail.
2. No sign, other than exempt signs, shall be erected without first
obtaining a sign permit from the Zoning Office. Permit applications
for signs larger than six square feet in area shall be accompanied
by a plan, drawn to scale, showing details of the sign, its size and
location on the building and/or lot. Permits for window signs and
changeable copy signs shall be valid as long as there is no change
in the area, location, and type of such signs which have been
authorized by permit. Fees for sign permits shall be paid in
18-811 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-812
AO:1018
accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the Township
Committee.
3. All signs shall be kept in a proper state of repair, in accordance
with the requirements of the Township's Building Code, Property
Maintenance Code, and any other pertinent regulations. Signs
which fall into such a state of disrepair as to become unsightly or to
pose a threat to public safety may be removed by the Township 30
days following notice by certified mail to the owner of record and
the Township shall have the right to recover from said owner the
full costs of the removal and disposal of such signs.
4. No permanent sign other than traffic or similar official signs shall
be erected within or project over the right-of-way of any public
street, except as hereafter provided.
5. No sign shall be erected that is of such character, form, shape or
color that it imitates or resembles any official traffic sign, signal or
device, or that has any characteristics which are likely to confuse
or dangerously distract the attention of the operator of a motor
vehicle on a public street.
6. No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any streets improved
for vehicular traffic within the triangular area formed by the rightof-
way lines, and a line connecting them at points 25 feet from their
intersection unless the topmost portion of said sign is less than
three feet. In no case shall any sign be so erected that it impedes
the vision of motorists or pedestrians, or otherwise endangers their
safety.
7. No sign shall be placed on any residential or commercial building
rooftop, fence, tree, telegraph, electric light, or public utility pole,
or upon rocks or other natural features. [Ord. No. 2017-30]
8. The aggregate total area of all permanent signs on a lot shall not
exceed the limitations of this section. Permanent signs visible on or
through windows, are included within these limitations.
9. Freestanding signs, except for directional signs or identification
signs, shall comply with the following:
a. Freestanding signs shall be permitted only in a front yard.
b. No sign shall be erected closer to the street or property line
than 15 feet, measured from the nearest portion of the sign to
the right-of-way line. (Including the sign face and not
necessarily the sign structure)
c. Signs with two exposures shall be measured for sign area by
using the surface of one side of the sign only, however, both
sides must be used for the same message.
18-812 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-812
AO:1019
d. A freestanding sign and/or a wall sign shall not be utilized
together to identify the same establishment on the same street
frontage, except as follows:
(1) A freestanding identification sign and wall identification
sign may be utilized together when identifying a shopping
center, planned office, industrial park, public facility,
public and private schools and houses of worship.
(2) The area of such signs shall not exceed the maximum area
as identified in this section.
e. A freestanding sign and/or wall sign may be used in
conjunction with projecting identification signs for individual
uses.
(1) Projecting signs do not exceed four square feet in area.
(2) Wall identification signs shall not exceed the maximum
area as established herein.
10. Schedule of Sign Use Regulations. Signs shall be permitted in each
zoning district according to the following use regulations and other
applicable requirements of this section. Standards for the types of
signs permitted herein are set forth in this section.
a. Permitted Signs in Residential Districts: Only one of these
listed may be placed on any one lot.
Uses or
Function
Type of Sign
Permitted
Other Regulations
Identification Ground, Wall Notwithstanding size
standards contained in this
section, the maximum size of
a sign shall not exceed four
square feet, and four feet in
height.
Nameplate Ground,
Projecting, Wall
Notwithstanding size
standards contained in this
section, the maximum size of
a sign shall not exceed one
and one-half (1 1/2) square
feet, and four feet in height.
"No
Solicitation"
Wall Sign shall be located on or
within two feet of front door
and shall not exceed one
square foot, and four feet in
height.
b. Permitted signs in non-residential districts:
18-812 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-812
AO:1020
Uses or
Function
Types of Sign
Permitted
Other Regulations
Real Estate
Advertising
Ground Only one per lot permitted
on undeveloped lots
Business Ground and
Wall
Only one type of sign
permitted for each separate
street frontage of a
business occupancy.(1)
Directory Ground Only two signs per lot are
permitted at its main
ingress or egress points
Nameplate Ground,
Projecting,
Wall
Only one type of sign
permitted for each occupant
of a lot. Notwithstanding
this section, maximum sign
area shall not exceed eight
sq. ft.
"No
Solicitation"
Wall Signs shall be located on or
within two feet of front door
and shall not exceed one
square foot, and four feet in
height.
(1) If a wall of a building housing a business has exposure
to a street but does not have frontage on the same street,
one additional wall sign may be permitted on that wall. The
height, area, dimensions, and construction of the sign shall be
in accordance with all applicable requirements and limitations
of this section.
11. Sign Standards. The types of signs permitted in this section shall
comply with the standards listed in the schedule below and shall
also be subject to other applicable regulations as set forth herein.
a. Nonresidential sign standards for freestanding signs.
Abutting R.O.W.
All Lanes of
Traffic Speed (mph)
Max
Sign Area
(SF)
Max
Height (ft)
2 15-25 15 5
30-40 35 6
45-55 75 20
4 30-40 50 18
18-812 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-812
AO:1021
Abutting R.O.W.
All Lanes of
Traffic Speed (mph)
Max
Sign Area
(SF)
Max
Height (ft)
45-55 120 22
6 30-40 65 20
45-55 130 24
b. Height Exceptions: Projections which are decorative and do
not total more than 10% of the total sign size, or 20% of the
vertical dimension of the sign shall not be counted in the
height.
c. Size Exceptions: A total increase of up to 10% in size and
height may be allowed for signs which incorporate as an
integral part of the sign's design:
(1) Raised, carved or sandblasted copy or border
(2) Non-rectilinear or non-square shape
12. Prohibited Signs.
Any other provisions of this section notwithstanding, the following
signs shall be prohibited in all zoning districts:
a. Signs which contain or are an imitation of an official traffic
signal or hide from view any traffic street signal or sign.
b. Billboards and other signs which advertise, promote, indicate
the location of, or otherwise direct attention to a business,
product, service or establishment that is not available on the
lot upon which the sign is located, except where digital
billboards are conditionally permitted by this act. [Ord. No.
2016-11 § 3]
c. Signs which are designed to move, either by mechanical or
other means.
d. Signs which contain or consist of banners, posters, pennant
ribbons, streamers, strings of light bulbs, spinners, or other
similarly moving devices.
e. Signs which flash, except for time and temperature indicator.
f. Signs which emit odors or smoke or produce noise or sounds
capable of being heard even though the sounds produced are
not understandable.
g. Silhouetted or three dimensional signs; e.g., signs lacking a
background and having letters, figures, or devices silhouetted
18-812 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-812
AO:1022
against the sky or other open space not a part of the sign,
and, or signs in which objects or representational devices are
present in the round, or other than in a vertical plane.
h. Pole mounted signage.
13. Supplementary Sign Regulations and Design Considerations.
The following regulations shall also apply to all permitted signs as
set forth herein:
a. Interior Signs. No interior sign shall cover more than 25% of
the window upon which it is affixed, displayed, or painted. The
Zoning Official may, upon written application, grant permission
during or prior to community wide sales days for interior signs
to cover not more than 50% in area of each window, but such
signs shall not be maintained for more than 15 days.
b. Canopy, Awning and Marquee Signs. Signs shall not be
permitted on any canopy, awning or marquee, other than signs
built into and forming a part of the structure of the canopy,
awning or marquee. Such canopy, awning or marquee signs
shall not exceed a height of three feet, a total area of 21 square
feet on any one side and shall not extend beyond the canopy,
awning or marquee's edge. Further, only that portion of the
canopy, awning or marquee containing such sign may be
illuminated. Minimum clearance, when over a walkway or
sidewalk, not in a public right of way, shall be eight feet; when
over a thoroughfare, not in a public right of way, it shall be 10
feet.
c. Wall signs. Wall signs shall be attached to the face of the
building in a plane parallel to such face and projecting not
more than 12 inches therefrom and shall not extend higher
than the top of the parapet.
(1) No wall sign or combination of signs on any single frontage
in a business district, including interior signs, shall exceed
an area equivalent to 100% of the linear length of the
structure on such frontage or a maximum of 60 square
feet, whichever is less, for said structure.
(2) Where an establishment for which business signs are
permitted has a rear entrance on a public way or frontage
on two or more streets, such as a corner, wall signs shall
be permitted as established in this section.
(3) Wall signs shall not cover wholly or partially, any wall
opening including doors, fire escapes, and windows, nor
project beyond the ends of the wall to which it is attached.
All such signs must be safely and adequately attached to
18-812 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-812
AO:1023
said building wall by means satisfactory to the
Construction Official.
d. Changeable Copy Signs. Permitted as a conditional use
provided the following standards are met:
(1) The need for a changeable copy sign is demonstrated on
the basis of the public's need to be appraised of special
events, attractions, or similar time-related notices.
Changeable copy shall not be used to advertise
merchandise or special sales events. Prices of limited
products which are typically provided to the general
public, such as gasoline prices, may be displayed on a
changeable copy sign.
(2) All such signs shall be permanently affixed to the ground
or to a structure.
(3) Copy shall be changed electronically or by means of
moveable lettering which is more than one-eighth (1/8)
inch in thickness.
(4) Changeable copy signs may not be located in any
residential zoning district.
(5) Changeable copy signs may be either freestanding or
marquee signs.
(6) No more than one changeable copy sign shall be permitted
per use, per street frontage.
(7) The sign area of a changeable copy sign shall be included
in the total permissible sign area for a freestanding or
marquee sign.
(8) A changeable copy sign must be part of a site identification
sign and shall not stand alone.
(9) Any sign utilizing computer controlled moveable
illumination symbols or lettering shall be subject to the
following:
(a) The sign shall be restricted to no more than three lines
of text.
(b) All illumination elements on the face of the sign shall
remain at a fixed level of illumination for a period of
not less than four seconds.
(c) Changes from one message to another shall be
accomplished by the change of all illumination
elements on the face of the sign simultaneously, with
the provision that the sign may fade to complete
18-812 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-812
AO:1024
darkness and then re-illuminate with or fade to the
new message.
(d) Scrolling of messages shall not be permitted.
(e) No representation of images other than letters and
numbers shall be permitted.
(f) The signs shall be equipped with the ability to adjust
the brightness of the sign, and shall not be operated at
a brightness that is substantially greater than other
sources of illumination in the area.
e. (Reserved)
f. Sign Location. Signs may be located on a lot so that they shall
not be in or within the public right of way nor interfere with
sight distances at street intersections or ingress and egress
points to a lot. Signs designed to be seen from vehicles should
be perpendicular to the line of travel while signs designed to
be read on foot can be parallel with walks. To the extent
possible, adjacent signs on the same or adjoining buildings
should be placed within the same horizontal band and be of
reasonably harmonious materials and colors.
g. Maximum Sign Dimension. The minimum sign outline
dimension in any direction shall be no more than 1/3 the
maximum sign outline dimension.
h. Design Theme. There should be a consistent sign design theme
throughout a particular project. The design theme would
include style of lettering, construction, material, type of pole or
standard, (i.e. wood or metal), size, and lighting. Color of
letters and background should be carefully considered in
relation to building material color or where the signs are
proposed to be located. Signs should be a subordinate rather
than predominant feature of a plan.
i. Sign Lettering. The general standard for directional signs is a
letter size of two inches plus one additional inch for each 25
feet of viewing distance. A sign designed to be read from 100
feet should have letters of at least six inches high. Adjacent
signs should be of the same height.
j. Landscaping. The base of any freestanding sign shall be
landscaped to visually buffer the sign elements.
B. Exempted Signs. The following signs are exempt from the need to
secure sign permits:
1. Decorations for a recognized officially designated holiday provided
they do not create a traffic or fire hazard, and provided that
provision is made for their removal within 30 days after the holiday.
18-812 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-812
AO:1025
2. Official municipal, County, State, or Federal governmental signs.
3. Memorial or historic markers when approved by the Board or
Historical Preservation Commission and when not more than six
square feet in area.
4. Change in the copy of a changeable copy sign or marquee sign,
once a permit for that sign has been issued.
5. Political signs provided they do not impede site visibility at all
street and property lines, and are not more than 32 square feet.
Political signs shall be permitted within 30 days prior to any
municipal, County, State or National election or referendum and
are removed within seven days after the election or referendum.
6. Street number designations, names on mailboxes or residences,
postal boxes, "Private Property," "No Hunting," "No Trespassing,"
onsite directional and parking signs and warning signs are
permitted in all zoning districts but are not considered in
calculating sign area. No such signs shall exceed two square feet.
7. Temporary yard or garage sale signs. Such signs may not exceed
four square feet; may not be erected more than seven days prior to
such sale; and, must be removed within 48 hours after the sale. No
premise shall be permitted to erect such signs more than two times
in any calendar year.
8. Temporary real estate signs on the lot on which the real estate for
rent, lease or sale is located. Said sign for a lot under five acres
may not be larger than six square feet nor more than four feet high.
Said sign for a lot five acres or more may not be larger than 32
square feet nor more than five feet high. They must be removed
within seven days of the sale, rental, or lease of the premise to
which the sign relates.
9. Sale or rent signs. Sign(s) advertising that the premises are for
lease, sale or rent are permitted, provided that each real estate
firm shall be limited to one such sign not to exceed 12 square feet
in area on each lot or parcel of property for which such firm has a
bona fide listing and that such sign shall be removed from the
premises within 10 days subsequent to the leasing, sale or rental of
such premises.
10. Temporary signs announcing an event sponsored by a Lakewood
Township-based nonprofit organization, provided that such signs
are set back at least 15 feet from any street or property line, each
sign is not greater than 24 square feet and no higher than five feet,
and that such signs are only erected within 14 days prior to the
event and removed within three days after the event.
18-812 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-812
AO:1026
11. Emergency warning signs erected by a public utility, pipeline
company, or contractor doing such work authorized or permitted by
such utility or company. Such signs may be illuminated.
12. Flags of the United States, the States, County or municipality, and
any other flag adopted and sanctioned by an elected legislative
body of competent jurisdiction, provided that such flag shall not
exceed 60 square feet in area and shall not be flown from a pole
that exceeds 35 feet in height. Other flags shall be considered
freestanding signs and shall be governed by such regulations that
may apply in the zoning district in which such flag is located. Flags
may be illuminated.
13. Residential freestanding signs provided that the size of the sign
does not exceed four square feet in area nor four feet in height and
shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from a street line or
property line.
14. Temporary signs of contractors, mechanics, painters, paperhangers
and/or artisans, on the lot on which the contracting work is being
performed. Said signs may not be larger than six square feet nor
more than four feet high. They must be removed within seven days
of the completion of the work to which the sign relates.
C. Temporary Signs.
1. Temporary project development signs shall be permitted where
final approval of a major site plan or major subdivision has been
granted by a board of competent jurisdiction and which indicate
the name of the development, developer, financier, or major
contractor; provided that no more than one sign per street frontage
is erected and the sign area does not exceed 32 square feet or six
feet in height. All such signs shall be removed within 14 days of the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy that permits the occupation
of a building in the case of a non-residential development, or when
95% of the dwelling units in a residential development have been
issued certificates of occupancy.
2. Grand Opening Signs are permitted, provided that:
a. Such signs are removed within 30 days of the initial opening of
the business or change in the ownership of the premises on
which the sign is located.
b. Grand opening signs may be wall signs, freestanding signs, or
banners.
c. Grand opening signs shall not exceed the total sign area
permitted on the premises for permanent signs. Such signs
shall be permitted in addition to any permanent signage
allowed. For the purpose of this subsection, the total sign area
of banners and freestanding signs shall not exceed 40 square
18-812 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-812
AO:1027
feet and six feet in height. Further, banners may only be
located on building fronts, and not used as a freestanding sign.
3. Special sale signs are permitted, provided that:
a. Such signs are permitted for 90 days within a calendar year.
b. Special sale signs may be wall signs, banners, or ground signs.
c. Special sale signs shall not exceed the total sign area
permitted on the premises for permanent signs. Such signs
shall be permitted in addition to any permanent signage
allowed. For the purpose of this subsection, the total sign area
of banners and freestanding signs shall not exceed 40 square
feet and six feet in height. Further, banners may only be
located on building fronts, and not used as a freestanding sign.
D. Signs for Public and Private Schools and Houses of Worship.
1. Public and Private Schools and houses of worship in non-residential
districts shall be permitted the same signage permitted for
commercial uses in those districts.
2. Public and private schools and houses of worship in residential
districts:
a. Public and private schools and houses of worship shall be
permitted one freestanding sign and one wall-mounted sign
per street frontage.
(1) The free standing sign shall not exceed 20 square feet and
shall not exceed five feet in height.
(2) All freestanding signage should be monument style
signage. No pole mounted signage is permitted.
(3) No wall mounted or freestanding signs shall be internally
illuminated.
(4) Wall-mounted signage shall not exceed 15 square feet.
Lettering on wall-mounted signage shall not exceed 18
inches in height.
(5) Lettering or symbols carved within the building façade
shall have no size requirement and shall be located on any
façade of the building.
E. Temporary Advertising Signs at Local Events. The purpose of this
subsection is to regulate and control temporary advertising signs at
local events.
1. Temporary advertising signs may be placed at public locations and
private property with the permission of the private property owner.
18-812 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-812
AO:1028
18-813. Site Design.
18-814. Streets/Residential Site Improvement Standards.
2. No sign shall exceed 18 inches by 24 inches in dimension.
3. There shall be a one hundred ($100) dollar fee paid for this permit.
In addition, there will be a one ($1) dollar fee charged for each
temporary advertising sign placed within the Township. These fees
will be paid by the applicant to the Township, through the Zoning
Officer, at the time of application, prior to any signs being placed.
These fees are non-refundable.
4. These signs will be permitted to be displayed for a maximum of 25
days. A $500 deposit will be paid to the Zoning Officer by the
applicant prior to any signs being placed. If any of the signs are still
displayed after 25 days, the Township will remove and destroy
them. If all of the signs are removed within the 25 day time frame,
the $500 deposit will be returned to the applicant.
5. The applicant will be issued a permit number to be placed on the
sign, along with the date as it appears on the application. Failure to
do so will negate the return of the five hundred ($500) dollar
deposit.
6. Application for the permit for each sign shall be made to the Zoning
Officer on a form promulgated by the Zoning Officer. [Ord. No.
2015-43]
A. General design requirements for all non-residential districts are as
follows.
1. All buildings in a development shall be compatibly designed,
whether constructed all at one time or in stages over a period of
time. All building walls facing any street or residential district line
shall be suitably finished for aesthetic purposes.
2. All portions of the property not utilized by buildings or paved
surfaces shall be landscaped or left in an undisturbed state.
3. The established grades on the site shall be planned for both
aesthetic and drainage purposes. The grading plan, drainage
facilities and landscaping shall be coordinated to prevent erosion
and silting as well as assuring that the capacity of any natural or
man-made drainage system is sufficient to handle the water
generated and anticipated both from the site and contributing
upstream areas.
4. Not more than one point of ingress and/or egress shall be permitted
within 50 feet of another point of ingress and/or egress serving the
same tract.
18-812 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-814
AO:1029
A. All subdivisions shall be served by paved public streets with an allweather
base and pavement with an adequate crown. The arrangement
of streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official Map, as adopted by
the Township, shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension
of existing streets and should conform with the topography as far as
practicable.
B. The developer shall submit plans, profiles, cross sections and design for
the work to the Township Engineer for approval prior to the start of any
construction and at their own expense, grade all streets for their full
width, unless exempted by the Board, in conformity with the terrain and
good engineering practices; shall have all underground utilities
installed prior to any street paving construction; shall construct
adequate underground pipe drainage systems to carry off surface
waters; shall construct streets in accordance with specifications shown
below; and, shall install a base course and shall install recharge
facilities where appropriate, which may be located in the Township
right-of-way.
C. In the event that a subdivision adjoins or includes existing Township
streets that do not conform to widths as shown on the adopted master
plan and/or official map or the street width requirements of this article,
additional land along either or both sides of said street sufficient to
conform to the right-of-way requirements as specified in the Township
Master Plan shall be dedicated to the Township for the location,
installation, repair and maintenance of streets, drainage facilities,
utilities and other facilities customarily located on street rights-of-way
and shall be expressed on the plat as follows: Street right-of-way
easement granted to the Township of Lakewood permitting the
Township to enter upon these lands for the purposes provided for and
expressed in this chapter of the Township of Lakewood. This statement
on an approved plat shall in no way reduce the subdivider's
responsibility to provide, install, repair or maintain the facilities in the
area dedicated by ordinance and/or as shown on the plat and/or as
provided for by any maintenance or performance guaranties. If the
subdivision is along one side only, one half (1/2) of the required extra
width shall be dedicated. For a major subdivision, that portion of the
existing street or road adjoining or included within the subdivision shall
be improved, including excavation, grading, gravel base and surfacing,
in accordance with the road improvement standards of this article.
D. All changes in grade where the algebraic difference in grade is 1% or
greater shall be connected by a vertical curve having a length of at least
50 feet for each 2% difference in grade or portion thereof and providing
minimum sight distance, of 200 feet for local streets, 275 feet for
collector street and 475 feet for an arterial street.
E. In all subdivisions, the minimum street right-of-way shall be measured
from lot line to lot line.
18-814 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-814
AO:1030
F. For both major and minor subdivisions, sight triangle easements shall
be required at all intersections, in addition to the right-of-way, which is
outlined above, in which no grading, planting or structure shall be
erected or maintained more than three feet above the street center line
except for street signs, fire hydrants and light standards. Sight
triangles shall conform to RSIS standards.
G. No street shall have a name, which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate
the name of an existing street that confusion results. The continuation
of an existing street shall have the same name. Curvilinear streets shall
change their names only at street intersections.
H. Continuous open driveways in excess of the permitted maximum width
as specified in § 18-807 shall be prohibited.
I. The pavement width of streets and the quality of surfacing and base
materials shall adhere to the minimum standards set forth by the
Township, County or State Engineers when said paving concerns roads
under their jurisdiction and where such standards exist. Concerning
streets under the jurisdiction of the Township, the following standards
shall apply:
1. In non-residential developments, the minimum total asphalt
thickness for all pavements shall be seven inches. The use of
alternate materials for subbase is permitted on an equivalent
asphalt basis (i.e., one inch of asphalt equals one and three-fourths
(1 3/4) inches of soil aggregate, Type 5, Class A; one inch of asphalt
also equals two and one-half (2 1/2) inches of soil aggregate, Type
5, Class B). The minimum top shall be two inches of FABC-1, Mix
No. 5. The above minimum pavement thickness is based upon a
California Bearing Ratio (C.B.R.) value of eight, and if actual C.B.R.
results indicate higher values, a lesser pavement thickness will be
entertained by the Township Engineer's approval, subject to the
Township Manager's approval.
2. Prior to placing the surface course, the base course shall have a
tack coat of bituminous material. All of the above construction shall
be in accordance with current New Jersey Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications and supplements thereto
on file in the office of the Township Engineer. The standard
specifications are further supplemented to require that, prior to
placing final surface course, the intermediate base course may be
open to traffic and shall so remain for at least one winter season.
Thereafter, the Township Engineer shall inspect the pavement and
will require areas of pavement failure to be removed and replaced,
settled areas shall be leveled with hot mixed bituminous concrete.
The Township Engineer may require compacted select fill or
approved subbase material as needed to replace native subgrade
material.
18-814 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-814
AO:1031
3. All traffic lanes, both moving and parking, shall be striped in
accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, as
amended. (U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration, 1971).
4. The work shall be inspected through the course of construction by
the Township Engineer or his duly authorized representative, who
shall be notified before any work is started or continued.
J. The approval by the Board or other Township agency of any map of land
delineating streets shall in no way be construed as an acceptance of any
street indicated thereon.
K. Construction standards as specified herein, shall also apply to any
private street as may be part of a development application receiving
preliminary approval by the Board.
L. Fire lanes located in other than those paved portions of a lot shall be
designed such that the subsurface base be at least 12 feet wide over a
quality subsoil necessary and sufficient to support use by Township fire
vehicles. The subsurface base may be covered with at least two inches
of topsoil prior to the placement of sod or alternative paving block or
similar decorative paving may be used. Final design shall be approved
by the Township Engineer.
M. Curbs and sidewalks shall be provided on all new streets and any
streets abutting proposed development or major subdivision.
N. Curbs. Unless otherwise approved, curbs shall be constructed of
Portland cement air entrained concrete, Class C, having a standard
strength of 4,500 pounds per square inch. Depressed curbs at
driveways shall have a full depth of 18 inches.
O. Sidewalks. All required sidewalks, except in areas where the
Residential Site Improvement Standards shall apply (N.J.A.C. 5:21-5),
shall be a minimum of four feet wide by four inches thick, where
reasonable, except at driveways and aprons where they shall be six
inches thick. Sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland cement air
entrained concrete, Class C 1 having a standard strength of 4,000
pounds per square inch.
P. Street Lights. Street lights shall be provided in accordance with the
standards in § 18-804.
Q. Street Signs.
1. All street signs shall have reflectorized white letters on a green
background (e.g., type E 450 or equal). Both signs and poles shall
either be of nonferrous metal or galvanized steel. Neighborhood or
directional signs shall be installed on major roads to aid in
circulation.
18-814 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-814
AO:1032
18-815. Stormwater Management/Residential Site Improvement
Standards.
2. All signs shall be mounted on two inch diameter posts embedded in
concrete.
3. Street signs shall be approved by the Township Engineer prior to
ordering by the developer.
4. Street signs shall comply with the requirements contained within
the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
5. Street signs shall be installed by the developer upon the completion
of the base course of each roadway within the development. No
certificates of occupancy will be issued until the signs are installed
and approved by the appropriate Township officials.
R. Any off-tract improvements shall be completed in accordance with the
requirements of Article V.
A. General.
1. All storm drainage systems consisting of catch basins, underground
sewers, paved swales, box culverts, rip rap or otherwise stabilized
stream banks, dams, retention basins and swales, trash racks, and
other devices shall be installed so that all stormwater is led to and
confined in natural drainage channels without causing erosion.
Bicycle safe storm sewer gratings are required. They shall also be
designed in accordance with the standards established in this
article.
2. Concrete pipe is preferred to box culverts for drainage under
roads. In such cases an easement of appropriate width.
3. Storm sewer requirements and standards for all development shall
be those required by the New Jersey Residential Site Improvement
Standards (NJRSIS). For nonresidential development, the following
requirements shall also apply.
4. All major site and subdivision plan development plans shall include
a Stormwater Management Report prepared, signed and sealed by
an engineer licensed by the State of New Jersey. The report is to
analyze pre-and post-development conditions and conveyance
system design. Drainage area maps are to be provided.
Calculations justifying runoff coefficients, travel time, flow rates,
flow volumes, storage volumes and discharge rates, pipe routing
tables, etc, are to be included.
5. The stormwater management plans submitted shall demonstrate
careful consideration of the general and specific concerns, values
and standards of the Township Master Plan and applicable County,
regional and State storm drainage control programs, any County
18-814 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-815
AO:1033
Mosquito Commission control standards, and shall be based on
environmentally sound site planning, engineering and architectural
techniques.
6. Development shall use the best available technology to minimize
off-site stormwater runoff, increase on-site infiltration, simulate
natural drainage systems, and minimize off-site discharge of
pollutants to ground and surface water and encourage natural
filtration functions. Best available technology may include
measures such as detention or retention basins, recharge trenches,
piping, contour terraces and swales.
7. It shall be the policy of the Board to minimize the number of basins
by encouraging the joint use of basins between various
developments and minimizing the number of basins within a
development.
8. When required in appropriate situations for safety purposes, all
basins shall be surrounded by a fence with a minimum height of
three feet. The fence shall be a "Superior-Rail" system as designed
by Superior Concrete Products or similar product which shall be
approved by the Department of Public Works.
B. Detention Facilities: Maintenance and Repair.
1. Responsibility for operation and maintenance of detention
facilities, including periodic removal and disposal of accumulated
particulate material and debris, shall remain with the owner(s) of
the property with permanent arrangements that it shall pass to any
successive owner, unless assumed by a government agency. If
portions of the land are to be sold, legally binding arrangements
shall be made to pass the basic responsibility to successors in title.
These arrangements shall be designated for each project, the
property owner, governmental agency, or other legally established
entity to be permanently responsible for maintenance, hereinafter
referred to as the responsible person.
2. Prior to granting approval to any project subject to review under
this chapter, the developer shall enter into an agreement with the
municipality (or County) to ensure the continued operation and
maintenance of the detention facility. This agreement shall be in a
form satisfactory to the Board Attorney, and may include, but may
not necessarily be limited to deed restrictions, covenants, and
bonds. In cases where property is subdivided and sold separately, a
homeowners association or similar permanent entity should be
established as the responsible entity, absent an agreement by a
governmental agency to assume responsibility.
3. In the event that the detention facility becomes a danger to public
safety or public health, or if it is in need of maintenance, the
municipality shall so notify in writing via certified mail the
responsible person. From that notice, the responsible person shall
18-815 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-815
AO:1034
have 14 days to effect such maintenance and repair of the facility
in a manner that is approved by the Municipal Engineer or their
designee. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform such
maintenance and repair, the municipality may immediately proceed
to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
4. See Subsection 18-815.1.9B12 for maintenance fees for
stormwater management facilities. [Ord. No. 2017-42; Ord. No.
2018-27]
5. The plans are to include notes pertaining to restoration procedures
and a long term maintenance schedule and procedures.
Maintenance shall include mowing, leaf removal, debris removal,
inspection, desilting, and any other work specific for the facility; to
include but not limited to inlet and outflow piping, overflow and
trash racks, ladders, steps and rungs, fencing, signage, etc. [Ord.
No. 2017-42]
C. Stormwater Management: Detention Basin Locations.
1. Low maintenance, water tolerant grasses, or wildflower seed mix
shall be used as appropriate. Type of vegetation used shall be
compatible with the site.
2. Landscaping may be required around basins.
3. All basins, regardless of ownership, shall have access leading to a
public right-of-way. The access should include a stabilized surface
suitable for the passage of maintenance and inspection equipment
and vehicles. An easement granting the municipality the right to
access and perform work in the basin should be granted.
D. Stormwater Management: Discharge Location.
1. The development plans should illustrate all topographical features
and structures downstream of all basin discharges, emergency
spillways, stormwater outfalls and swales, for a sufficient distance
to evaluate the impact of discharge. A stability analysis of the
downstream flow path should be provided. Impacts on structures
and/or private property should be reviewed.
2. The impact of increased runoff volume from basins should also be
reviewed.
3. Easements should be provided at all points of discharge onto
adjacent properties, regardless of the use of basins, swales, or
pipelines to convey the flow to the property line.
E. Stormwater Management: Water Quality.
1. The water quality standards for stormwater management shall be
those included in the NJRSIS (N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.6).
18-815 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-815
AO:1035
18-815.1. Scope and Purpose. [Ord. No. 2006-22 § 815.1; Ord. No.
2007-1 § 815.1]
F. Any off-tract improvements shall be completed in accordance with the
requirements of Article V.
A. Policy Statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural Best Management Practices
(BMP's). Structural BMPs should be integrated with nonstructural
stormwater management strategies and proper maintenance plans.
Nonstructural strategies include both environmentally sensitive site
design and source controls that prevent pollutants from being placed on
the site or from being exposed to stormwater. Source control plans
should be developed based upon physical site conditions and the origin,
nature, and the anticipated quantity or amount of potential pollutants.
Multiple stormwater management BMPs may be necessary to achieve
the established performance standards for water quality, quantity, and
groundwater recharge.
B. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
development," as defined in § 18-815.1.1.
C. Applicability.
1. This section shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
a. Nonresidential major developments; and
b. Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
2. This section shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Township of Lakewood.
D. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this section are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this section shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This section
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
18-815 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-815.1
AO:1036
18-815.1.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2006-22 § 815.1.1; Ord. No.
2007-1 § 815.1.1; Ord. No. 2018-27]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this section shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this section its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
CAFRA CENTERS, CORES OR NODES — Those areas within boundaries
accepted by the Department pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:8E-5B.
CAFRA PLANNING MAP — The geographic depiction of the boundaries for
Coastal Planning Areas, CAFRA Centers, CAFRA Cores and CAFRA Nodes
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7E-5B.3.
COMPACTION — The increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — A pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic uses serving
the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and access to
public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — An agency designated by the Ocean County
Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater management
plans and implementing ordinance(s). The County review agency may either
be: a County planning agency; or a County water resource association
created under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5, if the ordinance or resolution delegates
authority to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove municipal
stormwater management plans and implementing ordinances.
DEPARTMENT — The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — A person professionally qualified and duly licensed
in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may include, but not
necessarily be limited to, development of project requirements, creation
and development of project design and preparation of drawings and
specifications.
DESIGNATED CENTER — A State Development and Redevelopment Plan
Center as designated by the State Planning Commission such as urban,
regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DRAINAGE AREA — A geographic area within which stormwater,
sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular receiving waterbody
or to a particular point along a receiving waterbody.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — A neighborhood designated by the
Urban Coordinating Council "in consultation and conjunction with" the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — An area or feature which is
of significant environmental value, including but not limited to: stream
corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered or
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
18-815.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-815.1.1
AO:1037
threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland forest;
steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge areas.
Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using the
Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Nongame Species Program.
EROSION — The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by
water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that has been covered with a layer
of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water relative to
natural conditions in the area.
INFILTRATION — The process by which water seeps into the soil from
precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Any "development" that provides for ultimately
disturbing one or more acres of land or increasing impervious surface by
one-quarter (1/4) acre or more. Disturbance for the purpose of this rule is
the placement of impervious surface or exposure and/or movement of soil
or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Lakewood.
NODE — An area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — A chemical element or compound, such as nitrogen or
phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the development of
organisms.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, the Township of Lakewood, or political subdivision of this State
subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law,
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter
backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage sludge, munitions,
chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes, radioactive
substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954,
as amended (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.)), thermal waste, wrecked or discarded
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal, agricultural, and
construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged directly or
indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the State, or
to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous and
nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — The amount of water from precipitation that infiltrates into
the ground and is not evapotranspired.
RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY — For purposes of Stormwater Management,
a "residential community" is defined as a residential area or subdivision of
property created by a developer where there is no homeowners association
or condominium association created in conjunction with said development,
18-815.1.1 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-815.1.1
AO:1038
and where stormwater management facilities are dedicated, assigned, and/
or transferred to the municipality, and accepted by official action of the
municipality. Residential communities shall be required to pay fees for
stormwater management in accordance with § 18-815.1.9B12.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT OR PROJECT — For purposes of
Stormwater Management, a "residential development or project" is defined
as a residential area or subdivision of property created by a developer
where there is created a homeowners association or condominium
association created in conjunction with said development, and where either
the homeowners/condominium association or the developer maintains and
repairs all stormwater management facilities as set forth in its approval
for said development, the Developers Agreement associated therewith, the
master deed and by-laws of said association and by deed restrictions
created as a condition of any approval of said development. General
maintenance of all stormwater management facilities so constructed shall
be in accordance with §§ 18-815.1.9B1 through 18-815.1.9B8.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, mineral or organic, that is in suspension, is
being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water or
gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — The lot or lots upon which a major development is to occur or has
occurred.
SOIL — All unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — An area delineated on the State Plan Policy
Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is intended to be
the focus for much of the State's future redevelopment and revitalization
efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — Defined as the geographic application of the
State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Water resulting from precipitation (including rain and
snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the subsurface, or is
captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or drainage facilities,
or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — An excavation or embankment
and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A stormwater
management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a detention basin or
infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool (a retention basin), or
be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most constructed stormwater
wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Any structural or
nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater runoff and associated
pollutants, or to induce or control the infiltration or groundwater recharge
18-815.1.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-815.1.1
AO:1039
of stormwater or to eliminate illicit or illegal non-stormwater discharges
into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Water flow on the surface of the ground or in
storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — A flood hazard area, which may be
influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is primarily
caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION — The time it takes for runoff to travel from
the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point of interest
within a watershed.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The sum of dissolved and undissolved
solids and particulate matter of a buoyancy and/or specific gravity that
prohibits their settling in runoff.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— A neighborhood given priority access to State resources through the New
Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONE — A zone designated by the New Jersey
Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Urban Enterprise
Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Previously developed portions of
areas:
WATERS OF THE STATE — The ocean and its estuaries, all springs, streams,
wetlands, and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
WETLANDS OR WETLAND — An area that is inundated or saturated by
surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to
support, and that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation.
18-815.1.2. General Standards. [Ord. No. 2006-22 § 815.1.2; Ord.
No. 2007-1 § 815.1.2]
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
1.
2. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
3. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
4.
A. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management
Measures.
18-815.1.1 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-815.1.2
AO:1040
18-815.1.3. Stormwater Management Requirements for Major
Development. [Ord. No. 2006-22 § 815.1.3; Ord. No. 2007-1
§ 815.1.3]
1. For site improvements regulated under the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS) at N.J.A.C. 5:21, the RSIS shall
apply in addition to this section except to the extent the RSIS are
superseded by this section or alternative standards applicable
under a regional stormwater management plan or water quality
management plan adopted in accordance with the rules of the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
2. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in Subsection 18-815.1.3. To the maximum extent
practicable, these standards shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies into the design.
If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards,
structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet
these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
3. It shall be the policy of the Lakewood Planning Board and Zoning
Board of Adjustment to minimize the number of basins by
encouraging the joint use of basins between various developments
and minimizing the number of basins within a development.
A. The development shall incorporate a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of a
major development in accordance with Subsection 18-815.1.9.
B. Stormwater management measures shall avoid adverse impacts of
concentrated flow on habitat for threatened and endangered species as
documented in the Department Landscape Project or Natural Heritage
Database established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150.
C. The following linear development projects are exempt from the
groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater
runoff quality requirements of Subsection 18-815.1.3F and G.
1. The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
2. The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
3. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
18-815.1.2 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-815.1.3
AO:1041
D. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of Subsection 18-815.1.3F and G may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
1. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
2. The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of Subsection 18-815.1.3F and G to
the maximum extent practicable;
3. The applicant demonstrates that, in order to meet the requirements
of Subsection 815.1.3F and G, existing structures currently in use,
such as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
4. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under Subsection 18-815.1.3D3
above within the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream,
that would provide additional opportunities to mitigate the
requirements of Subsection 18-815.1.3F and G that were not
achievable on site.
E. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies.
1. To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in Subsection
18-815.1.3F and G shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies set forth at Subsection
18-815.1.3E into the design. The applicant shall identify the
nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of the project.
If the applicant contends that it is not feasible for engineering,
environmental, or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural
stormwater management measures identified in Subsection
18-815.1.3E2 below into the design of a particular project, the
applicant shall identify the strategy considered and provide a basis
for the contention.
2. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
a. Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
b. Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
18-815.1.3 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-815.1.3
AO:1042
c. Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
d. Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from
preconstruction to post construction. "Time of concentration"
is defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
e. Minimize land disturbance including clearing and grading;
f. Minimize soil compaction;
g. Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
h. Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
i. Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
(1) Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy Subsection 18-815.1.3E3 below;
(2) Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
(3) Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
(4) When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
3. Site design features identified under Subsection 18-815.1.3E2i(2)
above shall comply with the following standard to control passage
of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For
purposes of this subsection, "solid and floatable materials" means
sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see Subsection
18-815.1.3E3c below:
a. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
18-815.1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-815.1.3
AO:1043
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven (7.0) square
inches, or is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
b. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven (7.0) square inches, or be no
greater than two (2.0) inches across the smallest dimension.
c. This standard shall not apply under the following conditions or
situations:
(1) Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
(2) Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in Subsection 18-815.1.3G1 are conveyed
through any device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility,
manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin hood)
that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through
one of the following:
(a) A rectangular space four and five-eighths (4 5/8)
inches long and one and one-half (1 1/2) inches wide
(this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in Subsection 18-815.1.3G1; or
18-815.1.3 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-815.1.3
AO:1044
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
4. Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in Subsection
18-815.1.3F and G shall be dedicated to a government agency,
subjected to a conservation restriction filed with the Ocean County
Clerk's office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that
ensures that measure or an equivalent stormwater management
measure approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in
perpetuity.
5. Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in Subsection 18-815.1.6, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org.
F. Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity
Standards.
1. This subsection contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major development.
a. The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
b. The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
(1) The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at Subsection 18-815.1.4, either:
(a) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
(b) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to post-construction for the
2-year storm is infiltrated.
18-815.1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-815.1.3
AO:1045
(2) This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the "urban redevelopment area," or to
projects subject to Subsection (3) below.
(3) The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
(a) Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater than "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
(b) Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material."
"Source material" means any material(s) or
machinery, located at an industrial facility, that is
directly or indirectly related to process,
manufacturing or other industrial activities, which
could be a source of pollutants in any industrial
stormwater discharge to groundwater. Source
materials include, but are not limited to, raw
materials; intermediate products; final products;
waste materials; by-products; industrial machinery
and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and detergents
that are related to process, manufacturing, or other
industrial activities that are exposed to stormwater.
(4) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surface ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
c. In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at Subsection 18-815.1.4,
complete one of the following:
18-815.1.3 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-815.1.3
AO:1046
(1) No increase in runoff volume. Demonstrate through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that for stormwater
leaving the site, post-construction runoff hydrographs for
the 2-, 10-, and 100-year storm events do not exceed, at
any point in time, the preconstruction runoff hydrographs
for the same storm events;
(2) No increase in runoff rate. Demonstrate through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis that there is no increase,
as compared to the preconstruction condition, in the peak
runoff rates of stormwater leaving the site for the 2-, 10-,
and 100-year storm events and that the increased volume
or change in timing of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damage at or downstream of the site. This analysis
shall include the analysis of impacts of existing land uses
and projected land uses assuming full development under
existing zoning and land use ordinances in the drainage
area;
(3) Reduction in runoff rate. Design stormwater management
measures so that the post-construction peak runoff rates
for the 2-, 10-, and 100-year storm events are 50, 75 and
80 percent, respectively, of the preconstruction peak
runoff rates. The percentages apply only to the postconstruction
stormwater runoff that is attributable to the
portion of the site on which the proposed development or
project is to be constructed.
2. Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at Subsection 18-815.1.1 shall be
submitted to the Ocean County Soil Conservation District for
review and approval in accordance with the requirements of this
and any applicable Ocean County Conservation District guidelines
for stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control. For the
purposes of this section, "agricultural development" means land
uses normally associated with the production of food, fiber, or
livestock for sale. Such uses do not include the development of land
for the processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of
agriculturally related products.
G. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards.
1. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional one-quarter (1/4) acre of impervious surface
is being proposed on a development site. The requirement to
reduce TSS does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge
regulated under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed
18-815.1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-815.1.3
AO:1047
under the New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically
exempt under a NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water
quality design storm is one and one-quarter (1.25) inches of rainfall
in two hours. Water quality calculations shall take into account
the distribution of rain from the water quality design storm, as
reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of runoff may
take into account the implementation of nonstructural and
structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative
Rainfall
(Inches)
0 000 65 0.8917
5 083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
2. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in Subsection 18-815.1.6, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual
and other sources of technical guidance are listed in Subsection
18-815.1.6. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the removal
rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and
methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the design
engineer provides documentation demonstrating the capability of
these alternative rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of
any approved alternative rate or method of calculating the removal
rate shall be provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
18-815.1.3 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-815.1.3
AO:1048
Environmental Protection, PO Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625-0418.
3. If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R = A + B
(A X B)/100
Where:
R = total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs, and
A = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = the TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second BMP
Table 2: TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rate
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater
Wetland
90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment
Device
50-90*
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
* Manufactured treatment devices depend on and are determined
on a case-by-case basis.
4. If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the sub areas converge on site in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
5. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of the site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
18-815.1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-815.1.3
AO:1049
achieving the performance standards in Subsection 18-815.1.3F
and G.
6. In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measures shall be designed to prevent
any increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
7. Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas have been established for the protection of water
quality, aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance,
exceptional recreational significance, exceptional water supply
significance, and exceptional fisheries significance of those
established Category One waters. These areas shall be designated
and protected as follows:
a. The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
(1) A 300 foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards or from the center line of the waterway where
the bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or
vegetation allowed to follow natural succession is
provided.
(2) Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under Subsection (1) above shall
only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural
use, parking area or maintained lawn area). The
encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of the bank of the waterway or
center line of the waterway where the bank is undefined.
All encroachments proposed under this subsection shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
b. All stormwater shall be discharged outside of but may flow
through the special water resource protection area and shall
comply with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the
"Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
18-815.1.3 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-815.1.3
AO:1050
Jersey," established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
c. If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
(1) Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One waterway;
(2) Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a 95% TSS post-construction removal
rate;
(3) Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
(4) The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
(5) A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
(6) All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
d. A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to Subsection 18-815.1.3G7 has been
approved by the Department of Environmental Protection, then
the provisions of the plan shall be the applicable special water
resource protection area requirements for that waterway. A
stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to
Subsection 18-815.1.3G7 shall maintain or enhance the
current functional value and overall condition of the special
water resource protection area as defined in Subsection
18-815.1.3G7a(1) above. In no case shall a stream corridor
protection plan allow the reduction of the Special Water
18-815.1.3 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-815.1.3
AO:1051
18-815.1.4. Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater
Recharge. [Ord. No. 2006-22 § 815.1.4; Ord. No. 2007-1 § 815.1.4]
Resource Protection Area to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the waterway subject to this Subsection.
e. Paragraph G7 does not apply to the construction of one
individual single-family dwelling which is part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
A. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
1. The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
a. The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 — Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds; or
b. The Rational Method for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
2. For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at Subsection 18-815.1.4A1a and the
Rational and Modified Rational Methods at Subsection
18-815.1.4A1b. A runoff coefficient or a groundwater recharge land
cover for an existing condition may be used on all or a portion of
the site if the design engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition
has existed on the site or portion of the site for at least five years
without interruption prior to the time of application. If more than
one land cover have existed on the site during the five years
immediately prior to the time of application, the land cover with the
lowest runoff potential shall be used for the computations. In
addition, there is the presumption that the site is in good
hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park),
with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with good
hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land use
type is cultivation).
3. In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
18-815.1.3 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-815.1.4
AO:1052
18-815.1.5. Standards for Structural Stormwater Management
Measures. [Ord. No. 2006-22 § 815.1.5; Ord. No. 2007-1 § 815.1.5]
culverts, that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
4. In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surfaces separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 — Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
5. If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
B. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
1. The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSR-32 A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual; at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609)984-6587.
C. Design of stormwater conduit systems shall utilize the Sandy Hook,
25-year rainfall.
A. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
1. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes; depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
2. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
18-815.1.4 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-815.1.5
AO:1053
18-815.1.6. Sources for Technical Guidance. [Ord. No. 2006-22
§ 815.1.6; Ord. No. 2007-1 § 815.1.6]
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than 1/3 the width of the diameter of the
orifice or 1/3 the width of the weir, with a minimum spacing
between bars of one inch and a maximum spacing between bars of
six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must comply with
the requirements of Subsection 18-815.1.7B.
3. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4, and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
4. At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of two and one-half (2 1/2)
inches in diameter.
5. Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
Subsection 18-815.1.7.
B. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design
engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and
water quality design and performance standards established by
Subsection 18-815.1.3 of this section.
C. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of Subsection 18-815.1.3 of this section, provided the pollutant removal
rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced
Technology and certified by the Department.
A. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at Subsections 1 and 2 below, which are
available from Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton,
New Jersey, 08625; telephone (609)777-1038.
1. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
18-815.1.5 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-815.1.6
AO:1054
18-815.1.7. Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins.
[Ord. No. 2006-22 § 815-1.7; Ord. No. 2007-1 § 815.1.7]
2. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
B. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
1. The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
A. This subsection sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This subsection applies to any new stormwater management basin.
1. When required in appropriate situations for safety purposes, all
basins to be maintained by Lakewood Township shall be
surrounded by a fence with a minimum height of three feet. The
fence shall be a "Superior-Rail" system as designed by Superior
Concrete products or similar product, which shall be approved by
the Department of Public Works.
B. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape Provisions.
1. A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
a. The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six
inch spacing between the bars.
b. The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
c. The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed two and one-half (2.5) feet per second under the full
range of stage and discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the
basis of the net area of opening through the rack.
d. The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
2. An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
18-815.1.6 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-815.1.7
AO:1055
a. The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
b. The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
c. The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
3. For purposes of this subsection, escape provisions means the
permanent installation of ladders, steps, rungs, or other features
that provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
a. If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
Subsection 18-815.1.7C a freestanding outlet structure may be
exempted from this requirement.
b. Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than two and one-half (2 1/2) feet. Such safety
ledges shall be comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four
to six feet in width. One step shall be located approximately
two and one-half (2 1/2) feet below the permanent water
surface, and the second step shall be located one to one and
one-half (1 1/2) feet above the permanent water surface. See
Subsection 18-815.1.7D for an illustration of safety ledges in a
stormwater management basin.
c. In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
C. Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards.
1. A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, County or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
D. Illustration of Safety Ledges in a New Stormwater Management Basin.
18-815.1.7 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-815.1.7
AO:1056
18-815.1.8. Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan.
[Ord. No. 2006-22 § 815.1.8; Ord. No. 2007-1 § 815.1.8]
A. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan.
1. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this section, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the Checklist for the Site Development Stormwater
Plan at Subsection 18-815.1.8C as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this section.
3. The applicant shall submit 17 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
Subsection 18-815.1.8C of this section.
B. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board from which municipal
approval is sought. That municipal board shall consult the engineer
retained by the Planning and/or Zoning Board (as appropriate) to
determine if all of the checklist requirements have been satisfied and to
determine if the project meets the standards set forth in this section.
C. Checklist Requirements. The following information shall be required:
18-815.1.7 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-815.1.8
AO:1057
1. Topographic Base Map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals two
hundred feet (1" = 200') or greater, showing two foot contour
intervals. The map as appropriate may indicate the following:
existing surface water drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils,
erodible soils, perennial or intermittent streams, waterways that
drain into or upstream of the Category One waters, wetlands and
flood plains along with their appropriate buffer strips, marshlands
and other wetlands, pervious or vegetative surfaces, existing manmade
structures, roads, bearing and distances of property lines,
and significant natural and man-made features not otherwise
shown.
2. Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual, or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
3. Project Description and Site Plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of areas of
impervious surface including, but not limited to existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control, and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions shall also be
provided.
4. Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of Subsection
18-815.1.2 through Subsection 18-815.1.5 are being met. The focus
of this plan shall be to describe how the site is being developed to
meet the objective of controlling groundwater recharge,
stormwater quality and stormwater quantity problems at the
source by land management and source controls whenever
possible.
5. Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
a. Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
18-815.1.8 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-815.1.8
AO:1058
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
b. Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
6. Calculations.
a. Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for a predevelopment and post-development conditions for the
design storms specified in Subsection 18-815.1.3.
b. When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g., infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site boring logs or soil pit profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
7. Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of Subsection 18-815.1.9.
8. Waiver from Submission Requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this section may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in Subsection 18-815.1.8C1 through C6 of this
subsection when it can be demonstrated that the information
requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on
the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the
review process.
9. Drainage Basin Map. The applicant shall be responsible for
identifying the downstream stormwater system and watercourses
that will be impacted by the proposed development.
10. Site Plan Checklist. Major development applications shall require
the applicant to complete and submit a copy of the Site Conditions
Checklist, which can be found immediately following this section.
18-815.1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-815.1.8
AO:1059
Lakewood Township - Site Conditions Checklist
In addition to the prescribed information in Subsection
18-815.1.8: Requirements for a Site Development
Stormwater Plan, Part C - Checklist Requirements, the
following elements should be considered and presented as
appropriate and in combinations sufficient to adequately
indicate the existing site conditions and that of the
surrounding environs:
Yes No Not
Applicable
Hydrology
Perennial or intermittent
streams as shown on the
USGS 7.5 Minute Quadrangle
Maps and as indicated in the
Soil Survey of Hunterdon
County, New Jersey
Special water resource
protection areas along all
waters designated Category
One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B and
perennial/ intermittent
streams that drain into/
upstream of the Category One
waters as shown on the USGS
Quad Maps Soil Survey
Wetlands, NJDEP Linear Non-
Tidal Wetlands, Marshlands
and NJDEP Letter of
Interpretation findings FEMA
Q3 Flood Data 100 Year-
Floodplains and Floodways
Boundaries and Buffers
Appropriate buffers to
streams, rivers, wetlands,
marshlands, ponds, lakes and
other water bodies as
specified in pertinent
"ordinances, rules,
regulations, statutes or other
provisions of law imposed by
local, County, State or Federal
agencies"
18-815.1.8 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-815.1.8
AO:1060
Lakewood Township - Site Conditions Checklist
In addition to the prescribed information in Subsection
18-815.1.8: Requirements for a Site Development
Stormwater Plan, Part C - Checklist Requirements, the
following elements should be considered and presented as
appropriate and in combinations sufficient to adequately
indicate the existing site conditions and that of the
surrounding environs:
Yes No Not
Applicable
Existing and proposed
bearing and distances of
property lines
Existing and proposed
conservation, maintenance,
construction, reconstruction,
sight, utility, drainage and
right-of-way easements and
dedications
Vegetation and Landscaping
Pervious and vegetated
surfaces, i.e. woodlands,
grasslands and other
significant natural features
Native and invasive stands of
vegetation
Vegetated habitat for
Threatened and Endangered
Species
Geology and Soils
Steep slopes (10% or greater)
Colloidal soils
Geology and Soils
Highly erodible soils, with an
erodibility factor (K) of .40 or
greater
Seasonal high water table
Soils subject to dynamic
compaction and compacted
soil
Shrink swell potential
Deeply fractured bedrock
18-815.1.8 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-815.1.8
AO:1061
18-815.1.9. Maintenance and Repair. [Ord. No. 2006-22 § 815.1.9;
Ord. No. 2007-1 § 815.1.9; Ord. No. 2013-76; Ord. No. 2018-27; Ord.
No. 2018-65]
Lakewood Township - Site Conditions Checklist
In addition to the prescribed information in Subsection
18-815.1.8: Requirements for a Site Development
Stormwater Plan, Part C - Checklist Requirements, the
following elements should be considered and presented as
appropriate and in combinations sufficient to adequately
indicate the existing site conditions and that of the
surrounding environs:
Yes No Not
Applicable
Hardpans and plough pans
Existing Man-made
Structures and Activities
Existing buildings and
significant permanent manmade
features
Roads by classification,
parking areas and other
impervious surfaces
Bridges and culverts
Utilities, sub-surface and
above ground mining/quarry
operations and blasting areas
Acid or other hazardous
runoff
Areas of fill and buried debris
Wellheads and associated
groundwater withdrawals
Pipes, discharges and BMP's
of existing stormwater
utilities
Groundwater mounding
Septic systems and wells of
adjacent lots
Leaking sanitary lines
Previous land use
(agricultural, industrial,
commercial)
18-815.1.8 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-815.1.9
AO:1062
A. Applicability.
1. Projects subject to review as in Subsection 18-815.1C shall comply
with the requirements of Subsection 18-815.1.9B and C and all
applicable requirements as stated in Section 400 "Performance
Guarantees" and Section 401 "Maintenance Guarantees" as set
forth in Article IV "Improvement Guarantees" within the Township
of Lakewood's Unified Development Ordinance (UDO).
B. General Maintenance.
1. The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
2. Maintenance shall include mowing, leaf removal, debris removal,
inspection, desilting, and any other work specific for the facility.
The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a
homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
3. Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the municipality in a residential development or project.
Responsibility for facilities located in commercial or industrial
development sites shall be the owner of the site. A named
individual shall be responsible for the safety and maintenance of
said facility. The posting of a two year maintenance guarantee in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 shall be required for all
facilities not dedicated to the municipality or other public agency.
4. If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection 18-815.1.9B2 above is not a public agency, the
maintenance plan and any future revisions based on Subsection
18-815.1.9B7 below shall be recorded upon the deed of record for
each property on which the maintenance described in the
maintenance plan must be undertaken. The deed must also be
submitted for review and approval by the Board Engineer and
Attorney.
5. Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
18-815.1.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-815.1.9
AO:1063
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
6. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection 18-815.1.9B2 above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
7. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection 18-815.1.9B2 above shall evaluate the effectiveness of
the maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and
the deed as needed, and submit such changes for approval by the
Township Engineer prior to amending the deed.
8. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
Subsection 18-815.1.9B2 above shall retain and make available,
upon request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental, or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
plan and the documentation required by Subsection 18-815.1.9B6
and Subsection 18-815.1.9B7 within 10 days of such a request.
9. The requirements of Subsection 18-815.1.9B3 and B4 do not apply
to stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
10. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify in writing via
certified mail the responsible party. From that notice, the
responsible party shall have 14 days to effect such maintenance
and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the
Municipal Engineer or Director of Public Works. If the responsible
party fails or refuses to perform such maintenance and repair, the
municipality or County may immediately proceed to do so and shall
bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
11. All basins, regardless of ownership, shall have access leading to a
public right-of-way. The access should include a stabilized surface
suitable for the passage of maintenance and inspection equipment
and vehicles. An easement granting the municipality or the
responsible party the right to access and perform work in the basin
must be provided on the file map and a deed recorded for the
easement. No improvements such as fences or buffer landscaping
shall be permitted within the easement.
12. For all proposed stormwater management facilities serving a
residential community, the Township shall be responsible for all
maintenance (both annual and perpetual). The following one-time
18-815.1.9 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-815.1.9
AO:1064
18-815.1.10. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2006-22
§ 815.1.10]
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure, or land in violation of this section shall be
subject to the following penalties:
Failure to comply with any provisions of this section shall be considered
a violation of the Revised General Ordinances of Lakewood Township and
shall be punishable by a fine of $1,000 or 90 days in jail, or both. Each day
of such violations continuance shall be considered as a separate offense and
shall be separately punishable. These penalties shall not be in the exclusive
remedy available, and nothing in this section shall prevent an applicant
from obtaining injunctive relief.
18-815.1.11. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 2006-22 § 815.1.11]
This section shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the County
review agency, or 60 days from the receipt of the section by the County
review agency if the County review agency should fail to act.
18-815.1.12. Penalties. [Ord. No. 2006-22 § 815.1.12]
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure, or land in violation of this section shall be
subject to the penalties set forth by Lakewood Township within § 1109 of
this chapter.
maintenance fees shall be assessed per unit and paid to the
Township before the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy to
any unit for all of the original units created, and thereafter for any
subsequent certificates of occupancy issued for any subsequently
created units via further subdivision of the original parcels. The
maintenance fee assessment shall be held by the Township in a
separate and dedicated fund, which shall be used by the Township
exclusively for maintenance and repair of such stormwater
management facilities within the Township.
a. Single-family detached dwellings: $1,000
b. Single-family attached dwellings: $750
c. Multi-family dwellings: $550
Funds shall be posted as a condition of the release of this
performance guarantee.
C. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
18-815.1.9 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-815.1.13
AO:1065
18-815.1.13. Severability. [Ord. No. 2006-22 § 815.1.13]
If the provisions of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or
clause of this section shall be judged invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the
remainder of any section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of
this section.
18-815.1.14. Fees. [Ord. No. 2006-22 § 815.1.14]
All subdivision and site plan review fees associated with this section shall
be provided by the applicant as established within §§ 1105, 1106, 1007 and
1108 of this chapter.
18-816. Traffic Signs and Traffic Control.
A. A proposed traffic control plan showing traffic signs to be installed by
the developer at its sole expense shall be submitted with each
application for a major subdivision or site plan that involves the
creation of new streets or site plan approval. The plan shall indicate the
nature and proposed location of traffic and street signs needed to
assure safe and controlled flow of traffic on the tract, including site
ingress and egress. The information to be set forth on each sign,
including street names, stop and yield signs at intersections,
designations of one way and dead end streets, and prohibited parking
locations, shall be specified.
B. Final sign locations shall be determined by the Township after review,
when necessary, with the Department of Transportation (NJDOT) or
County, of proposed traffic generation and vehicular movement data
and relevant speed and accident sampling data.
C. All signs shall be approved by the Township Engineer prior to their
purchase by the developer, to assure uniformity and conformance with
the standards contained in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
D. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any structure located on
the tract until the Township Engineer has certified the satisfactory
installation by the developer of all signage in accordance with the
traffic control plan.
E. The installation of electronic traffic control signaling devices is not
prescribed by this section, since a pro-rata portion of the developer's
cost for such devices shall be assessed and collected from the developer
pursuant to § 18-504.
F. All non-residential site plans shall submit plans to the Township Public
Safety Office and the NJDOT to allow for Title 39 enforcement.
18-815.1.13 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-817
AO:1066
18-817. Water Supply/Residential Site Improvement Standards.
Water mains are to be installed in accordance with the requirements of the
Lakewood Township Municipal Utility Authority or New Jersey American
Water Company and the following except in areas where the Residential Site
Improvement Standards shall apply (N.J.A.C. 5:21-5):
18-818. Projections into Required Yards. [Ord. No. 2019-9]
A. Engineering requirements for all water main installations are to comply
with the rules and regulations of the Department of Environmental
Protection and the Lakewood Township Municipal Utilities Authority
(MUA) or the New Jersey American Water Company.
B. All joints shall be push-on or mechanical joint.
C. The depth of pipe from the finished surface or roadway or grade shall
be not less than three feet from the top of pipe.
D. Fire hydrants shall be generally located not more than 800 feet apart
and spotted, where practicable, as follows: near streetlights, inlets,
street intersections, and on property lines.
E. Valves shall be installed with all fire hydrants and at such other
locations in the lines as directed by the Lakewood Township Municipal
Utilities Authority or the New Jersey American Water Company.
F. House service connections, from the main to the curb stop and box,
must be installed at all lots prior to placing any foundation or surface on
the roadway.
G. No installation shall be covered until inspected and approved by the
Township Engineer or designee.
H. Where public water is accessible, the subdivider shall construct water
mains in such manner as to make adequate water service available to
each lot or dwelling unit within the subdivision or development. The
entire system shall be designed in accordance with the requirements
and standards of the local and/or state agency having approval
authority and shall be subject to its approval. The system shall also be
designed with adequate capacity and sustained pressure to service the
lots and permit necessary fire-fighting abilities.
A. No part of a building shall be erected within, or shall project into any
required yard area except as follows:
1. Cornices, projecting eaves, gutters or chimneys, and bay windows
or similar architectural projections may project a distance of up to
30 inches into a required yard area unless such a projection would
encroach beyond the property line of the neighboring property.
2. Handicapped ramps may project into a required setback. However,
the portion of the ramp where the floor elevation exceeds three feet
18-817 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-818
AO:1067
18-819. Temporary Construction and/or Sales Trailers.
Temporary construction and/or sales trailers are permitted in all districts.
A construction trailer may be at the site for the period of construction
beginning with the issuance of a construction permit and concluding before
the final certificate of occupancy is granted. A sales trailer may be at the
site for the period beginning with the posting of bonds for the project
and concluding before a certificate of occupancy is granted (or the last
certificate of occupancy in the case of a residential project). Construction
and sales trailers shall be set back from all street and lot lines at least 30
feet. Any temporary construction or sales signage must comply with the
standards as noted in § 18-812.
18-820. Environmental Impact Statement.
above finished grade, may not be closer than three feet to a
property line.
3. Second story and higher floors may project 24 inches into the front
or rear yard setback.
4. Steps that descend to a basement may project into any yard
setback as long as it is no closer than five feet from the adjacent
property line.
5. All other steps, including a maximum 6' x 4' landing or stoop may
project into any front or rear yard setback.
A. An Environmental Impact Statement is required for every major
subdivision containing 10 units or more and major site plan application
applications consisting of more than 5,000 square feet of commercial
space.
B. Every Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) shall contain the
following:
1. A key map showing the location of the development and how it
relates to the surrounding region affected thereby.
2. A description of the development specifying, in the form of maps,
drawings, graphs or similar visual aids, and also by narrative, what
is to be done and how it is to be done during and after construction
of the development, including information and technical data
adequate to permit a careful assessment of the environmental
impact of the development.
3. An inventory of the existing environmental conditions at the
development site and in the surrounding region affected thereby
which shall describe the following:
a. Physical Characteristics
(1) Air quality.
18-818 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-820
AO:1068
(2) Hydrology, including maps and descriptions of streams,
water bodies and flood plains and a discussion of water
quality.
(3) Geology.
(4) Soils and their properties, including capabilities and
limitations.
(5) Topography and slope.
(6) Drainage.
(7) Vegetation.
(8) Air Quality and Water Quality shall be described with
reference to the standards promulgated by the
Department of Environmental Protection of the State of
New Jersey and soils shall be described with reference to
criteria contained in the Ocean County, New Jersey Soil
Survey Standards and Specifications, issued by the United
States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation
Service.
b. Wildlife
(1) Fish and aquatic organisms.
(2) Wild animals.
c. Man-made Conditions and Structures
(1) Sanitary and storm sewer systems, including planned
construction.
(2) Noise characteristics and levels.
(3) Traffic Volume.
(4) Land use, including maps and descriptions of zoning and
Master Plan delineation of the development area.
d. Aesthetics.
e. A listing of all licenses, permits or other approvals required by
municipal, County or State law, the status of each, and proof
that the applicant has contacted officials of any Federal, State,
County or municipal agency affected by the proposed
development.
4. (Reserved)
5. (Reserved)
18-820 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-820
AO:1069
6. An assessment of the probable impact of the development upon all
of the topics listed in Subsection B3 above.
7. A listing and evaluation of adverse environmental impacts which
cannot be avoided, with particular emphasis upon air or water
pollution, increase in noise during and after construction, damage
to plant, tree and wildlife systems, damage to natural resources,
displacement of people and businesses, increase in sedimentation
and siltation, flooding, potential storm water runoff damage both
on and off site, increase in municipal services, and health, safety
and well being of the public. Off-site and off-tract impact shall also
be set forth and evaluated.
8. A thorough description of the steps to be taken to minimize adverse
environmental impact before, during and after construction of the
development, both at the development site and in the surrounding
region affected thereby, such description to be accompanied by
necessary maps, schedules and other explanatory data as may be
needed to clarify and explain the actions to be taken.
9. Any irreversible and irretrievable commitment of resources which
would be involved in the proposed action shall be identified and
described.
10. A statement of alternatives to the proposed development which
might avoid some or all of the adverse environmental effects,
including a no-action alternative, with an objective evaluation of
each alternative including the no-action alternative.
11. A reference list of available pertinent, published information
relating to the development, the development site, and the
surrounding region affected thereby.
12. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Reviewing Board may waive
the requirement for an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) if
sufficient evidence is submitted by the applicant to support a
conclusion that the proposed development will have a slight or
negligible environmental impact. Portions of such requirement may
likewise be waived upon a finding by the Board that a complete EIS
need not be prepared in order to evaluate adequately the
environmental impact of the development.
13. Environmental Considerations: Environmental elements relating to
soil erosion, preservation of trees, protection of watercourses,
topography, soil, and wildlife shall be reviewed and the design of
the plan shall minimize any adverse impact on these elements.
Whenever possible, the natural features of a site are to be
preserved, flood plains respected, and excessive cuts or fill
avoided. In reviewing a site plan, the reviewing authority shall take
into consideration the effect of the development upon all aspects of
the environment as outlined in the EIS requirements, as well as the
sufficiency of the applicant's proposal in their EIS for dealing with
18-820 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-820
AO:1070
18-821. Building Uniformity in Residential Developments.
any immediate or projected adverse environmental effects. The
reviewing authority may require, as a condition of approval of
the application, that steps be taken to minimize the adverse
environmental impact during and after construction, and no final
approval shall be issued until all such requirements shall have
been complied with or compliance is guaranteed by a performance
guarantee meeting the standards, requirements and procedures
set forth in this section.
A. Uniformity Prohibited. Except as provided in this section, not more than
one construction permit shall hereafter be issued for any dwelling to be
erected in a residential development consisting of two or more houses if
it is substantially alike in exterior design and appearance with any
neighboring dwelling situated on the same or opposite sides of the
street within 500 feet or five contiguous building lots, whichever is less,
of a dwelling then in existence or for which a building permit has been
issued or is pending. The distance herein specified shall be construed to
mean the distance between the street property lines of the respective
properties.
B. Criteria. Houses within such specified distances from each other shall
be considered uniform in exterior design and appearance if they have
any one of the following characteristics:
1. The same basic dimensions and floor plans are used without
substantial differentiation of more than one or (1) more exterior
elevations.
2. The same basic dimensions and floor plans are used without
substantial change in orientation on the lots.
3. The height and design of the roofs are without substantial change
in design and appearance.
4. The appearance and arrangement of the windows and other
openings in the front elevation, including the appearance and
arrangement of the porch and garage, are not substantially
different from adjoining dwellings.
C. Additional requirement. In addition to the requirements specified in
Subsection 18-821B, there shall not be less than two separate basic
house designs in every residential development consisting of four to six
houses, and not less than four basic house designs in every residential
development of seven to 15 houses and not less than five basic house
designs in every residential development consisting of 16 to 25 houses
and not less than eight basic designs in every development consisting of
more than 25 houses.
D. Survey Required. To insure conformity with the provisions of this
section, no construction permit shall hereafter be issued for more than
18-820 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-821
AO:1071
18-822. Soil Removal and Grading.
one dwelling in any residential development, except as provided in
Subsection 18-821E, until an engineer's survey or architect's drawing
of the entire tract, or part to be developed, has been submitted to
the Construction Official showing thereon, or on a schedule attached
thereto, the model number, type and design of each house. The survey
or drawing shall show the dimensions of each house, its exact location
on the lot with setbacks and width or depth of all yard spaces. In the
event of subsequent desired change in basic, size or location of a house
in such a tract, a revised plan and application therefor shall be filed and
approved before such work is started.
E. Affidavit required. To further insure the conformity with the provisions
of this section in respect to new subdivisions for the purpose of a
housing development, the Planning Board may at its discretion require
an affidavit or a performance guarantee approved as to form so that the
intent and purpose of this section is satisfied.
A. Soil Removal and Redistribution. No topsoil shall be removed from the
Township of Lakewood. Further, any proposal for the removal of more
than 425 cubic yards of soil from one location in the Township to
another shall be the subject of a site plan application containing the
information required for an application under Article VI of this chapter
for both the sending and receiving lots. The excavation and grading for
completion of a site plan shall be done in accordance with the approved
site plan that contains soil erosion and sediment control provisions. Any
application proposing the excavating, redistributing and/or removal of
more than 425 cubic yards of material or involving an area exceeding
1,275 square feet shall include on its site plan the following: the means
to prevent erosion, provide for sedimentation control and drainage,
dust and mud on the premises as well as abutting lands; the
preservation of soil fertility and the resulting ability of the area affected
to support plant and tree growth by maintenance of adequate topsoil
consisting of at least six inches of the original layer; maintenance of
necessary lateral support and grades of abutting land, structures and
other improvements; prevention of pits and declivities which are
hazardous or which provide insect breeding locations; the physical
characteristics and limitations of the soil for the use to which the land
may lawfully be put; and such other factors as may reasonably bear
upon or relate to the public health, safety and general welfare.
Additional controls on soil removal are set forth in the General
Ordinances of the Township of Lakewood.
B. Grading.
1. All lots being filled shall be filled with clean fill and/or topsoil to
allow complete surface draining of the lot into local storm sewer
systems or natural drainage rights-of-way. No construction or
regrading shall be permitted which creates or aggravates water
stagnation, siltation or a drainage problem on adjacent properties.
18-821 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-822
AO:1072
Grading shall be limited to areas shown on an approved site or
subdivision plan. Any topsoil distributed during approved
operations shall be redistributed throughout the site.
2. There shall be change in existing grade which raises the elevation
of the lot within five feet of a property line. Furthermore, there
shall be no change in existing grade which raises any portion of the
lot more than one and one-half (1.5) feet above the existing ground
level at a point 20 feet from the property line. When necessary, a
swale shall be created in order to control surface waters in a
manner that will protect abutting lands. For retaining walls which
exceed three feet in height above the natural grade, material
certifications and engineering drawings shall be required to ensure
durability and stability, provided that for each six inches in height
above the natural grade a retaining wall shall be set back two feet
from the property line to which it is adjacent. Distances from
property lines shall be measured at right angles to straight portions
and radial curved portions.
C. Clearing and Grading
1. The erection of a structure on a lot, the clearing of less than 10
trees or the alteration of the existing grade on a lot smaller than
two acres shall be in accordance with a plan approved by the
Township Engineer or his representative and shall meet the
requirements as set forth below. The clearing of 10 trees or more or
the alteration of the existing grade on a lot of two acres or more
shall be in accordance with a plan approved by the Planning Board.
This provision shall not apply to the clearing and grading necessary
for the construction of one single-family house unless that
construction is incidental to an application that is otherwise before
the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment, or proposes
clearing and grading of land within 15 feet of the side or rear yard
property lines.
2. Where possible, land shall be graded so that all stormwater runoff
from each lot shall drain directly to the street. If impossible to drain
directly to the street, it shall be drained to a system of interior yard
drainage designed in accordance with the requirements of the
subdivision and site plan provisions, the NJ Residential Site
Improvement Standards, or as otherwise required by the Township
Engineer.
3. Unless otherwise required by the Township Engineer, all tree
stumps, masonry and other obstructions shall be removed to a
depth of two feet below existing or finished grade, whichever is
lower.
4. The minimum slope for lawns shall be 1%, and for smooth, hard
finished surfaces other than roadways, four-tenths of one percent
(4/10 of 1%).
18-822 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-822
AO:1073
18-823. Plot Plan and As-Built Survey. [Ord. No. 2007-7 § 1]
5. The maximum grade for lawns within five feet of a building shall be
10% and for lawns more than five feet from a building, 25%.
A. Two signed and sealed copies of the individual plot plans shall be
submitted to the Township Engineer to accompany any permit
applications for new residential construction that require a building
permit, including new dwellings, additions, pools, retaining walls, and
any other improvements that require a permit. The individual plot plan
shall be utilized to review the project for adequate drainage and
grading and compliance to all applicable Township standards.
B. The Township Engineer will review the submitted documents and either
disapprove or approve the submitted plot plan. The applicant will be
notified if any revisions are required. (All plot plan review checklists
will be copied to the Construction Official.)
C. A road opening permit is required for any activity within a right-of-way
associated with the plot plan review.
D. The Construction Official shall not issue a construction permit until the
Township Engineer approves the proposed individual plot plan and
issuance of a road opening permit (where required).
E. Each individual plot plan shall be drawn to scale (not less than 1"
equaling 40'), signed and sealed by a professional licensed to practice
in the State of New Jersey, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 13:40-7.3, and
shall be no smaller than 8 1/2" x 14".
F. Individual plot plans should include the following information:
1. Bearing and distances.
2. North arrow, written and graphic scale.
3. Existing/proposed easements and dedications.
4. Existing/proposed building dimensions.
5. Existing/proposed sidewalks, driveways and retaining walls.
6. "Building Envelope" geographically depicting and dimensioning
zoning setback requirements and/or setbacks approved by the
Board (if applicable).
7. Street name, right-of-way width, pavement width and composition
of the street(s) fronting lot.
8. The title block on the plot plan must include the property address,
the block number and lot number of the property in question and
the name of the applicant.
9. Limits of clearing and soil disturbance.
18-822 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-823
AO:1074
10. Existing trees to be protected and remain.
11. Location of wetlands with NJDEP permit number and/or any
environmental constraints to the property. If there are no wetlands,
then a note should be added to the plan stating that no wetlands
exist on the subject property.
12. Sufficient street elevations including the center line, gutter and top
of curb (if applicable); existing and proposed lot elevations to
include a minimum, property corners, midpoints of property lines,
building corners and center of lot; the finished first floor, basement
and garage floor elevations of the proposed structure and adjacent
dwellings, corner elevations, and topography within 25 inches of
property lines. The source of data should be noted. Any specific
circumstances for which elevation requirements cannot be met will
be subject to review by the Township Engineer on a case-by-case
basis. Under no circumstances shall individual lots be graded in
such a manner as to redirect stormwater runoff onto adjacent and/
or downstream properties or disturb or change the existing
drainage patterns of adjacent lot(s). Drainage flow arrows shall be
provided to clearly depict the directions of stormwater runoff. No
grading or creation of sump conditions shall be permitted on an
adjacent lot unless the owner of said adjacent lot(s) has specifically
granted permission, in writing.
13. Location of any storm drainage pipes within 25 feet of the property
including pipe size, grade and invert.
14. Lot grading shall be designed to provide positive runoff with grades
at a minimum slope of one (1.0%) percent.
15. Other items that may be required by the Township Engineer for
proper construction of the site.
G. Plot plans for board approved projects shall match approved
subdivision/site plans.
H. If a basement is proposed, a subsurface soils investigation certified by a
licensed engineer shall be submitted with the plot plan. Basement floor
elevations shall be set a minimum two feet above the Seasonal High
Water Table (SHWT).
I. The applicant shall submit a foundation survey prior to an inspection of
the foundation for approval and backfilling. This survey shall include
the elevation and location of the foundation. If the as-built survey
establishes locations or elevations different from those submitted in the
plot plan, minor changes in the proposed grading shall be noted. Any
substantial differences will be reviewed by the Township Engineer with
the action plan.
J. The applicant shall submit a final "As-Built" Survey, signed and sealed
by a professional engineer or land surveyor prior to requesting a final
18-823 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-823
AO:1075
18-824. Site Disturbance. [Ord. No. 2010-56]
Since all Zoning Districts within the Township currently permit a maximum
disturbance of 100% of the property, in an effort to protect the Township's
natural resources, all properties which contain non-isolated wetlands,
Category 1 streams, or the presence of threatened and endangered species,
shall be limited to a maximum disturbance of 90% of the entire site. This
requirement shall be in addition to and not in place of any requirements of
other municipal, Ocean County or State of New Jersey regulations.
Certificate of Occupancy (CO inspection) from the Township Engineer.
All information on the as-built survey shall include the items described
under Subsection F and forwarded to the Engineer prior to backfilling.
K. Exemptions. The requirements of this section may be waived at the
discretion of the Township Engineer for building additions, sheds,
fences, etc. contingent on the following:
1. Proof that addition is not in a flood hazard zone.
2. A survey locating the existing dwelling and proposed addition,
fence, shed, etc.
3. A site inspection by the Lakewood Township Engineering Inspector
to verify that the proposed addition, fence, shed, etc. will not create
drainage problems.
18-823 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-824
AO:1076
ARTICLE IX
ZONING DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS72
[The Zoning Schedule was adopted by Ord. No. 2005-59 to
summarize the bulk requirements of each zone district.]
18-900. General. [Ord. No. 2018-35]
These regulations shall be applicable to the use of all lands in the Township
of Lakewood and any structures thereon.
A. The provisions of this article shall be held to be the minimum
requirements (or the maximum, when so specified). Where this article
imposes a greater restriction than is imposed and required by other
provisions of law or by other rules, regulations or resolutions, the
provisions of this article shall control. Where other laws, rules,
regulations or resolutions require greater restrictions than are imposed
by this article, the provisions of such laws, rules, regulations or
resolutions shall control.
B. The standards established by this article shall be applied uniformly
within each zoning district to each class or kind of structure or land.
Only uses which are specifically provided for by the regulations of any
district shall be permitted in that district unless authorized by the
Zoning Board of Adjustment pursuant to this article.
C. Upon the effective date of this article, no building shall hereafter be
used, erected, altered, converted, enlarged, added to, moved or
reduced, nor shall any lands be subdivided, developed, or redeveloped
in any manner except in conformity with the standards provided herein,
as applied to the zoning district in which the building or land is located.
D. Upon the effective date of this article, all buildings and land, which are
not in full conformity with the standards provided herein, as applied to
the zoning district in which the building or land is located, shall be
deemed to be nonconforming and shall be subject to the provisions of
this article.
E. The following uses shall be permitted in all residential districts:
1. Family Day Care Homes:
a. Family day care homes as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.5, and
are to be licensed or registered to the extent required by the
laws and regulations of the State of New Jersey.
b. The standards for said homes shall be the same as for singlefamily
dwelling units located in the same District, in
accordance with the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law,
40:55D-66.5b, as amended.
72.Editor's Note: Schedule of General Zoning Regulations may be found as an attachment to
this chapter.
18-900 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-900
AO:1077
c. Family day care homes are to be considered as home
occupations, and as such, shall not be subject to more
stringent restrictions than exist or apply to all other home
occupations in the particular residential district in which the
family day care home is located.
F. Child Care
1. Centers for which a license is required from the New Jersey
Department of Human Services pursuant to P.L. 1983, c. 492
(C:30:5B-1 et seq.) shall be a permitted use in all zoning districts.
a. The floor area in any building or structure used for child care
purposes shall be excluded in calculating any parking
requirement.
b. The floor area in any building or structure used for child care
purposes shall be excluded in calculating the permitted density
allowable for that building.
c. Notwithstanding the above statements, the development of a
child care facility in an existing structure or in a stand alone
facility, shall require site plan review and will be subject to the
standards of the district in which it is located. Parking
requirements shall be based on evaluating the following
factors: the maximum number of children for which the site is
licensed; the number of employees present during the
maximum shift; and the operational plan for the drop-off and
pick-up of children during the school day.
2. Child care centers and the provision of child care services which do
not require licensure by the State of New Jersey shall be permitted
in all zoning districts subject to Subsection F1a and Subsection F1b
and are exempt from the requirements of Subsection F1c above.
G. Cluster development shall be permitted in accordance with § 18-904 of
this chapter.
H. Townhouse (single-family attached) development:
Where townhouse (single-family attached) are outright permitted uses
(not conditional permitted uses) the following standards shall apply:
1. Minimum tract size shall be one-half (0.5) acre in all districts in
which townhouses are permitted with the exception of the HD-7
zone in which the minimum tract size shall be one acre.
2. Tract Boundaries: from a state highway - 100 feet. From all other
right-of-way lines - 25 feet. From all other property lines-20 feet.
3. Maximum Density - eight townhouses or 16 dwelling units per acre.
4. Minimum tract width - 125 feet.
18-900 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-900
AO:1078
5. Minimum tract depth - 100 feet.
6. The overall townhouse tract may be subdivided to provide feesimple
ownership for the individual townhouse units. The following
shall apply to the individual townhouse lots:
a. Minimum front yard setback - 25 feet from internal streets.
b. Minimum side yard setback (for end units) - 12 feet.
c. Minimum rear yard setback - 20 feet.
d. Maximum height - 35 feet or 2.5 stories, whichever is less.
7. Minimum distance between buildings - 25 feet.
8. Maximum units per structure — eight.
9. Maximum building length - 240 feet.
10. A structure shall not have more than two connected townhouse
units on one facade without providing a variation in setback of at
least two feet.
11. Each unit shall have an area designated for the storage of trash and
recycling containers. All trash containers shall be screened from
view. Screening should blend with the building exterior.
12. All residential development shall provide a usable rear yard depth
of at least 20 feet, including the rear yard setback. Decks shall be
permitted within the usable yard area, but detention/retention
facilities, drainage swales, or any easements which would inhibit
the use of the rear yard are prohibited. For the purposes of this
section a drainage swale with side slopes exceeding 1:10 and a
depth exceeding 18 inches shall be established as the limit which
inhibits use of this yard and is therefore prohibited.
13. Architectural drawings of the front, side and rear elevations shall
be provided. Architectural drawings should also be provided if the
HVAC equipment is to be located on the roof.
14. All areas put into common ownership for common use by all
residents shall be owned by a non-profit homeowners association in
accordance with the requirements of the Department of
Community Affairs and the following:
a. Deed restrictions and covenants shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements and standards of the
Department of Community Affairs.
b. The homeowners association shall be responsible for the
ownership and maintenance of all common space and any
streets not accepted by the Township.
18-900 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-900
AO:1079
c. This organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of
any common open space, by sale or otherwise, except to
another organization conceived and established to own and
maintain the common open space and non-dedicated streets.
d. The homeowners association shall be established prior to any
certificates of occupancy being issued. Membership of the
association shall be automatic and mandatory for each owner
of a dwelling unit and any succeeding owner thereto, being
accomplished by the purchase of a dwelling unit in the
development.
e. The association shall guarantee access to all the common areas
to all persons legally residing in the development.
f. The association shall be responsible for liability insurance,
taxes certificate of incorporation shall contain provisions so
that adequate funds will be available for maintenance.
g. The documents establishing the association shall provide a
plan for the maintenance of all common areas and undedicated
streets.
15. Parking shall be provided within 150 feet of the structure.
16. All units shall be designed with a unified architectural style.
17. Variations in setback and building facades shall be provided.
18. All HVAC equipment shall be located in rear or side yards and shall
be buffered from adjoining properties and units, or shall be placed
on rooftops.
19. Maximum building coverage of the tract: 35%.
I. Any site or development may contain more than one use as long as the
uses are permitted in the zoning district in which it is located.
J. In all Residential Zoning districts, any tract for which a complete
application for a Planned Educational Campus has been filed with the
Lakewood Planning Board, in compliance with § 18-902H1(g), reapproval
for development of that tract shall be conditionally permitted
in accordance with the provisions of the R-7.5 (Residential) Land Use
District. Such re-approval shall be subject to all of the following
conditions:
1. Submission and approval of a complete development application to
the Lakewood Planning Board based on the provisions of the R-7.5
(Residential) Land Use District, § 18-902G.
2. A complete application for a Planned Educational Campus in
accordance with § 18-902H1g must have been submitted prior to
18-900 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-900
AO:1080
18-901. Establishment of Zoning Districts and Zoning Map.73 [Ord.
No. 2005-96 § 1; Ord. No. 2013-58 § 1; Ord. No. 2013-59 § 1; Ord.
No. 2013-60 § 1; Ord. No. 2014-20 § 1; Ord. No. 2014-51 § 1; Ord.
No. 2014-52 § 1; Ord. No. 2014-61 § 1; Ord. No. 2015-35 and
removed 4-24-17 by Court Order; Ord. No. 2017-24; Ord. No.
2017-51 § 2; Ord. No. 2019-15]
the adoption of this ordinance. [Adopted July 12, 2018 by Ord.
No. 2018-35]
3. No development of any portion of the Planned Educational Campus
may have been commenced at or before the time of adoption of this
ordinance. If any development of the Planned Educational Campus
was commenced at or before the time of adoption of this ordinance,
the re-approval provisions of this section shall be prohibited.
[Adopted July 12, 2018 by Ord. No. 2018-35]
A. The following zoning districts are hereby created and all land within the
Township of Lakewood shall be placed in one of these districts by
designation on a zoning map, as described below.
1. Agricultural (A-1)
2. Residential (R40)
3. Residential (R20)
4. Residential (R15)
5. Residential (R12)
6. Residential (R12A)
7. Residential (R10)
8. Residential (R7.5)
9. Multi-Family Residential (R-M)
10. Multi-Family Limited Residential (R-LM)
11. Public Housing (PH-1)
12. Office Transitional (OT)
13. Neighborhood Business (B-1)
14. Central Business (B-2)
15. Highway Business (B-3)
16. Wholesale Service (B-4)
73.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map may be found as an attachment to this chapter.
18-900 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-901
AO:1081
17. Highway Development (B-5)
18. Highway Development (B-5A)
19. Highway Development (HD-6)
20. Highway Development (HD-7)
21. Residential Office Park (ROP)
22. Open Space and Preservation (OSP)
23. Airport Hazard Zone (AHZ)
24. Cedarbridge Redevelopment Area (DA-1)
25. Industrial (M-1)
26. (Reserved)
27. (Reserved)
28. Industrial Park Limited Professional Service (LP)
29. (Reserved)
30. Corporate Campus/Stadium Support Zone (B-6)
31. Hospital Support (HS)
32. Single Family Residential (R-10A)
33. Airport Business Commercial (ABC)
34. Oak Street Core Neighborhood Overlay Zone-1 (OSCN 1)
35. Oak Street Core Neighborhood Overlay Zone-2 (OSCN 2)
36. Cross and Prospect Street Core (CPSC) Overlay
37. (Reserved)
38. Public Purpose (PP) Overlay
39. Single Family Residential (R-10B)
40. (Reserved)
41. Single Family Residential (R-20A)
42. (Reserved)
43. Residential Cluster (R-15/10 C)
44. Residential Cluster (R-20/12 C)
45. Residential Cluster (R-40/20 C)
18-901 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-901
AO:1082
46. Planned Development Non-Contiguous Cluster (PDNC) Overlay
47. Riparian Buffer Conservation Overlay [Ord. No. 2017-24 § 1;
Ord. No. 2019-15 § 2]
B. Zoning Map and Interpretation.74
1. The boundaries of these zoning districts are established on a map
entitled "Zoning Map of the Township of Lakewood — 2017," dated
December 7, 2017, which accompanies this chapter and is
incorporated herein. [Ord. No. 2017-51 § 3]
a. Amendments to the Zoning Map:
(1) The following Blocks and Lots are and the same are hereby
retuned to the R-40/20C Zone and the Zoning Map and tax
records shall be adjusted accordingly to reflect same:
[Added 8-15-2019 by Ord. No. 2019-31]
Block Lot(s)
807 1
808 1 and 2
809 1 and 2
814 1
815 All
815.01 All
837 3
2. The map entitled "Amended Zoning Map of the Township of
Lakewood - 2017" and dated December 7, 2017 shall be adopted
and replace the Zoning Map referred to above upon the completion
of roadway improvements so as to minimize traffic congestion as
recommended in the 2017 Lakewood Township Master Plan, and
more specifically set forth in the introductory "whereas" clauses of
Ordinance No. 2017-51. [Ord. No. 2017-51 § 3]
3. The boundaries between zoning districts are, unless otherwise
indicated, either the center lines of streets or railroad rights-ofway,
municipal boundary lines, property lines existing at the time of
the zoning map adoption or amendment, or lines parallel or
perpendicular thereto. Distances not specifically indicated shall be
determined by the scale of the map. [Ord. No. 2019-15]
4. Where a district boundary line divides a lot existing at the time of
adoption of this chapter, the regulations applicable to the least
74.Editor's Note: The Official Zoning Map can be found as an attachment to this chapter.
Prior Ordinance History: Ord. Nos. 2005-95, 2005-96, 2006-29, 2013-30, 2013-40,
2013-58, 2013-59, 2013-60, 2014-13, 2014-20, 2014-47, 2014-51, 2014-52, 2014-61,
2015-35.
18-901 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-901
AO:1083
18-902. Residential Zoning Districts. [Ord. No. 2009-53 §§ 1, 2; Ord.
No. 2010-22 § 1; Ord. No. 2010-78; Ord. No. 2013-58 § 2; Ord. No.
2013-79 §§ 1-5; Ord. No. 2014-20 § 3; Ord. No. 2014-51 § 3; Ord. No.
2014-52 §§ 3-5; Ord. No. 2014-61 §§ 3-5; Ord. No. 2015-30; Ord. No.
2016-34; Ord. No. 2017-24 § 2; Ord. No. 2017-51 §§ 7-19]
restrictive district shall extend over the portion of the lot in the
more restrictive district for a distance of not more than 20 feet.
A. Agricultural (A-1)
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Single family detached dwellings.
b. Farm house and associated dwellings.
c. Customary and conventional agricultural uses with the
exception of raising hogs and goats. The processing or sale of
agricultural products grown or raised on the premises is
permitted. This may include the slaughtering of poultry,
however, no other type of abattoir shall be permitted.
d. Places of worship including parish house and classrooms. (See
§ 18-905 for regulations in addition to Subsection 5 below.)
e. Public and private schools in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-906 and the bulk standards below.
2. Conditional Uses (See Article X):
a. Public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature but not
including warehouses and workshops.
b. Golf Courses with a minimum of nine holes and a minimum
distance from tee to green for a hole of 100 yards. A clubhouse
is permitted on the same property.
Public Utility installations which involve no storage yard or
commercial office space.
c. Hospitals and Clinics.
3. Accessory Uses:
a. Private residential garages.
b. Sheds.
c. Greenhouses.
d. Private Swimming Pools.
e. Home occupations, provided that the sum of all such uses in a
dwelling complies with the following standards:
18-901 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1084
(1) The home occupation may not employ more than two
people at any one time who are not a member of the
household residing in the dwelling.
(2) The home occupation shall primarily be conducted in a
manner that does not bring more than one client at a time
to the premises.
(3) The residential character of the exterior of the structure
appearance shall not be compromised.
(4) Not more than 25% of the total floor area of the dwelling
may be devoted to the home occupation use.
(5) There shall be no outdoor storage or display of materials,
products or equipment.
(6) One off-street parking space must be provided in addition
to those required for the dwelling if a non-resident person
is employed in conjunction with the home occupation use.
(7) Deliveries are permitted by way of UPS, FedEx or other
similar agencies.
4. Design Regulations - For all permitted uses except for Places of
Worship:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 2 acres.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 200 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 50 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 20 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 15 feet with an aggregate of 40 feet.
f. Accessory Building:
(1) Side Yard Setback — 10 feet.
(2) Rear Yard Setback — 10 feet.
g. Maximum Building Coverage — 25%.
h. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet.
5. Design Regulations - Places of Worship:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 2 acres.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 200 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 50 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 20 feet.
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1085
e. Side Yard Setback — 15 feet with an aggregate of 40 feet.
f. Maximum Building Coverage — 20%.
g. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet.
B. Residential (R-40) [Amended by Ord. No. 2005-77]
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Single Family Detached Housing.
b. Places of worship including parish house and classrooms. (See
§ 18-905 for regulations in addition to Subsection 5 below.)
c. Public and private schools in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-906 and the bulk standards below.
d. Planned Affordable Residential Development in those areas
identified on the Zoning Map for R-40/20 Cluster and in
accordance with the bulk standards and requirements of
Subsection 18-902B7.
2. Conditional Uses (See Article X):
a. Public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature but not
including warehouses and workshops.
b. Congregate or Assisted Living and Nursing Care.
c. Adult Communities. (See § 18-1001).
d. Planned Unit Development (See § 18-1021). [Ord. No.
2017-51 § 4]
3. Accessory Uses:
a. Private residential garages.
b. Sheds.
c. Greenhouses.
d. Private Swimming Pools.
e. Home occupations, provided that the sum of all such uses in a
dwelling complies with the following standards:
(1) The home occupation may not employ more than two
people at any one time who are not a member of the
household residing in the dwelling.
(2) The home occupation shall primarily be conducted in a
manner that does not bring more than one client at a time
to the premises.
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1086
(3) The residential character of the exterior of the structure
appearance shall not be compromised.
(4) Not more than 25% of the total floor area of the dwelling
may be devoted to the home occupation use.
(5) There shall be no outdoor storage or display of materials,
products or equipment.
(6) One off-street parking space must be provided in addition
to those required for the dwelling if a non-resident person
is employed in conjunction with the home occupation use.
(7) Deliveries are permitted by way of UPS, FedEx or other
similar agencies.
4. Design Regulations:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 40,000 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 150 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 50 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 30 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 15 feet with an aggregate of 40 feet.
f. Accessory Building:
(1) Side Yard Setback — 10 feet.
(2) Rear Yard Setback — 10 feet.
g. Maximum Building Coverage — 20%.
h. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet.
5. Design Regulations. Houses of Worship:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 40,000 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 150 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 50 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 30 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 15 feet with an aggregate of 40 feet.
f. Accessory Building:
(1) Side Yard Setback — 10 feet.
(2) Rear Yard Setback — 10 feet.
g. Maximum Building Coverage — 25%.
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1087
h. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet.
6. [Amended by Ord. No. 2005-94; Ord. No. 2015-30]
a. A cluster development plan for single family detached
dwellings shall be permitted in those areas designated on the
Zoning Map as R-40/20 Cluster and as provided in § 18-904.
The bulk standards for the lots in the cluster development shall
be in accordance with the R-20 Design Regulations.
b. The minimum size of a tract of land proposed for cluster
development shall be 15 acres. [Ord. No. 2015-30]
c. For cluster developments which comply with Subsection b
above that have been approved by the Planning Board either in
accordance with Subsection a above for cluster development
approved by the granting of lot area variances, which include a
remainder open space parcel, the bulk setback standards shall
be in accordance with the R-20 requirements per § 18-902C4c
through 18-902C4h. [Ord. No. 2015-30]
7. Planned Affordable Residential Development. [Added by Ord. No.
2005-77]
a. Dwelling Unit Types.
(1) TOWNHOUSE — A building containing attached dwelling
units arranged side by side with each unit divided by a
common party wall, and having a separate exterior
entrance.
(2) DUPLEX — A building containing two dwelling units,
arranged either side by side as in the case of a semidetached
dwelling or one over the other, with each unit
having a separate exterior entrance.
(3) MULTI-FAMILY — A building containing multiple dwelling
units, other than a townhouse, that are attached both
vertically and horizontally, with each unit having either a
separate exterior entrance or access from a common
hallway.
(4) SINGLE FAMILY — A detached building containing one
dwelling unit intended for one family and is not attached to
any other dwelling by any means and is surrounded by
open space or yards.
b. Minimum Tract Size. A planned affordable residential
development may only be developed on one or more
contiguous parcels of land having a minimum gross acreage of
four acres. Paper streets, existing rights-of-way or easements
shall not be deemed to divide acreage. The initial development
tract at the time of approval shall contain a minimum of 50%
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1088
publicly-owned land. Subsequent additions of contiguous
acreage may be made in any acreage amount without regard
to public ownership requirements provided such acreage is
integrated within the overall design of the initially approved
planned development.
c. Permitted Principal Uses. No building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used except for one or
more of the following uses:
(1) With public sewer and water: townhouses, duplex, multifamily,
and single family units restricted to low and
moderate income households.
(2) Community facilities related to the cultural, social and
recreational needs of the residents of the development,
including public or private parks, religious, ceremonial
and ritual facilities, churches and other places of worship.
(3) Public or private schools and day-care facilities related to
the needs of the residents of the development.
(4) Public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature.
(5) Neighborhood commercial uses, such as retail sales and
services and professional offices, designed and intended
primarily to serve the residents of the planned affordable
residential development. The lot area of such commercial
uses shall not exceed 10% of the tract area of a planned
development. Bulk and parking requirements for such
commercial uses shall conform to the standards contained
in § 18-903A, "B-1 Neighborhood Business Zone".
d. Permitted Accessory Uses. Any of the following uses may be
permitted when used in conjunction with a principal use:
(1) Off street parking and common parking areas.
(2) Maintenance and utility facilities intended to service the
residents of the planned development.
(3) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted
principal use.
e. Tract Development Requirements. The following standards
shall apply to any planned affordable residential development
tract:
(1) Minimum tract area: four acres.
(2) Maximum gross density: 22 dwelling units per acre.
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1089
(3) Residential unit distribution. At a minimum, two of the
permitted housing types shall be provided.
(4) Maximum building coverage: 45% of the gross tract area.
(5) Maximum impervious surface coverage: 80% of the gross
tract area.
(6) Minimum tract setbacks.
(a) Tract boundary: 10 feet shall be permitted if dwellings
front on an existing street and parking for such units
is provided from a service alley.
(b) Interior roadway/circulation driveway: 20 feet; except
10 feet shall be permitted if parking for dwelling units
is located with access from a service alley.
(c) Interior parking lot paved surface: 10 feet.
f. Bulk requirements. The following bulk requirements shall
apply to the permitted dwelling unit types in a planned
affordable residential development project.
(1) Townhouses on fee simple lots.
(a) Minimum lot
area
2,000 square feet
(b) Minimum lot
frontage/ width:
20 feet
(c) Minimum lot
depth:
80 feet
(d) Minimum front
yard:
20 feet for units with front entry
garages; 10 feet for units without
garages or with parking provided in
the rear yard with access from a
rear service alley
(e) Minimum side
yard:
0 feet for a common wall; 10 feet
end units
(f) Minimum rear
yard:
15 feet to principal building; 12
feet to garage or accessory
structures
(g) Maximum
building height:
45 feet
(2) Townhouse structures on common property.
(a) Clusters of townhouse dwellings may be arranged on a
tract subject to the applicable design standards
contained in § 18-902B7.
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1090
(3) Duplex dwelling on individual lots.
(a) Minimum lot
area:
6,000 square feet
(b) Minimum lot
frontage/ width:
50 feet
(c) Minimum lot
depth:
80 feet
(d) Minimum front
yard:
25 feet; except 10 feet if parking is
located in the rear yard with access
from a rear service alley
(e) Minimum side
yard:
8 feet one side; 15 feet total
(f) Minimum rear
yard:
15 feet to principal building; 12 feet
to garage or accessory structures
(g) Maximum
building height:
45 feet
(4) Single Family on individual lots.
(a) Minimum lot
area:
5,000 square feet
(b) Minimum lot
frontage/ width
45 feet
(c) Minimum lot
depth
80 feet
(d) Minimum front
yards
20 feet except 10 feet if parking is
located in the rear yard with access
from a rear service alley
(e) Minimum side
yard
7 feet one side; 15 feet total
(f) Minimum rear
yard
15 feet to principal building; 12 feet
to garage or accessory structures
(5) Duplex structures on common property.
(a) Clusters of duplex dwellings may be arranged on a
tract subject to the applicable design standards
contained in this chapter.
(6) Multi-family structures on common property.
(a) Clusters of multi-family dwellings may be arranged on
a tract subject to the applicable design standards
contained in this chapter.
(b) Minimum average floor area for a dwelling unit shall
be 1,100 square feet.
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1091
(c) Each unit above the ground floor may have a balcony
or terrace, which if provided shall be at least 60
square feet in area.
(d) Maximum building height – 45 feet.
g. Design requirements.
(1) Minimum distance between buildings that are designed on
common property.
(a) End wall (no openings)
to end wall:
12 feet
(b) End wall to window
wall:
30 feet
(c) Windows wall to window
wall
40 feet
(2) Townhouse structures shall not have a length in excess of
240 feet and shall be designed with offsets or other
architectural features so as to provide breaks in a linear
plane.
(3) Multi-family structures shall provide for variety in roof
height and avoid the appearance of one continuous multistory
building through the introduction of offsets or other
architectural features.
(4) Minimum off-street parking requirements. The parking
requirements as outlined in the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS) for residential land uses
shall apply to the permitted dwelling units. For townhouse
or multi-family units containing four or more bedrooms the
parking ratio shall be 2.5 per townhouse unit and 2.2 per
multi-family unit.
(5) Recreational facilities. Facilities to serve the recreational
needs of the residents of the planned development shall be
appropriately sized to the scale and type of the
development. A minimum recreational open space area
equal to 5% of the tract area of a planned development
shall be provided. Common open space areas shall
conform to the requirements for such open space, except
as modified herein, as contained in § 18-808 of this
chapter.
(6) Construction, design, lighting, screening and landscaping
of parking areas and streets shall conform to the
applicable provisions of this chapter. To the extent that the
Township's standards for the construction and design of
parking facilities including the size and number of parking
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1092
spaces as well as the design of internal streets and
circulation driveways is inconsistent with the Residential
Site Improvement Standards (RSIS), then the RSIS code
standards shall govern the parking area and street design.
h. Planned Development Findings. Prior to the approval of a
planned affordable residential development, the Planning
Board shall make findings and conclusions as required under
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45:
(1) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property
conforms to the zoning ordinance standards pursuant to
this article;
(2) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of
the common open space are adequate in the amount,
location and purpose.
(3) That provision through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular
and pedestrian traffic and the amenities of light and air,
recreation and visual enjoyment are adequate.
(4) In the case of a proposed development, which
contemplates construction over a period of years, that the
terms and conditions intended to protect the interests of
the public and the residents, occupants and owners of the
proposed development in the total completion of the
development are adequate.
C. Single-Family Residential (R-20)
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Single Family Detached Housing.
b. Places of worship including parish house and classrooms. (See
§ 18-905 for regulations in addition to Subsection 5 below.)
c. Public and private schools in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-906 and the bulk standards below.
2. Conditional Uses (See Article X):
a. Public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature but not
including warehouses and workshops.
b. Congregate or Assisted Living and Nursing Care.
c. Agricultural uses. The processing or sale of agricultural
products grown or raised on the premises is permitted.
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1093
d. Golf courses with a minimum of nine holes and a minimum
distance from tee to green for a hole of 100 yards. A clubhouse
is permitted on the same property.
e. Adult Communities. (See § 18-1001.)
f. (Reserved)75
3. Accessory Uses:
a. Private residential garages.
b. Sheds.
c. Greenhouses.
d. Private swimming pools.
e. Home occupations, provided that the sum of all such uses in a
dwelling complies with the following standards:
(1) The home occupation may not employ more than two
people at any one time who are not a member of the
household residing in the dwelling.
(2) The home occupation shall primarily be conducted in a
manner that does not bring more than one client at a time
to the premises.
(3) The residential character of the exterior of the structure
appearance shall not be compromised.
(4) Not more than 25% of the total floor area of the dwelling
may be devoted to the home occupation use.
(5) There shall be no outdoor storage or display of materials,
products or equipment.
(6) One off-street parking space must be provided in addition
to those required for the dwelling if a non-resident person
is employed in conjunction with the home occupation use.
(7) Deliveries are permitted by way of UPS, FedEx or other
similar agencies.
4. Design Regulations - For all permitted uses except for Places of
Worship:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 20,000 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 100 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 30 feet.
75.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2013-79 was repealed by Court Order on June 2, 2017
deleting commercial uses on properties with frontage County Route No. 526.
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1094
d. Rear Yard Setback — 20 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 10 feet with an aggregate of 25 feet.
f. Accessory Building:
(1) Side Yard Setback — 10 feet.
(2) Rear Yard Setback — 10 feet.
g. Maximum Building Coverage — 30%.
h. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet.
5. Design Regulations - Places of Worship:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 20,000 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 100 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 30 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 30 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 10 feet with an aggregate of 25 feet.
f. Maximum Building Coverage — 25%.
6. Cluster Option: A cluster development plan for single family
detached dwellings shall be permitted in those areas designated on
the Zoning Map as R-20/12 Cluster and as provided in § 18-904. The
bulk standards for the lots in the cluster development shall be in
accordance with the R-12 Design Regulations. [Amended by Ord.
No. 2005-94]
7. Reduction in Lot Area for Recreation Purposes: In any residential
subdivision in the R-20 District, the minimum lot area and width
requirements may be reduced in accordance with the standards
and requirements specified in § 18-908.
D. Single Family Residential (R-15)
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Single-family detached housing.
b. Places of worship including parish house and classrooms. (See
§ 18-905 for regulations in addition to Subsection 5 below.)
c. Public and private schools in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-906 and the bulk standards below.
2. Conditional Uses (See Article X):
a. Public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature but not
including warehouses and workshops.
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1095
b. Congregate or Assisted Living and Nursing Care.
c. Agricultural uses. The processing or sale of agricultural
products grown or raised on the premises is permitted.
d. Golf courses with a minimum of nine holes and a minimum
distance from tee to green for a hole of 100 yards. A clubhouse
is permitted on the same property.
e. Adult Communities. (See § 18-1001).
f. (Reserved)76
3. Accessory Uses:
a. Private residential garages.
b. Sheds.
c. Greenhouses.
d. Private Swimming Pools.
e. Home occupations, provided that the sum of all such uses in a
dwelling complies with the following standards:
(1) The home occupation may not employ more than two
people at any one time who are not a member of the
household residing in the dwelling.
(2) The home occupation shall primarily be conducted in a
manner that does not bring more than one client at a time
to the premises.
(3) The residential character of the exterior of the structure
appearance shall not be compromised.
(4) Not more than 25% of the total floor area of the dwelling
may be devoted to the home occupation use.
(5) There shall be no outdoor storage or display of materials,
products or equipment.
(6) One off-street parking space must be provided in addition
to those required for the dwelling if a non-resident person
is employed in conjunction with the home occupation use.
(7) Deliveries are permitted by way of UPS, FedEx or other
similar agencies.
4. Design Regulations - For all permitted uses except Places of
Worship:
76.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2013-79 was repealed by Court Order on June 2, 2017
deleting commercial uses on properties with frontage County Route No. 526.
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1096
a. Minimum Lot Area — 15,000 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 100 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 30 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 20 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 10 feet with an aggregate of 25 feet.
f. Accessory Building:
(1) Side Yard Setback — 10 feet.
(2) Rear Yard Setback — 10 feet.
g. Maximum Building Coverage — 30%.
h. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet.
5. Design Regulations - Places of Worship:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 15,000 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 100 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 30 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 20 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 10 feet with an aggregate of 25 feet.
f. Maximum Building Coverage — 25%.
6. Reduction in Lot Area for Recreation Purposes: In any residential
subdivision in the R-15 District, the minimum lot area and width
requirements may be reduced in accordance with the standards
and requirements specified in § 18-908.
7. Cluster Option: A cluster development plan for single-family
detached dwellings shall be permitted in those areas designated on
the Zoning Map as R-15/10 Cluster and as provided in § 18-904. The
bulk standards for the lots in the cluster development shall be in
accordance with the R-10 Design Regulations. [Ord. No. 2005-95
§ 2]
E. Single-Family (R-12 and 12A)
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Single Family Detached Housing.
b. Places of worship including parish house and classrooms. (See
§ 18-905 for regulations in addition to Subsection 5 below.)
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1097
c. Public and private schools in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-906 and the bulk standards below.
2. Conditional Uses (See Article X)
a. Public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature but not
including warehouses and workshops.
b. (Reserved)77
3. Accessory Uses:
a. Private residential garages.
b. Sheds.
c. Greenhouses.
d. Private Swimming Pools.
e. Home occupations, provided that the sum of all such uses in a
dwelling complies with the following standards:
(1) The home occupation may not employ more than two
people at any one time who are not a member of the
household residing in the dwelling.
(2) The home occupation shall primarily be conducted in a
manner that does not bring more than one client at a time
to the premises.
(3) The residential character of the exterior of the structure
appearance shall not be compromised.
(4) Not more than 25% of the total floor area of the dwelling
may be devoted to the home occupation use.
(5) There shall be no outdoor storage or display of materials,
products or equipment.
(6) One off-street parking space must be provided in addition
to those required for the dwelling if a non-resident person
is employed in conjunction with the home occupation use.
(7) Deliveries are permitted by way of UPS, FedEx or other
similar agencies.
4. Design Regulations for R-12- For all uses except for Places of
Worship:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 12,000 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 90 feet.
77.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2013-79 was repealed by Court Order on June 2, 2017
deleting commercial uses on properties with frontage County Route No. 526.
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1098
c. Front Yard Setback — 30 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 20 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 10 feet with an aggregate of 25 feet.
f. Accessory Building:
(1) Side Yard Setback — 10 feet.
(2) Rear Yard Setback — 10 feet.
g. Maximum Building Coverage — 30%.
h. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet.
5. Design Regulations for R-12A- For all uses except for Places of
Worship:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 12,000 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 75 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 30 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 20 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 10 feet with an aggregate of 25 feet.
f. Accessory Building:
(1) Side Yard Setback — 10 feet.
(2) Rear Yard Setback — 10 feet.
g. Maximum Building Coverage — 25%.
h. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet.
6. Design Regulations for R-12 - Places of Worship:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 12,000 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width —90 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 30 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 20 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 10 feet with an aggregate of 25 feet.
f. Maximum Building Coverage — 25%.
7. Design Regulations for R-12A - Places of Worship:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 12,000 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 75 feet.
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1099
c. Front Yard Setback — 30 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 20 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 10 feet with an aggregate of 25 feet.
f. Maximum Building Coverage — 25%.
8. Reduction in Lot Area for Recreation Purposes: In any residential
subdivision in the R-12 and R-12A Districts, the minimum lot area
and width requirements may be reduced in accordance with the
standards and requirements specified in § 18-908.
F. Single-Family Residential (R-10)
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Single Family Detached Housing.
b. Two-Family and Duplexes, provided that existing lots have a
minimum lot size of 12,000 square feet and any newly created
lot have a minimum lot size of 12,000 square feet and have a
minimum lot width of 75 feet.
c. Places of worship including parish house and classrooms. (See
§ 18-905 for regulations in addition to Subsection 5 below.)
d. Public and private schools in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-906 and the bulk standards below.
2. Conditional Uses (See Article X):
a. Public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature but not
including warehouses and workshops.
b. (Reserved)78
3. Accessory Uses:
a. Private residential garages.
b. Sheds.
c. Greenhouses.
d. Private Swimming Pools.
e. Home occupations, provided that the sum of all such uses in a
dwelling complies with the following standards:
(1) The home occupation may not employ more than two
people at any one time who are not a member of the
household residing in the dwelling.
78.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2013-79 was repealed by Court Order on June 2, 2017
deleting commercial uses on properties with frontage County Route No. 526.
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1100
(2) The home occupation shall primarily be conducted in a
manner that does not bring more than one client at a time
to the premises.
(3) The residential character of the exterior of the structure
appearance shall not be compromised.
(4) Not more than 25% of the total floor area of the dwelling
may be devoted to the home occupation use.
(5) There shall be no outdoor storage or display of materials,
products or equipment.
(6) One off-street parking space must be provided in addition
to those required for the dwelling if a non-resident person
is employed in conjunction with the home occupation use.
(7) Deliveries are permitted by way of UPS, FedEx or other
similar agencies.
4. Design Regulations - For all uses except for Places of Worship:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 10,000 square feet; two family/duplex
structures, 12,000 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 75 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 30 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 20 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 10 feet with an aggregate of 25 feet.
f. Accessory Building:
(1) Side Yard Setback — 10 feet.
(2) Rear Yard Setback — 10 feet.
g. Maximum Building Coverage — 30%.
h. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet.
5. Design Regulations - Places of Worship:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 10,000 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 75 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 30 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 20 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 10 feet with an aggregate of 25 feet.
f. Maximum Building Coverage — 25%.
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1101
6. Reduction in Lot Area for Recreation Purposes: In any residential
subdivision in the R-10 District, the minimum lot area and width
requirements may be reduced in accordance with the standards
and requirements specified in § 18-908.
G. Single-Family Residential (R-7.5)
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Single Family Detached Housing.
b. Two-Family Housing and Duplexes, provided that existing lots
have a minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet and newly
created lots have a minimum lot size of 10,000 square feet and
have a minimum lot width of 60 feet.
c. Places of worship including parish house and classrooms. (See
§ 18-905 for regulations in addition to Subsection 5 below.)
d. Public and private schools in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-906 and the bulk standards below.
2. Conditional Uses (See Article X):
a. Public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature but not
including warehouses and workshops.
b. (Reserved)79
3. Accessory Uses:
a. Private residential garages.
b. Sheds.
c. Greenhouses.
d. Private Swimming Pools.
e. Home occupations, provided that the sum of all such uses in a
dwelling complies with the following standards:
(1) The home occupation may not employ more than two
people at any one time who are not a member of the
household residing in the dwelling.
(2) The home occupation shall primarily be conducted in a
manner that does not bring more than one client at a time
to the premises.
(3) The residential character of the exterior of the structure
appearance shall not be compromised.
79.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2013-79 was repealed by Court Order on June 2, 2017
deleting commercial uses on properties with frontage County Route No. 526.
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1102
(4) Not more than 25% of the total floor area of the dwelling
may be devoted to the home occupation use.
(5) There shall be no outdoor storage or display of materials,
products or equipment.
(6) One off-street parking space must be provided in addition
to those required for the dwelling if a non-resident person
is employed in conjunction with the home occupation use.
(7) Deliveries are permitted by way of UPS, FedEx or other
similar agencies.
4. Design Regulations - For all uses except for Places of Worship:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 7,500 square feet; two family/duplex
structures - 10,000 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 50 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 25 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 15 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 7 feet with an aggregate of 15 feet.
f. Accessory Building:
(1) Side Yard Setback — 7 feet.
(2) Rear Yard Setback — 7 feet.
g. Maximum Building Coverage — 35%.
h. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet.
5. Design Regulations - Places of Worship:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 7,500 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 50 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 25 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 15 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 7 feet with an aggregate of 15 feet.
f. Maximum Building Coverage — 30%.
6. Reduction in Lot Area for Recreation Purposes: In any residential
subdivision in the R-7.5 District, the minimum lot area and width
requirements may be reduced in accordance with the standards
and requirements specified in § 18-908.
H. Multi-Family Residential (R-M)
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1103
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Single Family Detached Housing.
b. Two Family and Duplex Housing.
c. Multi-Family Housing.
d. Townhouses (Notwithstanding the definition of townhouse in
this chapter, for the purposes of this section, any townhouse
with a basement should be considered two units.)
e. Places of worship including parish house and classrooms. (See
§ 18-905 for regulations in addition to Subsection H4 below.)
f. Public and private schools in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-906 and the bulk standards below.
g. Planned Educational Campus in those areas identified on the
Zoning Map for RM (except for the DA-1 (Cedar Bridge
Redevelopment Area), M-1 (Industrial), LP (Industrial Park
Limited Professional), AHZ (Airport Hazard Zone), Open Space
and Preservation (OSP), A-1 (Agricultural-Rural), and PH-1
(Public Housing), B-6 (Stadium Support Zone) where a Planned
Educational Campus will not be permitted) and in accordance
with the bulk standards and requirements of § 18-902H6.
[Ord. No. 2017-51 § 7]
2. Conditional Uses (See Article X):
a. Public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature but not
including warehouses and workshops.
b. Mixed Use Development—Cross Street Core in accordance
with the standards set forth in § 18-1022. [Ord. No. 2017-51
§ 8]
3. Accessory uses permitted on single-family lot:
a. Private residential garages.
b. Sheds.
c. Greenhouses.
d. Private Swimming Pools.
e. Home occupations, provided that the sum of all such uses in a
dwelling complies with the following standards:
(1) The home occupation may not employ more than two
people at any one time who are not a member of the
household residing in the dwelling.
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1104
(2) The home occupation shall primarily be conducted in a
manner that does not bring more than one client at a time
to the premises.
(3) The residential character of the exterior of the structure
appearance shall not be compromised.
(4) Not more than 25% of the total floor area of the dwelling
may be devoted to the home occupation use.
(5) There shall be no outdoor storage or display of materials,
products or equipment.
(6) One off-street parking space must be provided in addition
to those required for the dwelling if a non-resident person
is employed in conjunction with the home occupation use.
(7) Deliveries are permitted by way of UPS, FedEx or other
similar agencies.
4. Design Regulations:
a. Single-Family and Two Family Standards:
(1) Minimum Lot Area — 7,500 square feet for single family
and 10,000 square feet for two family structures.
(2) (Reserved)
(3) Minimum Lot Width — 50 feet.
(4) Front Yard Setback — 25 feet.
(5) Rear Yard Setback — 15 feet.
(6) Side Yard Setback — 7 feet with an aggregate of 15 feet.
(7) Accessory Building:
(a) Side Yard Setback — 7 feet.
(b) Rear Yard Setback — 7 feet.
(8) Maximum Building Coverage — 35%.
(9) Maximum Building Height — 35 feet.
b. Multi-Family Standards:
(1) Minimum Lot Area: 12,500 square feet.
(2) Maximum Gross Density - 15 dwelling units per acre.
(3) Minimum Lot Width — 100 feet.
(4) Front Yard Setback — 25 feet.
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1105
(5) Rear Yard Setback — 25 feet.
(6) Side Yard Setback — 25 feet with an aggregate of 50 feet.
(7) Maximum Building Coverage — 40%.
(8) Maximum Building Height — 65 feet.
c. Places of Worship and Schools:
(1) Minimum Lot Area — 10,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum Lot Width — 75 feet.
(3) Front Yard Setback — 25 feet.
(4) Rear Yard Setback — 15 feet.
(5) Side Yard Setback — 12 feet with an aggregate of 25 feet.
(6) Maximum Building Coverage — 35%.
d. Duplex Regulations:
(1) Minimum Lot Area: 10,000 square feet
(2) Minimum Lot Width: Existing lots — 50 feet
Newly created lots — 60 feet
(3) Minimum Front Yard Setback: 25 feet
(4) Minimum Rear Yard Setback: 15 feet
(5) Side Yard Setback: 7 feet with an aggregate of 15 feet
5. Off-Street Parking shall be provided in accordance with NJ RSIS.
6. Planned Educational Campus.
a. Dwelling Unit Types. All dwelling units are to be occupied only
by students, faculty or staff of the educational institution, by
persons directly associated with the educational institution,
and or by their immediate families.
(1) Townhouse. A building containing attached dwelling units
arranged side by side with each unit divided by a common
party wall, and having a separate exterior entrance.
(2) Duplex. A building containing two dwelling units, arranged
either side by side as in the case of a semi-detached
dwelling or one over the other, with each unit having a
separate exterior entrance.
(3) Multi-Family. A building containing multiple dwelling
units, other than a townhouse, that are attached both
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1106
vertically and horizontally, with each unit having either
a separate exterior entrance or access from a common
hallway.
(4) Single Family. A detached building containing one dwelling
unit intended for one family and is not attached to any
other dwelling by any means and is surrounded by open
space or yards.
(5) Student Dormitory. A building or portion thereof, owned
and operated by a nonprofit school, nonprofit college or
other entity operating in association with an educational
institution, containing rooms and facilities which are
provided as residences or for overnight sleeping for
individuals or groups not living as a housekeeping unit.
b. Minimum Tract Size. A Planned Educational Campus may only
be developed on one or more contiguous parcels of land having
a minimum gross acreage of three acres. Paper streets,
existing rights-of-way or easements shall not be deemed to
divide acreage.
c. Permitted Principal Uses. No building or premises shall be
used and no building shall be erected or altered which is
arranged, intended or designed to be used except for one or
more of the following uses:
(1) With public sewer and water: townhouses, duplex,
multifamily units and student dormitories.
(2) Community facilities related to the cultural, social and
recreational needs of the residents of the development,
including public or private parks, religious ceremonial and
ritual facilities, churches and other places of worship.
(3) Public or private schools, and day-care facilities related to
the needs of the residents of the development.
(4) Public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature.
(5) Student housing, married student housing or faculty
housing on a campus like setting.
d. Permitted Accessory Uses. Any of the following uses may be
permitted when used in conjunction with a principal use:
(1) Off-street parking and common parking areas.
(2) Maintenance and utility facilities intended to service the
residents of the Planned Educational Campus. This covers
storm water as well.
(3) Recreation amenities such as patios and play areas.
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1107
(4) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to a permitted
principal use.
(5) Student services such as food service, cafeteria, student
run inn, or other vocational services to benefit academic
programs.
e. Planned Educational Campus Requirements. The following
standards shall apply to any Planned Educational Campus:
(1) Minimum Tract Area: three acres.
(2) Maximum Gross Residential Density: 28 dwelling units per
acre.
(3) Maximum Building Coverage: 45% of the gross tract area.
(4) Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage: 85% of the gross
tract area.
(5) Minimum Tract Setbacks.
(a) Tract boundary: 4 feet shall be permitted if dwellings
front on an existing street and parking for such units
is provided from a service alley.
(b) Interior parking lot paved surface: 0.
(6) More than one principal building shall be permitted on a
tract as long as compatible to educational campus setting.
(7) It shall be a requirement that the land and all buildings,
dwellings and structures shall be owned by the
educational institution.
(8) Planned Educational Campuses must provide adequate
buffer areas whenever it adjoins residential areas. Buffer
requirements shall be in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-803 of this chapter.
f. Bulk Requirements. The following bulk requirements shall
apply to the permitted dwelling unit types in a Planned
Educational Campus project.
(1) Townhouses on fee simple or condominium lots.
(a) Minimum Lot
Area:
2000 square feet
(b) Minimum Lot
Frontage/ Width:
20 feet
(c) Minimum Lot
Depth:
80 feet
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1108
(d) Minimum Front
Yard:
20 feet for units with front entry
garages; 10 feet for units without
garages or with parking provided in
the rear yard with access from a
rear service alley
(e) Minimum Side
Yard:
0 feet for a common wall; 10 feet
end units
(f) Minimum Rear
Yard:
15 feet to principal building; 12
feet to garage or accessory
structures
(g) Maximum
Building Height:
35 feet from the average grade to
the mean height of the roof
(2) Townhouse Structures on Common Property.
(a) Clusters of townhouse dwellings may be arranged on a
tract subject to the applicable design standards
contained in § 18, Article VIII, where applicable.
(3) Duplex Dwelling on Individual Lots.
(a) Minimum Lot
Area:
5000 square feet
(b) Minimum Lot
Frontage/ Width:
50 feet
(c) Minimum Lot
Depth:
80 feet
(d) Minimum Front
Yard:
20 feet; except 10 feet if parking is
located in the rear yard with access
from a rear service alley
(e) Minimum Side
Yard:
5 feet one side; 10 feet total
(f) Minimum Rear
Yard:
15 feet to principal building; 12
feet to garage or accessory
structures
(g) Maximum
Building Height:
35 feet
(4) Single Family on Individual Lots.
(a) Minimum Lot
Area:
5000 square feet
(b) Minimum Lot
Frontage/ Width:
45 feet
(c) Minimum Lot
Depth:
80 feet
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1109
(d) Minimum Front
Yards:
20 feet; except 10 feet if parking is
located in the rear yard with access
from a rear service alley
(e) Minimum Side
Yard:
7 feet one side; 15 feet total
(f) Minimum Rear
Yard:
15 feet to principal building; 12
feet to garage or accessory
structures
(5) Duplex Structures on Common Property.
Clusters of duplex dwellings may be arranged on a tract
subject to the applicable design standards contained in
this chapter.
(6) Multi-Family Structures on Common Property.
(a) Clusters of multi-family dwellings may be arranged on
a tract subject to the applicable design standards
contained in this chapter.
(b) Minimum average floor area for a dwelling unit shall
be 900 square feet.
(c) Each unit above the ground floor may have a balcony
or terrace, which if provided shall be at least 36
square feet in area (6x6).
(d) Maximum building height, 65 feet from average grade
to mean height of roof.
(7) Student Dormitory Structures on Common Property:
(a) Clusters of dormitory dwellings may be arranged on a
tract subject to the applicable design standards
contained in this chapter.
(b) Each dwelling unit together with its proportionate
share of the common areas shall be no less than 240
square feet.
(c) Maximum building height, as defined by median
height; 65 feet.
g. Design Requirements.
(1) Minimum Distance Between Buildings That Are Designed
on Common Property.
(a) End wall (no openings) to end wall: 12 feet
(b) End wall to window wall: 15 feet
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1110
(c) Window wall to window wall: 15 feet
(2) Townhouse structures shall not have a length in excess of
240 feet and shall be designed with offsets or other
architectural features so as to provide breaks in a linear
plane.
(3) Multi-family or student dormitory structures shall not have
a length in excess of 290 feet and shall provide for variety
in roof height and avoid the appearance of one continuous
multi-story building through the introduction of offsets or
other architectural features.
(4) Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements. All parking
must be on site parking. The parking requirements as
outlined in the Residential Site Improvement Standards
(RSIS) for residential land uses shall not apply to the
permitted dwelling units. This is because this is an
educational campus and therefore cannot be covered or
governed by the RSIS. For townhouse or multi-family units
containing four or more bedrooms the parking ratio shall
be one per townhouse unit and one per multi-family unit.
For rental apartments, which are multi-family for married
students, it shall be one per dwelling unit. For student
dormitories, which are defined as shared student quarters
where there are typically multiple students in a common
unit, shall be .25 per dwelling unit.
(5) Recreational facilities. Facilities to serve the recreational
needs of the residents of the Planned Educational Campus,
when provided by the educational institution, shall be
appropriately sized to the scale and type of the educational
facility. A minimum recreational open space area equal to
5% of the tract area of a planned development shall be
provided. Common open space areas shall conform to the
requirements for such open space, except as modified
herein, as contained in § 808 of this chapter.
h. Planned Development and other findings. Prior to the approval
of a Planned Educational Campus the Planning Board shall
make findings and conclusions as required under N.J.S.A.
40:55D-45:
(1) That departures by the proposed development from zoning
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property
conforms to the zoning ordinance standards pursuant to
this article;
(2) That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of
the common open space are adequate in the amount,
location, and purpose;
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1111
(3) That provision through the physical design of the proposed
development for public services, control over vehicular
and pedestrian traffic and the amenities of light and air,
recreation and visual enjoyment are adequate;
(4) In the case of a proposed Planned Educational Campus,
which contemplates construction over a period of years,
that the terms and conditions intended to protect the
interests of the public and the residents, occupants and
owner of the proposed Planned Educational Campus in the
total completion of the development are adequate;
(5) That the Planned Educational Campus will be developed in
accordance the provisions and requirements of terms of
the Township's plan endorsement approval that may be in
effect at the time of the application;
(6) All structures must meet life and safety requirements of
the New Jersey Building Code; and
(7) Adequate fenced areas to be provided for the bulk garbage
collection/compacting.
I. Residential Limited Multi-Family (R-LM)
1. Permitted Uses:
a. All uses permitted in R-M Zone.
2. Area Requirements and Off-Street Parking. Area requirements shall
be the same as the R-M Zone and off-street parking shall be in
accordance with RSIS.
J. Public Housing — PH-1
Within this zone shall be located only those buildings or structures as
shall be erected by the housing authority of the Township of Lakewood
in the County of Ocean, pursuant to the rules and regulations of the
Public Housing Administration, the State of New Jersey and the
Township of Lakewood governing public housing for senior citizens or
low income housing.
1. Permitted Use — Senior Citizen.
The permitted use for the tract of lands described in the zoning
map as PH-1 — Public Housing shall be for only senior citizen
housing projects undertaken by the Housing Authority of the
Township of Lakewood pursuant to annual contributions contract
between the housing authority of the Township and the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1112
All senior citizen projects shall be constructed pursuant to the
requirements set forth in this chapter, except that the following
shall apply to the PH-1 — Public Housing Zone only:
a. Minimum area: 1.7 acres; minimum dwelling units: ten.
b. Minimum floor area for an "efficiency" type dwelling unit with
zero bedrooms shall be 350 square feet.
c. Minimum floor area for a one-bedroom unit shall be 540 square
feet of living space.
d. Minimum floor area for two-bedroom units shall be 720 square
feet of living space.
e. Off-street parking shall be required. At least two off-street
parking spaces shall be provided for each five living units. This
provision shall be in addition to any required access roads,
sidewalks, or service areas and the location of the spaces must
be shown on the approved preliminary and final plan.
f. No more than two persons shall be permitted to occupy an
"efficiency" unit.
2. Permitted Uses — Low-Income Housing.
The lands described in the zoning map as PH-1 — Public Housing
are hereby limited to use as low-income housing pursuant to the
annual contributions contract between the housing authority of the
Township and the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD), and the following shall apply.
a. Those uses permitted in Residential R-7.5 Zone.
b. Those uses permitted in Multi-Family R-M Zone.
c. Minimum floor area for an "efficiency" type dwelling unit with
zero bedrooms shall be 350 square feet.
d. Minimum floor area for a one-bedroom unit shall be 540 square
feet of living space.
e. Minimum floor area for a two-bedroom unit shall be 720 square
feet of living space.
f. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided. Not less than one
space per living unit shall be provided and this shall not
include service or access roads, walks or service areas.
3. Conflicting Provisions.
Any provisions of this section conflicting with other provisions of
this chapter shall supersede such other provisions. In all other
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1113
respects, any applicable provisions of this chapter shall continue to
apply to public housing.
K. Office Transitional Use (OT)
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Single family residences as existing at the time of passage of
this subsection.
b. Professional offices including:
c. Attorneys and counselors-at-law.
d. Accountants and certified public accountants.
e. Architects.
f. Chiropodists and chiropractors.
g. Dentists.
h. Medical Doctors.
i. Real Estate brokers.
j. Engineers and land surveyors.
k. Insurance brokers.
l. Stockbrokers.
m. Optometrists, oculists, and osteopaths.
n. Psychologists.
o. Marriage counselors licensed by the State of New Jersey.
p. Other similar professional offices.
q. Executive offices, where no product will be displayed for sale.
2. Design Standards. All permitted uses except houses of worship,
parish houses and Sunday schools.
a. Area Requirements
Minimum lot area 10,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 75 feet
Front Yard Setback 25 feet
Side Yard Setback (one) 12 feet
Side Yard Setback (both) 25 feet
Rear Yard Setback 15 feet
Accessory Building
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1114
Rear Yard Setback 7 feet
Side Yard Setback 7 feet
Maximum Building Coverage 25%
Maximum Building Height 35 feet.
3. Churches and houses of worship, parish houses, and Sunday
schools
a. Area requirements
Minimum lot size 10,000 square feet
Minimum lot width 75 feet
Front setback 25 feet
Side yard (one) 12 feet
Side yard (both) 25 feet
Rear yard 15 feet
Accessory Building
Rear 7 feet
Side 7 feet
Percent Maximum lot coverage 25 percent
Maximum height 35 feet
b. Parking Requirements
(1) One parking space for every 200 square feet of office
space.
(2) Churches and houses of worship, parish houses and
Sunday schools, see § 18-905.
c. Signs. One non-flashing sign to identify a permitted
professional office which does not exceed 20 square feet on
any one side. This sign may be freestanding or may be attached
to the building and may be indirectly illuminated.
d. Other Requirements.
(1) All parking areas shall have a five foot solid buffer area if
the adjacent property is residential.
(2) Site plan approval shall be required as set forth in Article
VI.
(3) Additional regulations pertaining to churches and houses
of worship see § 18-905.
L. Single Family Residential (R-10A)
1. Permitted Uses:
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1115
a. Single-family detached housing.
b. Two-family and duplex housing.
c. Places of worship including parish houses and classrooms (See
§ 18-905 for regulations in addition to Subsection 5 below.)
d. Public and private schools in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-906 and the bulk standards below.
2. Conditional Uses: (See Article X)
a. Public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature but not
including warehouse and workshops.
b. Mixed Use Development—Oak Street Core in accordance with
the standards set forth in § 18-1023. [Ord. No. 2017-51 § 9]
3. Accessory Uses:
a. Private residential garages.
b. Sheds.
c. Greenhouses.
d. Private swimming pools.
e. Home occupations, provided that the sum of all such uses in a
dwelling complies with the following standards:
(1) The home occupation may not employ more than two
people at any one time who are not a member of the
household residing in the dwelling.
(2) The home occupation shall primarily be conducted in a
manner that does not bring more than one client at a time
to the premises.
(3) The residential character of the exterior of the structure
appearance shall not be compromised.
(4) Not more than 25% of the total floor area of the dwelling
may be devoted to the home occupation use.
(5) There shall be no outdoor storage or display of materials,
products or equipment.
(6) One off-street parking space must be provided in addition
to those required for the dwelling if a nonresident person
is employed in conjunction with the home occupation use.
(7) Deliveries are permitted by way of UPS, FedEx or other
similar agencies.
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1116
4. Design Regulations — For all uses except for places of worship.
a. Minimum Lot Area — 10,000 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot width — 75 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 30 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 20 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 10 feet with an aggregate of 25 feet.
f. Accessory Building.
(1) Side Yard Setback — 10 feet.
(2) Rear Yard Setback — 10 feet.
g. Maximum Building Coverage - 35%. [Ord. No. 2016-34]
h. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet.
5. Design Regulations — Places of Worship:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 10,000 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 75 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 30 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 20 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 10 feet with an aggregate of 25 feet.
f. Maximum Building Coverage — 25%.
6. Reduction in Lot Area for Recreation Purposes: In any residential
subdivision in the R-10A District, the minimum lot area and width
requirements may be reduced in accordance with the standards
and requirements specified in § 18-908.
M. Oak Street Core Neighborhood Overlay Zone-1. [Ord. No. 2017-51
§ 13]
1. Purpose: The Oak Street Core Neighborhood Overlay Zone-1 is
intended to provide an optional development technique for
residential and school development consistent with the
surrounding area, offer a sufficient buffer to existing
neighborhoods and provide a new north-south pedestrian-oriented
linkage from Pine Street to Oak Street. [Ord. No. 2017-51 § 10]
2. Location: The underlying zones for the Oak Street Core
Neighborhood Overlay Zone are the R-20 and R-40/20 C
Residential Zones. The Overlay Zone consists of the following
blocks: 824, 824.01, 825, 828, 829, 830, and 853 and is generally
located south of Pine Street and west of Albert Avenue. The area
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1117
contains a number of paper streets some of which will be vacated.
[Ord. No. 2017-51 § 11]
3. Unified Development: To achieve the goals of the Oak Street Core
Neighborhood Overlay Zone-1, it is critical that development of the
permitted uses in the zone occurs in a unified or overall manner.
Piecemeal development is discouraged. [Ord. No. 2017-51 § 12]
4. Street Development: The Overlay Zone shall be developed with a
north-south street with a service road to serve the permitted uses
in accordance with the street location plan and street cross-section
prepared by T&M Associates, entitled "Street Plan, Oak Street
Core Neighborhood" one sheet, dated 2014. The single-family
detached and townhouse sub-district will also be served by internal
streets based on the design of the property owner.
5. Maximum Residential Density: The maximum gross density in the
area of the tract devoted to residential development shall not
exceed six units per acre. For the purpose of calculating the gross
residential density, the tract area devoted to residential
development shall include both the area of the R-12 and Single
Family/Townhouse sub-districts, excluding public rights-of-way,
after subtracting the area of the school sub-district.
6. Use and Bulk Regulations: In addition to the applicable
requirements of the underlying zone districts, the following uses
are permitted in accordance with the design regulations provided
herein:
a. R-12 Sub-District:
(1) Permitted Uses: Single Family Detached Housing.
(2) Accessory Uses: Private residential garages, sheds,
greenhouses, and private swimming pools; home
occupations in accordance with the standards established
by 18-902E.
(3) Design Regulations:
(a) Minimum Lot Area: 12,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum Lot Width: 75 feet.
(c) Minimum Front Yard Setback: 30 feet.
(d) Minimum Rear yard Setback: 20 feet.
(e) Minimum Side Yard Setback: 10 feet with an
aggregate of 25 feet.
(f) Maximum Building Coverage: 25%.
(g) Maximum Building Height: 35 feet.
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1118
(h) Accessory Buildings Setbacks:
[1] Minimum Side Yard: 10 feet.
[2] Minimum Rear Yard: 10 feet.
(i) Buffer to Albert Avenue neighborhood: A twenty-five
foot wide undisturbed buffer, after the vacation of
Charity Tull Avenue, bordering the west side of the
Albert Avenue neighborhood shall be provided on the
east side of the tract.
b. Single-Family Detached and Townhouse Sub-District:
(1) Permitted Uses: Single-family detached and townhouse
(single-family attached) development.
(2) Accessory Uses: uses customarily incidental and accessory
to single-family detached and townhome dwellings.
(3) Townhouse Design Regulations:
(a) Minimum sub-district size shall be one-half (0.5) acre.
(b) Sub-district boundaries: From all other property lines
- 20 feet.
(c) Minimum sub-district width - 125 feet.
(d) Minimum sub-district depth - 100 feet.
(e) The overall single family-detached and townhouse
sub-district may be subdivided to provide fee-simple
ownership for the individual townhouse units. The
following shall apply to the individual townhouse lots:
[1] Minimum front yard setback - 5 feet from internal
streets.
[2] Minimum side yard setback (for end units) - 5 feet.
[3] Minimum rear yard setback - 20 feet.
[4] Maximum height - 35 feet or 2.5 stories,
whichever is less.
(4) Single-family detached dwellings design regulations:
(a) Minimum front yard setback - 5 feet.
(b) Minimum side yard setback - 5 feet.
(c) Minimum rear yard setback - 20 feet.
(d) Maximum height - 35 feet.
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1119
(e) Minimum lot area— 3,600 square feet.
(5) Minimum distance between townhouse buildings - 10 feet.
(6) Maximum units per townhouse structure — eight.
(7) Maximum townhouse building length - 240 feet.
(8) Design: Separate rows of townhouses shall incorporate
different design elements to distinguish the buildings from
each other. Such elements may include varied facade
colors or materials; building ornamentation; window
treatments; window placements; porches or stoops; rooflines;
or any other architectural element that accomplishes
the intent of varied design.
(9) Each unit shall have an area designated for the storage of
trash and recycling containers. All trash containers shall
be screened from view. Screening should blend with the
building exterior.
(10) All residential development shall provide a usable rear
yard depth of at least 15 feet, including the rear yard
setback. Decks shall be permitted within the usable yard
area, but detention/retention facilities, drainage swales, or
any easements which would inhibit the use of the rear yard
are prohibited. For the purposes of this section a drainage
swale with side slopes exceeding 1:10 and a depth
exceeding 18 inches shall be established as the limit which
inhibits use of this yard and is therefore prohibited.
(11) Architectural drawings of the front, side and rear
elevations of townhouse structures shall be provided.
Architectural drawings should also be provided if the
HVAC equipment is to be located on the roof.
(12) All areas put into common ownership for common use by
all residents shall be owned by a nonprofit homeowners
association in accordance with the requirements of the
Department of Community Affairs and the following:
(a) Deed restrictions and covenants shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements and standards of
the Department of Community Affairs.
(b) The homeowners association shall be responsible for
the ownership and maintenance of all common space
and any streets not accepted by the Township.
(c) This organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it
dispose of any common open space, by sale or
otherwise, except to another organization conceived
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1120
and established to own and maintain the common
open space and non-dedicated streets.
(d) The homeowners association shall be established
prior to any certificates of occupancy being issued.
Membership of the association shall be automatic and
mandatory for each owner of dwelling unit and any
succeeding owner thereto, being accomplished by the
purchase of a dwelling unit in the development.
(e) The association shall guarantee access to all the
common areas to all persons legally residing in the
development.
(f) The association shall be responsible for liability
insurance and taxes.
(g) A certificate of incorporation shall contain provisions
so that adequate funds will be available for
maintenance.
(h) The documents establishing the association shall
provide a plan for the maintenance of all common
areas and undedicated streets.
(13) Parking shall be provided within 150 feet of the structure.
(14) All units shall be designed with a unified architectural
style.
(15) Variations in setback and building facades shall be
provided.
(16) All HVAC equipment shall be located in rear or side yards
and shall be buffered from adjoining properties and units,
or shall be placed on rooftops.
(17) Maximum building coverage of the townhouse sub-district:
35%.
(18) Buffer to Block 830.04: A twenty-five foot wide
undisturbed buffer or dense landscaping shall be provided
adjacent to the existing dwellings on Block 830.04. This
buffer requirement shall not apply to the stormwater basin
on Lot 47.
c. School Sub-District:
(1) Permitted Uses—Public and private schools. With the
exception of dormitories as defined in this sub-section, no
residential use shall be permitted in the school subdistrict.
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1121
(2) Accessory Uses: Uses customarily incidental and
accessory to the school use including but not limited to
dormitories, off-street parking, basketball court or
gymnasium, swimming pools, playgrounds and play
equipment and recreation facilities/athletic fields. For the
purpose of this subsection, the term "dormitory" shall
mean a building used as group quarters for a student body
or religious order as an accessory use to a college,
university, boarding school, convent, monastery or similar
institutional use.
(3) Design Regulations:
(a) Maximum Lot Area: 5 acres.
(b) Minimum Lot Area: 3 acres.
(c) Minimum Lot Width: 75 feet.
(d) Minimum Front Yard Setback: 30 feet.
(e) Minimum Rear yard Setback: 20 feet.
(f) Minimum Side Yard Setback: 10 feet with an
aggregate of 25 feet.
(g) Maximum Building Coverage: 25%.
(h) Maximum Building Height: 35 feet.
(i) Accessory Buildings Setbacks:
[1] Minimum Side Yard: 10 feet.
[2] Minimum Rear Yard: 10 feet.
(4) Buffer Requirements:
(a) From the overlay zone boundary - 10 feet.
(b) A required buffer shall be landscaped with trees,
shrubs, and other suitable plantings for beautification
and screening. Natural vegetation should be retained
to the maximum degree possible. On those sites where
no existing vegetation is present or existing
vegetation is inadequate to provide screening, the
applicant shall suitably grade and plant the required
buffer area, such that this planting shall provide an
adequate screen of at least six feet in height so as to
continually restrict the view. A minimum on-center
distance between plantings shall be such that upon
maturity the buffer will create a solid screen. The
buffer may be supplemented with a fence of solid
material where necessary.
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1122
(c) Parking is not permitted in any required buffer.
(d) One parking space shall be provided for each of the
following:
[1] Classrooms.
[2] Tutor room.
[3] Library.
[4] Meeting room.
[5] Office.
(e) If a recreation area or areas are designated then
details shall be provided for such recreational areas.
All play equipment shall meet all required safety
standards.
(f) Bus loading and unloading areas shall be situated in a
manner so that children do not cross any traffic lane
or parking areas whatsoever, unless it is in area that is
curbed and physically separated from traffic
circulation and specifically designated solely for bus
loading and unloading.
N. Oak Street Core Neighborhood Overlay Zone-2 [Ord. No. 2014-51
§ 3]
1. Purpose. The Oak Street Core Neighborhood Overlay Zone-2 is
intended to provide an optional development technique for
residential development consistent with the surrounding area, offer
a sufficient buffer to existing neighborhoods, and provide a new
north-south pedestrian-oriented linkage from Pine Street to Oak
Street.
2. Location. The underlying zone for the Oak Street Core
Neighborhood Overlay Zone-2 is the R-40/20 C Residential Zone.
The Overlay Zone consists of the following blocks: 795, 800, 802,
803, 804, 805, 806.01, 821, 822, 823, and 830 and is generally
located south of Pine Street and west of Albert Avenue. The area
contains a number of paper streets, some of which will be vacated.
[Ord. No. 2017-51 § 14]
3. Street Development. The Overlay Zone shall be developed with a
north-south street. The single-family detached and townhouse subdistrict
will also be served by internal streets based on the design
of the property owner.
4. Use and Bulk Regulations. In addition to the applicable
requirements of the underlying zone districts, the following uses
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1123
are permitted in accordance with the design regulations provided
herein:
a. R-12 Subdistrict:
(1) Permitted Uses: Single Family Detached Housing.
(2) Accessory Uses: Private residential garages, sheds,
greenhouses, and private swimming pools; home
occupations in accordance with the standards established
by § 18-902E.
(3) Design Regulations:
(a) Minimum Lot Area: 12,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum Lot Width: 75 feet.
(c) Minimum Front Yard Setback: 30 feet.
(d) Minimum Rear Yard Setback: 20 feet.
(e) Minimum Side Yard Setback: 10 feet with an
aggregate of 25 feet.
(f) Maximum Building Coverage: 25%.
(g) Maximum Building Height: 35 feet.
(h) Accessory Building Setbacks:
i. Minimum Side Yard: 10 feet.
ii. Minimum Rear Yard: 10 feet.
(i) Buffer to Albert Avenue neighborhood: A 25-foot wide
undisturbed buffer, after the vacation of Charity Tull
Avenue, bordering the west side of the Albert Avenue
neighborhood (including Blocks 798, 799, and 801),
shall be provided on the east side of the tract.
b. Townhouse Subdistrict:
(1) Permitted Uses: Townhouse (single-family attached)
development.
(2) Accessory Uses: Uses customarily incidental and
accessory to townhome dwellings.
(3) Townhouse Design Regulations:
(a) Minimum Lot Area: 2,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum Lot Width: 20 feet.
(c) Minimum Lot Depth: 80 feet.
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1124
(d) Minimum Front Yard Setback with Garage: 20 feet.
(e) Minimum Front Yard Setback without Garage: 10 feet.
(f) Minimum Side Yard Setback: 0 feet for a common
wall; 10 feet for end units.
(g) Minimum Rear Yard Setback: 15 feet.
(h) Maximum Building Height: 35 feet.
(i) Minimum distance between townhouse buildings- 12
feet.
(j) Maximum units per townhouse structure- eight.
(k) Maximum townhouse building length- 240 feet.
(l) Maximum building coverage: 40%.
(m) Maximum impervious coverage: 80%.
(4) Townhouse Development Standards:
(a) Minimum tract size shall be one acre.
(b) Maximum Density: 16 dwelling units per acre.
(c) Minimum Tract Width: 125 feet.
(d) Minimum Tract Depth: 100 feet.
(5) Design. Separate rows of townhouses shall incorporate
different design elements to distinguish the buildings from
each other. Such elements may include varied facade
colors or materials; building ornamentation; window
treatments; window placements; porches or stoops; rooflines;
or any other architectural element that accomplishes
the intent of varied design.
(6) Each unit shall have an area designated for the storage of
trash and recycling containers. All trash containers shall
be screened from view. Screening should blend with the
building interior.
(7) All residential development shall provide a usable rear
yard depth of at least 15 feet, including the rear yard
setback. Decks shall be permitted within the usable yard
area, but detention/retention facilities, drainage swales, or
any easements which would inhibit the use of the rear yard
are prohibited. For the purposes of this section a drainage
swale with side slopes exceeding 1:10 and a depth
exceeding 18 inches shall be established as the limit which
inhibits use of this yard and is therefore prohibited.
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1125
(8) Architectural drawings of the front, side, and rear
elevations of townhouse structures shall be provided.
Architectural drawings should also be provided if the
HVAC equipment is to be located on the roof.
(9) All areas put into common ownership for common use by
all residents shall be owned by a nonprofit homeowner's
association in accordance with the requirements of the
Department of Community Affairs and the following:
(a) Deed restrictions and covenants shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements and standards of
the Department of Community Affairs.
(b) The homeowner's association shall be responsible for
the ownership and maintenance of all common space
and any streets not accepted by the Township.
(c) This organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it
dispose of any common open space, by sale or
otherwise, except to another organization conceived
and established to own and maintain the common
open space and non-dedicated streets.
(d) The homeowner's association shall be established
prior to any certificates of occupancy being issued.
Membership of the association shall be automatic and
mandatory for each owner of the dwelling unit and any
succeeding owner thereto, being accomplished by the
purchase of a dwelling unit in the development.
(e) The association shall guarantee access to all the
common areas to all persons legally residing in the
development.
(f) The association shall be responsible for the liability
insurance and taxes.
(g) A certificate of incorporation shall contain provisions
so that adequate funds will be available for
maintenance.
(h) The documents establishing the association shall
provide a plan for the maintenance of all common
areas and undedicated streets.
(10) Parking shall be provided within 150 feet of the structure.
(11) All units shall be designed with a unified architectural
style.
(12) Variations in setback and building facades shall be
provided.
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1126
(13) All HVAC equipment shall be located in rear or side yards
and shall be buffered from adjoining properties and units,
or shall be placed on rooftops.
O. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-52; repealed by Ord. No. 2017-51 § 15]
P. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-52 § 4; repealed by Ord. No. 2017-51
§ 16]
Q. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-52 § 5; repealed by Ord. No. 2017-51
§ 17]
R. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-61 § 3; repealed by Ord. No. 2017-51
§ 18]
S. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-61 § 4; repealed by Ord. No. 2017-51
§ 19]
T. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2014-61 § 5; repealed by Ord. No. 2019-15
§ 5]
U. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2015-35 § 3; Ord. No. 2015-35 repealed by
Court Order on April 24, 2017 to delete the R-40B Zone]
V. Riparian Buffer Conservation Overlay Zone [Ord. No. 2017-24 § 2]
1. Intent and Purpose.
The Governing Body of the Township of Lakewood finds that
riparian lands adjacent to streams, lakes, or other surface water
bodies that are adequately vegetated provide an important
environmental protection and water resource management benefit.
It is necessary to protect and maintain the beneficial character
of riparian areas by implementing specifications for the
establishment, protection, and maintenance of vegetation along
the surface water bodies within the jurisdiction of Township of
Lakewood, consistent with the interest of landowners in making
reasonable economic use of parcels of land that include such
designated areas. The purpose of this Subsection 18-902V is to
designate riparian zones, and to provide for land use regulation
therein for those riparian zones in order to protect the streams,
lakes, and other surface water bodies of the Township of Lakewood;
to protect the water quality of watercourses, reservoirs, lakes,
and other significant water resources within the Township of
Lakewood; to protect the riparian and aquatic ecosystems of the
Township of Lakewood; to provide for the environmentally sound
use of the land resources of the Township of Lakewood, and to
complement existing state, regional, county, and municipal stream
corridor protection and management regulations and initiatives.
The specific purposes and intent of this Subsection 18-902V are to:
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1127
a. Restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological
integrity of the water resources of the Township of Lakewood;
b. Prevent excessive nutrients, sediment, and organic matter, as
well as biocides and other pollutants, from reaching surface
waters by optimizing opportunities for filtration, deposition,
absorption, adsorption, plant uptake, biodegradation, and denitrification,
which occur when stormwater runoff is conveyed
through vegetated buffers as stable, distributed flow prior to
reaching receiving waters;
c. Provide for shading of the aquatic environment so as to
moderate temperatures, retain more dissolved oxygen, and
support a healthy assemblage of aquatic flora and fauna;
d. Provide for the availability of natural organic matter (leaves
and twigs) and large woody debris (trees and limbs) that
provide food and habitat for aquatic organisms (insects,
amphibians, crustaceans, and small fish), which are essential
to maintain the food chain;
e. Increase stream bank stability and maintain natural fluvial
geomorphology of the stream system, thereby reducing stream
bank erosion and sedimentation and protecting habitat for
aquatic organisms;
f. Maintain base flows in streams and moisture in wetlands;
g. Control downstream flooding; and
h. Conserve the natural features important to land and water
resources, e.g., headwater areas, ground water recharge
zones, floodways, floodplains, springs, streams, wetlands,
woodlands, and prime wildlife habitats.
2. Statutory Authority.
The municipality of the Township of Lakewood is empowered to
regulate land uses under the provisions of the New Jersey
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., which
authorizes each municipality to plan and regulate land use to
protect public health, safety and welfare by protecting and
maintaining native vegetation in riparian areas. The Township of
Lakewood is also empowered to adopt and implement this
Subsection 18-902V under provisions provided by the following
legislative authorities of the State of New Jersey:
a. Water Pollution Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.
b. Water Quality Planning Act, N.J.S.A. 58:11A-1 et seq.
c. Spill Compensation and Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10-23 et seq.
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1128
d. Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.
e. Flood Hazard Area Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq.
3. Definitions.
ACID PRODUCING SOILS — Soils that contain geologic deposits of
iron sulfide minerals (pyrite and marcasite) which, when exposed
to oxygen from the air or from surface waters, oxidize to produce
sulfuric acid. Acid producing soils, upon excavation, generally have
a pH of 4.0 or lower. After exposure to oxygen, these soils generally
have a pH of 3.0 or lower. Information regarding the location of
acid producing soils in New Jersey can be obtained from local Soil
Conservation District offices.
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — The Planning Board or Board of
Adjustment or Construction Office with all of the powers delegated,
assigned, or assumed by them according to statute or ordinance.
APPLICANT — A person, corporation, Government Body or other
legal entity applying to the Planning Board, Board of Adjustment
or the Construction Office proposing to engage in an activity that
is regulated by the provisions of this Subsection 18-902V, and that
would be located in whole or in part within a regulated Riparian
Zone.
CATEGORY ONE WATERS OR C1 WATERS — Shall have the
meaning ascribed to this term by the Surface Water Quality
Standards, N.J.A.C. 7:9B, for purposes of implementing the antidegradation
policies set forth in those standards, for protection
from measurable changes in water quality characteristics because
of their clarity, color, scenic setting, and other characteristics of
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance, or
exceptional fisheries resources.
CATEGORY TWO WATERS OR C2 WATERS — Those waters not
designated as Outstanding Natural Resource waters or Category
One waters in the Surface Water Quality Standards, N.J.A.C. 7:9B,
for purposes of implementing the anti- degradation policies set
forth in those standards.
FLOODWAY — Shall have the meaning ascribed to this term by
the Flood Hazard Area Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:16A-50 et seq.,
and regulations promulgated there under published at N.J.A.C.
7:13 et seq., and any supplementary or successor legislation and
regulations from time to time enacted or promulgated.
INTERMITTENT STREAM — A surface water body with definite
bed and banks in which there is not a permanent flow of water and
shown on the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Geographic Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages.
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1129
LAKE, POND, OR RESERVOIR — Any surface water body shown
on the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Geographic Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or,
in the case of C1 waters as shown on the USGS quadrangle map
or in the County Soil Surveys; that is an impoundment, whether
naturally occurring or created in whole or in part by the building
of structures for the retention of surface water. This excludes
sedimentation control and stormwater retention/detention basins
and ponds designed for treatment of wastewater.
PERENNIAL STREAM — A surface water body that flows
continuously throughout the year in most years and shown on the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection Geographic
Information System (GIS) hydrography coverages or, in the case of
C1 waters as shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the County
Soil Surveys.
RIPARIAN ZONE — The land and vegetation within and directly
adjacent to all surface water bodies including, but not limited to
lakes, ponds, reservoirs, perennial and intermittent streams, up
to and including their point of origin, such as seeps and springs,
as shown on the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection's GIS hydrography coverages or, in the case of C1
waters as shown on the USGS quadrangle map or in the County
Soil Surveys.
RIPARIAN ZONE MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan approved by the
Engineer of the Township of Lakewood. The plan shall be prepared
by a landscape architect, professional engineer or other qualified
professional, and shall evaluate the effects of any proposed activity/
uses on any riparian zone. The plan shall identify existing
conditions, all proposed activities, and all proposed management
techniques, including any measures necessary to offset
disturbances to any affected riparian zone.
SURFACE WATER BODY(IES) — Any perennial stream,
intermittent stream, lake, pond, or reservoir, as defined herein. In
addition, any regulated water under the Flood Hazard Area Control
Act rules at N.J.A.C. 7:13-2.2, or State open waters identified in
a Letter of Interpretation issued under the Freshwater Wetlands
Protection Act Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:7A-3 by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection Division of Land Use
Regulation shall also be considered surface water bodies.
THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES — A species identified
pursuant to the Endangered and Nongame Species Conservation
Act, N.J.S.A. 23:2A-1 et seq., the Endangered Species Act of 1973,
16 U.S.C. §§ 1531 et seq. or the Endangered Plant Species List,
N.J.A.C. 7:5C-5.1, and any subsequent amendments thereto.
TROUT MAINTENANCE WATER — A section of water designated
as trout maintenance in the New Jersey Department of
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1130
Environmental Protection's Surface Water Quality Standards at
N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
TROUT PRODUCTION WATER — A section of water identified as
trout production in the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection's Surface Water Quality Standards at N.J.A.C. 7:9B.
4. Establishment of Riparian Zones.
a. Riparian zones adjacent to all surface water bodies shall be
protected from avoidable disturbance and shall be delineated
as follows:
(1) The riparian zone shall be 300 feet wide along both sides
of any Category One water (C1 water), and all upstream
tributaries situated within the same HUC 14 watershed.
(2) The riparian zone shall be 150 feet wide along both sides
of the following waters not designated as C1 waters:
(a) Any trout production water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries);
(b) Any trout maintenance water and all upstream waters
(including tributaries) within one linear mile as
measured along the length of the surface water body;
and
(c) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that
contains a threatened or endangered species, and/or
present or documented habitat for those species,
which is critically dependent on the regulated water
for survival, and all upstream waters (including
tributaries) within one mile of such habitat (measured
along the length of the regulated water)..
(3) For all other regulated waters, a riparian zone of 50 feet
wide shall be maintained along both sides of the water.
b. The portion of the riparian zone that lies outside of a surface
water body is measured landward from the top of bank. If a
discernible bank is not present along a regulated water, the
portion of the riparian zone outside the regulated water is
measured landward as follows:
(1) Along a linear fluvial or tidal water, such as a stream or
swale, the riparian zone is measured landward of the
feature's center line;
(2) Along a non-linear fluvial water, such as a lake or pond, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the normal water
surface limit;
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1131
(3) Along a non-linear tidal water, such as a bay or inlet, the
riparian zone is measured landward of the mean high
water line; and
(4) Along an amorphously-shaped feature such as a wetland
complex, through which water flows but which lacks a
definable channel, the riparian zone is measured landward
of the feature's center line. Where slopes (in excess of 15
percent) are located within the designated widths, the
riparian zone shall be extended to include the entire
distance of this sloped area to a maximum of 300 feet.
For areas adjacent to surface water bodies for which the floodway
has been delineated per the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules
at N.J.A.C. 7:13-3 or the State's adopted floodway delineations,
the riparian zone shall cover the entire floodway area, or the
area described in Subsection V4 above, whichever area has the
greatest extent. Requests for alterations to the adopted
delineations can be provided to the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection for consideration if site specific
information is available.
c. A riparian zone is an overlay to the existing zoning districts.
The provisions of the underlying district shall remain in full
force except where the provisions of the riparian zone differ
from the provisions of the underlying district, in which case the
provision that is more restrictive shall apply. These provisions
apply to land disturbances resulting from or related to any
activity or use requiring application for any of the following
permits or approvals:
• Building permit
• Zoning variance
• Conditional use
• Subdivision/site plan/land development approval
d. A map of the riparian zones of the entire municipality of
Lakewood Township that the Town may be aware of, including
all land and water areas within its boundaries, which
designates surface water bodies, is included as part of this
Subsection 18-902V, and is appended as Figure 1.0. Maps of
the municipality on which these designations have been
overlain shall be on file and maintained by the offices of the
Clerk of the Township of Lakewood.
e. The applicant or designated representative shall be
responsible for the initial determination of the presence of a
riparian zone on a site, and for identifying the area on any plan
submitted to the Township of Lakewood in conjunction with an
application for a construction permit, subdivision, land
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1132
development, or other improvement that requires plan
submissions or permits. This initial determination shall be
subject to review and approval by the Municipal Engineer and
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
f. The municipal Master Plan provides the legal basis for zoning
and land use regulation at the local level. The technical
foundation for local riparian zones in this municipality should
be incorporated into the Master Plan. A technical report on the
need for riparian zones in the Township of Lakewood may be
adopted as part of the Master Plan, N.J.S.A 40:55D-28b(11).
The technical report should include the following information:
a statement setting forth the rationale and need to protect
riparian zones; and reference to the methods used to designate
and delineate riparian zones.
g. Exemptions. Instead of the riparian zone protection
requirements above, the applicant must demonstrate
compliance with one of the following:
(1) The proposed disturbance in a riparian zone is for a linear
development with no feasible alternative route. If the
riparian zone is associated with Category One waters, the
linear development must also meet the requirements for
disturbance of a riparian zone under the Flood Hazard
Area Control Act Rules N.J.A.C. 7:13;
(2) The proposed disturbance in a riparian zone is in
accordance with a stream corridor restoration or stream
bank stabilization plan or project approved by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection;
(3) The proposed disturbance of a riparian zone is necessary
to provide for public pedestrian access or water dependent
recreation that meets the requirements of the Freshwater
Wetlands Protection Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7A, the Flood
Hazard Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, or the
Coastal Zone Management rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7;
(4) The proposed disturbance of a riparian zone is required for
the remediation of hazardous substances performed with
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or
Federal oversight pursuant to the Spill Compensation and
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 58:10- 23.11a et seq. or the
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation,
and Liability Act of 1980, 42 U.S.C. §§ 9601 et seq.;
(5) The proposed disturbance is for redevelopment that does
not exceed the limits of existing impervious surfaces;
(6) The proposed disturbance would prevent extraordinary
hardship on the property owner peculiar to the property;
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1133
or prevent extraordinary hardship, provided the hardship
was not created by the property owner, that would not
permit a minimum economically viable use of the property
based upon reasonable investment; and/or
(7) Demonstrate through site plans depicting proposed
development and topography that new disturbance is not
located in areas with a 20 percent or greater slope, except
as allowed under Subsection g(6) above.
5. Uses Permitted in Riparian Zones.
For riparian zones in Category One waters (C1 waters), permitted
uses are governed the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:13, unless otherwise exempt.
a. Any other riparian zone area shall remain in a natural
condition or, if in a disturbed condition, including agricultural
activities, at the time of adoption of this ordinance may be
restored to a natural condition. There shall be no clearing or
cutting of trees and brush, except for removal of dead
vegetation and pruning for reasons of public safety or for the
replacement of invasive species with indigenous species. There
shall be no altering of watercourses, dumping of trash, soil,
dirt, fill, vegetative or other debris, regrading or construction.
The following uses are permitted either by right or after review
and approval by the municipality in riparian zones. No new
construction, development, use, activity, encroachment, or
structure shall take place in a riparian zone, except as
specifically authorized in this Subsection 18-902V. The
following uses shall be permitted within a riparian zone:
(1) Open space uses that are primarily passive in character
shall be permitted by right to extend into a riparian zone,
provided near stream vegetation is preserved. These uses
do not require approval by the Zoning Enforcement Officer
or compliance with an approved Riparian Zone
Management Plan. Such uses include wildlife sanctuaries,
nature preserves, forest preserves, fishing areas, game
farms, fish hatcheries and fishing reserves, operated for
the protection and propagation of wildlife, but excluding
structures. Such uses also include passive recreation areas
of public and private parklands, including unpaved hiking,
bicycle and bridle trails, provided that said trail have been
stabilized with pervious materials.
(2) Fences, for which a permit has been issued by the
Construction Code Office, to the extent required by
applicable law, rule or regulation.
(3) Crossings by farm vehicles and livestock, recreational
trails, roads, railroads, storm water lines, sanitary sewer
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1134
lines, water lines and public utility transmission lines,
provided that the land disturbance is the minimum
required to accomplish the permitted use, subject to
approval by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, provided that
any applicable State permits are acquired, and provided
that any disturbance is offset by buffer improvements in
compliance with an approved Riparian Zone Management
Plan and that the area of the crossing is stabilized against
significant erosion due to its use as a crossing.
(4) Stream bank stabilization or riparian reforestation, which
conform to the guidelines of an approved Riparian Zone
Management Plan, or wetlands mitigation projects that
have been approved by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, subject to approval by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer and subject to compliance
with an approved Riparian Zone Management Plan.
6. Performance Standards for Riparian Zones.
a. All encroachments proposed into riparian zones in C1 waters
shall comply with the requirements of the Stormwater
Management rule at N.J.A.C. 7:8- 5.5(h) and the Flood Hazard
Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13, and shall be subject to
review and approval by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, unless exempt.
b. For all other riparian zones, the following conditions shall
apply:
(1) All new major and minor subdivisions and site plans shall
be designed to provide sufficient areas outside of the
riparian zone to accommodate primary structures, any
normal accessory uses appurtenant thereto, as well as all
planned lawn areas.
(2) Portions of lots within the riparian zone must be
permanently restricted by deed or conservation easement
held by the Township of Lakewood, its agent, or another
public or private land conservation organization which has
the ability to provide adequate protection to prevent
adverse impacts within the riparian zone. A complete copy
of the recorded conservation restriction that clearly
identifies the deed book and pages where it has been
recorded in the office of the clerk of the applicable county
or the registrar of deeds and mortgages of the applicable
county must be submitted to the municipality. The
applicant shall not commence with the project or activity
prior to making this submittal and receiving actual
approval of the plan modification and receipt of any
applicable permits from the New Jersey Department of
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1135
Environmental Protection. The recorded conservation
restriction shall be in the form approved by the
municipality and shall run with the land and be binding
upon the property owner and the successors in interest
in the property or in any part thereof. The conservation
restriction may include language reserving the right to
make de minimus changes to accommodate necessary
regulatory approvals upon the written consent of the
municipality, provided such changes are otherwise
consistent with the purpose and intent of the conservation
restriction. The recorded conservation restriction shall, at
a minimum, include:
(a) A written narrative of the authorized regulated
activity, date of issuance, and date of expiration, and
the conservation restriction that, in addition, includes
all of the prohibitions set forth at N.J.S.A. 13:8B-2b (1)
through (7);
(b) Survey plans for the property as a whole and, where
applicable, for any additional properties subject to the
conservation restrictions. Such survey plans shall be
submitted on the surveyor's letterhead, signed and
sealed by the surveyor, and shall include metes and
bounds descriptions of the property, the site, and the
areas subject to the conservation restriction in New
Jersey State Plane Coordinates, North American
Datum 1983, and shall depict the boundaries of the
site and all areas subject to the conservation
restriction as marked with flags or stakes on site. All
such survey plans shall be submitted on paper and in
digital CAD or GIS file on a media and format defined
by the municipality. The flags or stakes shall be
numbered and identified on the survey plan; and
(c) A copy or copies of deeds for the property as a whole
that indicate the deed book and pages where it has
been recorded in the office of the clerk of the
applicable county or the registrar of deeds and
mortgages of the applicable county.
(3) Any lands proposed for development which include all or a
portion of a riparian zone shall as a condition of any major
subdivision or major site plan approval, provide for the
vegetation or re-vegetation of any portions of the riparian
zone which are not vegetated at the time of the application
or which were disturbed by prior land uses, including for
agricultural use. Said vegetation plan shall utilize native
and non- invasive tree and plant species to the maximum
extent practicable in accordance with an approved
Riparian Zone Management Plan.
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1136
(4) For building lots which exist as of the date of adoption of
this Subsection 18-902V, adopted on 12-7-17 by Ord. No.
2017-24, but for which a building permit or a preliminary
site plan approval has not been obtained or is no longer
valid, the required minimum front, side, and rear setbacks
may extend into the riparian zone, provided that a deed
restriction and/or conservation easement is applied which
prohibits clearing or construction in the riparian zone.
(5) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of but may flow
through a riparian zone and shall comply with the
Standard For Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq. (See N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3.)
(6) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through a
riparian zone cannot comply with the Standard for Off-Site
Stability, then the proposed stabilization measures must
meet the requirements of the Flood Hazard Area Control
Act rules at N.J.A.C. 7:13-10.2 et seq., and have an
approved flood hazard area permit.
7. Nonconforming Structures and Uses in Riparian Zones.
Nonconforming structures and uses of land within the riparian
zone are subject to the following requirements:
a. Legally existing but nonconforming structures or uses may be
continued.
b. Any proposed enlargement or expansion of the building
footprint within the riparian zone of a C1 water shall comply
with the standards in the Stormwater Management rules at
N.J.A.C. 7:8-5.5(h) and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act
rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13.
c. For all other riparian zones:
(1) Encroachment within the riparian zone shall only be
allowed where previous development or disturbance has
occurred and shall be in conformance with the Stormwater
Management rules, N.J.A.C. 7:8, and the Flood Hazard
Area Control Act rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13.
(2) Existing impervious cover shall not be increased within the
riparian zone, as a result of encroachments where
previous development or disturbances have occurred.
(3) Discontinued nonconforming uses may be resumed any
time within one year from such discontinuance but not
thereafter when showing clear indications of
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-902
AO:1137
abandonment. No change or resumption shall be
permitted that is more detrimental to the riparian zone, as
measured against the intent and purpose of the applicable
regulations than the existing or former nonconforming
use. This one-year time frame shall not apply to
agricultural uses that are following prescribed Best
Management Practices for crop rotation. However,
resumption of agricultural uses must be strictly confined
to the extent of disturbance existing at the time of
adoption of this Ordinance No. 2017-24 establishing
Subsection 18-902V.
8. Uses Prohibited in Riparian Zones.
a. Any use within a riparian zone of a C1 water shall comply with
the standards in the Stormwater Management rules at N.J.A.C.
7:8-5.5(h) and the Flood Hazard Area Control Act rules,
N.J.A.C. 7:13.
b. For other riparian zones, any use or activity not specifically
authorized in Subsections 18-902V5 or V7 shall be prohibited
within the riparian zone. By way of example, the following
activities and facilities are prohibited:
(1) Removal or clear-cutting of trees and other vegetation or
soil disturbance such as grading, except for selective
vegetation removal for the purpose of stream or riparian
area stabilization or restoration projects that require
vegetation removal or grading prior to implementation.
(2) Storage of any hazardous or noxious materials.
(3) Use of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, and/or other
chemicals in excess of prescribed industry standards or
the recommendations of the Soil Conservation District.
(4) Roads or driveways, except where permitted in
compliance with Subsection 18-902V and applicable FHA
rules.
(5) Motor or wheeled vehicle traffic in any area, except as
permitted by this Subsection 18-902V.
(6) Parking lots.
(7) Any type of permanent structure, except structures
needed for a use permitted by Subsection 18-902V5.
(8) New subsurface sewage disposal system areas. The
expansion and replacement of existing subsurface sewage
disposal system areas for existing uses is permitted.
18-902 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-902
AO:1138
18-903. Non-Residential Zoning Districts. [Ord. No. 2005-96 § 3;
Ord. No. 2006-3 § 5; Ord. No. 2006-38 §§ 2,3; Ord. No. 2006-39 § 2;
Ord. No. 2008-12 § 2; Ord. No. 2009-40 § 2; Ord. No. 2009-45 § 1;
Ord. No. 2010-19 § 1; Ord. No. 2018-20 § 1; Ord. No. 2010-29 § 1;
Ord. No. 2011-3 § 1; Ord. No. 2011-11 § 1; Ord. No. 2011-17 § 2;
Ord. No. 2011-40 § 1; Ord. No. 2012-04 § 2; Ord. No. 2012-52 § 2;
Ord. No. 2013-7; Ord. No. 2013-16; Ord. No. 2013-18; Ord. No.
2013-31 § 2; Ord. No. 2013-49; Ord. No. 2013-51 §§ 3-8; Ord. No.
2013-59 § 2; Ord. No. 2013-60 § 2; Ord. No. 2013-74 §§ 1,2; Ord. No.
2014-32 § 3; Ord. No. 2016-11 §§ 4-9; Ord. No. 2017-11; Ord. No.
2017-13; Ord. No. 2017-51 §§ 20-28; Ord. No. 2018-54]
(9) Residential grounds or lawns, except as otherwise
permitted pursuant to this Subsection 18-902V.
9. Enforcement.
A prompt investigation shall be made by the appropriate personnel
of the Township of Lakewood, of any person or entity believed
to be in violation hereof. If, upon inspection, a condition which
is in violation of this Subsection 18-902V is discovered, a civil
action in the Special Part of the Superior Court, or in the Superior
Court, if the primary relief sought is injunctive or if penalties may
exceed the jurisdictional limit of the Special Civil Part, by the filing
and serving of appropriate process. Nothing in this Subsection
18-902V shall be construed to preclude the right of the Township
of Lakewood, pursuant to N.J.S.A 26:3A2-25, to initiate legal
proceedings hereunder in Municipal Court. The violation of any
section or subsection of this Subsection 18-902V shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense independent of the violation of any
other section or subsection, or of any order issued pursuant to
this Subsection 18-902V. Each day a violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.
Actions taken in the event of non-compliance shall be governed by
the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Lakewood.
A. Neighborhood Business Zone (B-1)
1. Permitted Uses:
a. All uses permitted in the RM zoning district.
b. Retail activities of and similar to the following types may be
permitted:
(1) Grocery and food stores.
(2) Drug and Pharmaceuticals.
(3) Confectionery.
(4) Hardware and Paint Stores.
18-902 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-903
AO:1139
(5) Periodical and Newspaper Stores.
c. Service activities of and similar to the following types may be
permitted:
(1) Barber and Beauty Shops.
(2) Tailor and dressmakers.
(3) Dry cleaning collection but not processing.
(4) Shoe repair.
(5) Self-service laundry facilities.
(6) Radio and television services.
(7) Banks.
(8) Theaters - except for open air theaters.
(9) Upholstery shops.
(10) Professional offices.
(11) Offices, restaurants and similar services.
(12) Bus passenger stations, terminal, railroad stations and taxi
stands.
(13) Funeral Parlors.
(14) Telephone exchanges, telecommunication, telegraph and
express offices.
(15) Car and van rental agencies including an office and
parking areas for rental vehicles; subject to the limitation
of one rental vehicle per parking space. Two parking
spaces required for the office and one parking space for
each rental vehicle. All rental vehicles must be parked in
designated parking spaces. Parking lots to conform to the
requirements of § 18-807 except for § 18-807B, which shall
not apply to a car and van rental agency in any zone.
(16) Parking lots.
2. Combined Business and Residential Uses subject to Subsection 6
below.
3. Places of worship including parish house and classrooms in
accordance with the requirements of § 18-905 and the bulk
standards below.
4. Public and private schools in accordance with the requirements of §
18-906 and the bulk standards below.
18-903 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-903
AO:1140
5. Conditional Uses (See Article X):
a. Public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature but not
including warehouses and workshops.
b. Public garages.
c. Service Stations.
d. Townhouses.
e. Digital billboards. [Ord. No. 2016-11 § 4]
6. Design Regulations (Non-Residential):
a. Front Yard Setback — 15 feet.
b. Rear Yard Setback — 10 feet.
c. Side Yard Setback — 7 feet with an aggregate of 15 feet. A side
yard setback is not required between two business uses.
d. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet.
e. Accessory Uses - Not to be located within a front yard. A 5 foot
side and rear yard setback is required.
7. Design Regulations (Single-Family and Two-Family):
a. Minimum Lot Area — 7,500 square feet for single family and
10,000 square feet for two family structures.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 50 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 25 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 15 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 7 feet with an aggregate of 15 feet.
f. Accessory Building:
(1) Side Yard Setback — 7 feet.
(2) Rear Yard Setback — 7 feet.
g. Maximum Building Coverage — 30%.
h. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet.
8. Design Regulations (Multi-Family Dwellings):
a. Minimum Lot Area - 12,500 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width - 100 feet.
c. Maximum Building Coverage - 40%
18-903 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-903
AO:1141
d. Front Yard Setback - 20 feet.
e. Rear Yard Setback - 20 feet.
f. Side Yard Setback (Each) - 20 feet.
g. Maximum Density - 22 dwelling units per gross acre.
h. Maximum Building Height - 65 feet.
9. Design Regulations (Combined Business and Residential Uses):
a. Minimum Lot Area — 7,500 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 50 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 15 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 15 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 7 feet with an aggregate of 15 feet.
f. Accessory Building:
(1) Side Yard Setback — 7 feet.
(2) Rear Yard Setback — 7 feet.
g. Maximum Building Coverage — 30%.
h. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet.
B. Central Business Zone (B-2)
1. Permitted Uses:
a. All uses permitted in Zone B-1 and R-M zones.
Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary,
combined business and residential uses are not to be
considered as multi-family dwelling structures for the purposes
of this section. Combined business and residential uses are
hereby expressly prohibited in all B-2 zones within the
Township of Lakewood.
b. Stores and shops for the conducting of any customary retail or
service establishment.
c. Baking, laundry, printing, upholstering and similar
establishments and businesses of a similar and no more
objectionable character, subject to the following provisions:
(1) All goods or products, manufactured or processed shall be
sold on the premises.
(2) All manufacturing or processing shall be done on the
premises.
18-903 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-903
AO:1142
d. Banks (except drive-in facilities), theaters (except open air),
offices, restaurants and similar services.
e. Bowling alleys.
f. Places of worship including parish house and classrooms in
accordance with the requirements of § 18-905 and the bulk
standards below.
g. Public and private schools in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-906 and the bulk standards below.
2. Conditional Uses (See Article X):
a. Public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature but not
including warehouses and workshops.
b. Public garages.
c. Service Stations.
d. Townhouses.
3. Design Regulations (Non-Residential):
a. Rear Yard Setback — 10 feet.
b. Side Yard Setback — 7 feet with an aggregate of 15 feet. A side
yard setback is not required between two business uses.
c. Maximum Building Height — 65 feet.
d. Accessory Uses - Not to be located within a front yard. A 5 foot
side and rear yard setback is required.
4. Design Regulations (Single-Family and Two Family):
a. Minimum Lot Area — 7,500 square feet for single family and
10,000 square feet for two family structures.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 50 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 25 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 15 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 7 feet with an aggregate of 15 feet.
f. Accessory Building:
(1) Side Yard Setback — 7 feet.
(2) Rear Yard Setback — 7 feet.
g. Maximum Building Coverage — 30%.
h. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet.
18-903 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-903
AO:1143
5. Design Regulations (Multi-Family Dwellings):
a. Minimum Lot Area - 12,500 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width - 100 feet.
c. Maximum Lot Coverage - 40%.
d. Front Yard Setback - 20 feet.
e. Rear Yard Setback - 20 feet.
f. Side Yard Setback (Each) - 20 feet.
g. Maximum Density - 22 dwelling units per gross acre.
h. Maximum Building Height - 65 feet.
C. Highway Business Zone (B-3)
1. Permitted Uses:
a. All principal uses permitted in the B-1 district, except multifamily
dwellings.
b. Places of worship including parish house and classrooms in
accordance with the requirements of § 18-905 and the bulk
standards below.
c. Public and private schools in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-906 and the bulk standards below.
d. Community-based health care facility, so long as the site has
frontage on a state highway or county road.
2. Conditional Uses (See Article X):
a. Public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature but not
including warehouses and workshops.
b. Motels.
c. Townhouses.
d. Digital billboards. [Ord. No. 2016-11 § 5]
3. Design Regulations:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 20,000 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 150 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 50 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 30 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 30 feet with an aggregate of 60 feet.
18-903 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-903
AO:1144
f. Maximum Building Coverage — 25%.
g. Maximum Building Height — 45 feet.
4. Combined Business and Residential uses shall comply with
Subsection 3 above.
D. Wholesale Service Zone (B-4) [Ord. No. 2017-13]
1. Permitted Uses:
a. All principal uses permitted in the B-3 district, excluding multifamily
residential.
b. Lumber, coal, grain and feed storage yards.
c. Wholesale, storage and warehousing facilities.
d. Cold storage, ice manufacturing and storage.
e. New or used car lots.
f. Baking, laundry, printing upholstering, woodworking and
cabinetry shops and similar establishment, and business of a
similar and no more objectionable character. [Ord. No.
2017-13]
g. Places of worship including parish house and classrooms in
accordance with the requirements of § 18-905 and the bulk
standards below.
h. Public and private schools in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-906 and the bulk standards below.
2. Conditional Uses (See Article X):
a. Public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature but not
including warehouses and workshops.
b. Townhouses.
c. Digital billboards. [Ord. No. 2016-11 § 6]
3. Design Regulations:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 20,000 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 100 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 25 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 30 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 10 feet with an aggregate of 20 feet.
f. Maximum Building Height — 45 feet.
18-903 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-903
AO:1145
4. Design Regulations (Single-Family and Two-Family):
a. Minimum Lot Area — 7,500 square feet for single family and
10,000 square feet for two family structures.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 50 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 25 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 15 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 7 feet with an aggregate of 15 feet.
f. Accessory Building:
(1) Side Yard Setback — 7 feet.
(2) Rear Yard Setback — 7 feet.
g. Maximum Building Coverage — 30%.
h. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet.
E. Highway Development Zone (B-5)
1. Permitted Uses: [Ord. No. 2017-11; Ord. No. 2018-54]
a. Office buildings for professional, executive, engineering or
administrative purposes, including accounting and sale
functions.
b. Retail Stores and Shops.
c. Indoor theaters, assembly halls, bowling alleys and similar
public recreational uses.
d. Restaurants, cafes and similar non-"drive-in" eating
establishments.
e. Motels and hotels. [Ord. No. 2017-11; Ord. No. 2018-54]
f. New motor vehicle salesrooms.
g. Wholesale business and distributors.
h. Research and testing laboratories.
i. Places of worship including parish houses and classrooms in
accordance with the requirements of § 18-905 and the bulk
standards below.
j. Public and private schools in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-906 and the bulk standards below.
2. Conditional Uses (See Article X):
a. Shopping Centers.
18-903 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-903
AO:1146
b. Congregate or Assisted Living and Nursing Care.
c. Commercial office parks.
d. Age-restricted Multifamily Housing, which may include two
family and duplex housing.
e. Mixed-Use Mid-Rise Development.
f. Mixed-Use Townhouse Development.
g. Mixed-Use Multifamily Development.
h. Mixed-Use Development.
3. Design Regulations:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 2 acres.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 200 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 100 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 50 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 50 feet with an aggregate of 100 feet.
f. Maximum Building Coverage — 30%.
g. Maximum Lot Coverage - 90%.
h. Maximum Building Height — 50 feet.
F. Highway Development Zone (B-5A)
1. Permitted Uses:
a. All uses permitted in the B-5 zone.
b. Multi-family residential, which may include two family and
duplex housing.
2. Design Regulations:
a. Multi-family dwellings shall be permitted in accordance with
the standards set for multi-family dwellings located in the B-2
zone as to all criteria, except density. Maximum density for
multi-family dwellings shall be limited to 17 units per acre.
b. All other permitted uses shall comply with the standards of the
B-5 zone.
c. Ingress and egress to new multi-family dwelling units located
in the area of the B-5A (Highway Development Zone) district
that is located between N.J. Highway Route 70 and Chestnut
Street shall be only to and from NJ Route 70 and not permitted
18-903 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-903
AO:1147
from Chestnut Street when the B-5A zoning is being used as a
basis for development. [Ord. No. 2017-51 § 20]
G. Highway Development Zone (HD-6)
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Hotels and Motels.
b. Professional Occupations including the office of a physician,
surgeon, dentist, minister, architect, engineer, attorney or
other member of a recognized profession.
c. The studio of a teacher of music, dancing or art.
d. The studio of a photographer.
e. The office of an insurance agent, real estate broker, accountant
or other bookkeeper.
f. Undertaking establishments.
g. Buildings used for administrative purposes only by the federal,
state, county or local government for public purposes.
h. Public utility structures, but not including storage and
maintenance uses and garages.
i. Offices including banks, savings and loan, finance companies,
insurance, brokerage, medical and dental, legal, accounting,
architectural, engineering and general.
j. Clubs, lodges and association buildings, meeting rooms and
halls.
k. Public recreational and community center buildings and
grounds.
l. Public libraries and museums.
m. Places of worship including parish house and classrooms in
accordance with the requirements of § 18-905 and the bulk
standards below.
n. Public and private schools in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-906 and the bulk standards below.
o. Parking lots.
2. Conditional Uses (See Article X). In addition to the conditional use
standards provided in Article X any residential use permitted as a
conditional use in the HD-6 Zone district shall be subject to the
following: For that portion of State Highway Route 9 south of its
intersection with Central Avenue, the property line and boundary of
any residential yard, lot or tract of a residential use or residential
18-903 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-903
AO:1148
building shall be located 200 feet or more from the right-of-way
boundary of Route 9/River Avenue.
a. Hospitals.
b. Townhouses.
c. Two-family dwellings.
d. Duplexes.
e. Digital billboards. [Ord. No. 2016-11 § 7]
3. Design Regulations:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 10,000 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Frontage — 75 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 50 feet except as follows:
(1) Residential development fronting on a State highway shall
provide a minimum front yard setback of 100 feet.
(2) Non-residential development fronting on a State highway
shall provide a minimum front yard setback of 150 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 30 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 15 feet with an aggregate of 35 feet.
f. Accessory Structures:
(1) Rear Yard Setback - 10 feet.
(2) Side Yard Setback - 7 feet.
g. Maximum Building Coverage — 30%.
h. Maximum Building Height — 40 feet.
4. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided for all development in
accordance with the requirements of § 18-803 of this chapter.
5. There shall be no more than one driveway per each 100 feet of
street frontage.
H. Highway Development Zone (HD-7)
1. Permitted Uses:
a. All principal uses permitted in the HD-6 district.
b. Retail business establishments such as but not limited to the
following:
18-903 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-903
AO:1149
(1) Stores selling groceries, meats, poultry, baked goods, and
other such items.
(2) Drug and pharmaceutical stores.
(3) Hardware, dry goods, and household supply stores.
(4) Packaged liquor stores.
(5) Flower shops.
(6) Luncheonettes and confectionery stores.
(7) Haberdashery, dress goods and notions.
c. Personal service establishments such as but not limited to the
following:
(1) Barber and beauty shops.
(2) Tailoring and dressmaking shops employing not more than
three persons.
(3) Dry cleaning and laundry collection.
(4) Shoe repair shops.
(5) Appliance repair shops.
d. Restaurants and lunchrooms.
e. Service organizations, theater, bowling alleys and other forms
of commercial recreation, provided that they are carried on
entirely within an enclosed building.
f. Automobile sales rooms.
g. Places of worship including parish house and classrooms in
accordance with the requirements of § 18-905 and the bulk
standards below.
h. Public and private schools in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-906 and the bulk standards below.
2. Conditional Uses (See Article X). In addition to the conditional use
standards provided in Article X any residential use permitted as a
conditional use in the HD-7 Zone district shall be subject to the
following: For that portion of State Highway Route 9 south of its
intersection with Central Avenue, the property line and boundary of
any residential yard, lot or tract of a residential use or residential
building shall be located 200 feet or more from the right-of-way
boundary of Route 9/River Avenue.
a. Hospitals.
b. Townhouses.
18-903 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-903
AO:1150
c. Two-family dwellings as defined in 18-1010.A.3.
d. Digital billboards. [Ord. No. 2016-11 § 8]
3. Design Regulations:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 1 acre.
b. Minimum Lot Frontage — 150 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 50 feet except as follows:
(1) Residential development fronting on a State highway shall
provide a minimum front yard setback of 75 feet.
(2) Non-residential development fronting on a State highway
shall provide a minimum front yard setback of 75 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 50 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 30 feet.
f. Accessory Structures:
(1) Rear Yard Setback - 30 feet.
(2) Side Yard Setback - 30 feet.
g. Maximum Building Coverage — 30%.
h. Maximum Building Height — 65 feet.
i. Minimum Floor Area - 2,500 square feet.
4. Landscaping and Buffering shall be provided for all development in
accordance with the requirements of § 18-803 of this chapter.
5. There shall be no more than one driveway per each 100 feet of
street frontage.
6. Parking shall be permitted in the required front yard setback for
both residential and nonresidential development, provided no
parking shall be less than 65 feet from the center line of a State
highway.
I. Residential Office Park (ROP)
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Professional Offices including:
(1) Attorneys.
(2) Accountants and certified public accountants.
(3) Architects, engineers and land surveyors.
18-903 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-903
AO:1151
(4) Chiropodists and chiropractors.
(5) Dentists.
(6) Medical doctors.
(7) Real Estate and Insurance Brokers.
(8) Stockbrokers.
(9) Optometrists, oculists, and osteopaths.
(10) Psychologists.
(11) Marriage counselors licensed by the State of New Jersey.
(12) Executive offices, where no product will be displayed for
sale.
(13) Other similar professional offices.
b. Places of worship including parish house and classrooms in
accordance with the requirements of § 18-905 and the bulk
standards below.
c. Public and private schools in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-906 and the bulk standards below.
d. Single-family detached dwellings.
e. Multi-family housing in accordance with the design regulations
of the R-M District as specified in § 18-902H4b.
f. Townhouses (not withstanding the definition of townhouse in
this chapter, for the purposes of this section, any townhouse
with a basement should be considered two units.)
g. Banks, including drive-in facilities.
h. Duplexes.
2. Design Regulations (all uses except Multi-family Residential and
Duplexes):
a. Minimum Lot Area — 10,000 square feet.
b. Minimum Lot Width — 75 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 25 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 15 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 12 feet with an aggregate of 25 feet.
f. Maximum Building Coverage — 25%.
g. Maximum Building Height - 35 feet.
18-903 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-903
AO:1152
h. Accessory Building:
(1) Rear Yard Setback - 7 feet.
(2) Side Yard Setback - 7 feet.
3. Design Regulations Duplexes:
a. Minimum Lot Size — 10,000 square feet.
b. Minimum lot size for newly created lots shall be 10,000 square
feet and have a minimum lot width of 60 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback — 25 feet, except any development along a
State Highway shall provide a minimum front yard setback of
75 feet.
d. Rear Yard Setback — 15 feet.
e. Side Yard Setback — 7 feet with an aggregate of 15 feet.
f. Maximum Building Coverage — 30%.
g. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet.
4. Conditional Uses:
a. Automobile sales only on properties that have frontage on US
Highway 9 (Madison Avenue).
J. Open Space and Preservation (OSP) [Ord. No. 2017-51 § 21]
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Single-Family Residential Dwellings.
b. Public Open Space and Parks.
2. Design Regulations:
a. Minimum Lot Size - 3 acres.
b. Lot Width - 200 feet.
c. Front Yard Setback - 50 feet.
d. Side Yard Setback - 15 feet with an aggregate of 40 feet.
e. Rear Yard Setback - 20 feet.
f. Maximum Building Coverage - 10%.
g. Maximum Building Height - 30 feet.
h. Accessory Building:
(1) Side yard - 10 feet.
18-903 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-903
AO:1153
(2) Rear yard - 10 feet.
K. Airport Hazard Zone (AHZ)
1. Establishment of Code. A code establishing minimum standards for
the control of airport and aeronautical hazards, and standards for
land use adjacent to airports is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.A.C.
16:62.
2. Title of Code. The code established and adopted by this chapter is
described and commonly known as "The Air Safety and Hazardous
Zoning Act of 1983," P.L. 1983, c.260.
3. Public Record. Three copies of the Air Safety and Hazardous
Zoning Act of 1983 (1983) have been placed on file in the offices of
the Township Clerk, and the Secretary of the Zoning Board, and
will remain on file in said offices for use of and examination by the
public.
4. The enforcing authority for the Air Safety and Hazardous Zoning
Act shall be the Township Zoning Officer and other such officials
designated by the Township Committee.
L. Cedarbridge Redevelopment Area (DA-1)
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Corporate offices and administrative buildings.
b. Commercial office parks.
c. Business Parks.
d. Professional offices including physicians, attorneys, engineers,
accountants, etc.
e. Medical laboratories.
f. Pharmaceutical laboratories and research facilities.
g. High technology industry offices, and research and
development facilities.
h. Engineering offices and laboratories.
i. Computer service centers.
j. Hotels and/or conference centers.
k. Public buildings of a governmental or cultural nature for office
or research use.
l. Public libraries and museums.
m. Public utility uses.
18-903 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-903
AO:1154
n. Public sports facilities.
o. Parking garages.
p. Indoor and outdoor recreation facilities.
q. Banks and other financial lending institutions.
r. Day care facilities.
s. Fitness centers.
t. Training centers, the center is used exclusively for training and
is accessory to the principal use of the office park.
u. Restaurants and/or employee cafeterias.
v. Satellite dish and television antennae
w. Communication towers
x. Maintenance buildings
y. Retail and personal service activities that are incidental to the
principal use.
2. Permitted Accessory Uses:
a. Off-street parking.
b. Fences and walls.
c. Signs.
d. Public Utility uses.
3. Off-street parking:
a. Office uses, one space for every 250 square feet of floor area
(4/1,000sq.ft.).
b. Research and laboratory uses, one space for every 400 square
feet of floor area (2.5/1,000 sq. ft.).
c. Parking spaces shall be a minimum of nine feet by 18 feet in
accordance with CAFRA regulations governing the land in the
RM zone.
d. Accessible parking shall comply with the New Jersey Barrier
Free Subcode (cite N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.1 to 31).
4. Off-street loading and unloading:
a. Applicability to existing a new and expanded uses. The
applicability of the loading regulations established by this
subsection shall apply to all uses within the zone.
18-903 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-903
AO:1155
b. Loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building
or structure to which they are accessory. No loading space
shall be located in any front yard.
c. No required loading space shall be less than 12 feet in width or
35 feet in length or have vertical clearance of less than 10 feet.
d. Loading spaces shall be provided in sufficient number and of
sufficient size so that no loading or unloading operation
infringes upon any street, sidewalk or public property. In no
event shall the number of loading spaces provided be less than
that determined on the following schedule of required offstreet
loading spaces, except in the case of demonstrated
hardship, the Planning Board may grant a variance from
loading requirements, provided that an approved plan for
delivery truck operations, including but not limited to hours
and staging of operation, is attached to such variance.
Schedule of Off-Street Loading Requirements
Gross Floor Area (sq. ft.) Number of Loading Spaces
10,000 to 99,000 1
100,000 to 149,999 2
150,000 to 399,999 3
400,000 to 649,999 4
650,000 to 949,999 5
950,000 to 1,500,000 6
For each additional 350,000 1
5. General provisions
a. More than one principal building shall be permitted on a lot.
b. Landscape and buffer areas shall be provided pursuant to §
18-803 of this chapter.
6. Area, yard and density requirements:
a. Minimum lot area 3 acres
b. Minimum lot
frontage
300 feet
c. Maximum building
coverage
40%
d. Maximum
impervious coverage
80% of the applicable coverage
requirements as identified within
N.J.A.C.7:7E et seq., whichever is less.
18-903 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-903
AO:1156
e. Maximum building
height
75 feet exclusive of mechanical
equipment and penthouses which may be
up to an additional 15 feet.
7. Principal building and yard requirements:
a. Front yard: 50 feet.
b. Side yard: 30 feet.
c. Side yard aggregate: 70 feet.
d. Rear yard: 30 feet.
8. Accessory building yard requirements:
a. Front yard: 50 feet.
b. Side yard: 10 feet.
c. Rear yard: 10 feet.
9. Parking Setbacks:
a. Front yard: 50 feet.
b. Side yard: 20 feet.
c. Rear yard: 20 feet.
d. Pine Street buffer: 50 feet.
M. Industrial Zone (M-1)
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Research and development.
b. Lumber yards and other similar establishments for the bulk
storage of building materials, plumbing and electrical supplies
or electrical or home appliances.
c. Warehouses and terminal facilities.
d. Manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging or
treatment of beverages, food, candy, cosmetics, dairy products,
drugs, ice, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, plastics, toilet articles
and similar products.
e. Metal works or machine shops, welding shops, excluding drop
hammers.
f. Airports.
g. Laundry, cleaning and dyeing works, carpet and rug cleaning.
18-903 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-903
AO:1157
h. Public utility uses such as public utility repair and maintenance
yards, storage facilities, depots, stations, classification yards,
road houses, and plants for the production of energy, other
than those which use atomic energy.
i. Printing, photographic reproduction or the manufacture of
equipment or supplies therefore.
j. Automobile assembly plants.
k. Metallurgical processes and/or precious metal recycling and
manufacturing.
l. Manufacture or assembly of:
(1) Aluminum or aluminum alloy products or equipment.
(2) Vending machines.
(3) Wood products, furniture, or cabinets.
(4) Cartons, glass containers, wooden or metal containers.
(5) Novelties, toys and paper products of all kinds.
(6) Aviation equipment, accessories or aircraft control
equipment.
(7) Electronics equipment, electronics parts, components or
electrical machinery and equipment, except wherein
atomic or radioactive power or materials is used in the
manufacturing process.
(8) Radio, telephone, or other communication equipment or
parts thereof.
(9) Pools, playground equipment, athletic equipment, and all
types of sporting goods including firearms.
(10) Restaurant or bar equipment or supplies.
(11) Boats, nautical equipment, diving gear, water sports
equipment of all types.
(12) Embroidery, lace, clothing or wearing apparel of all kinds
including footwear.
(13) Glassware, cement products, china or tile.
(14) Burial supplies, markers, monuments, vaults, urns or
ornamental equipment in connection therewith.
(15) Carpets, rugs, drapes, textiles or synthetic tiles.
(16) Cotton or wool products or other manufactured fibrous
products.
18-903 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-903
AO:1158
(17) Cosmetics, ointments, beauty products or creams.
(18) Optical instruments or supplies.
(19) Musical instruments or supplies.
(20) Doors, windows, and sash or trim for building
construction.
(21) Elevators or elevator equipment.
(22) Poultry feed or poultry equipment or supplies.
(23) Lamps and electrical fixtures of all kinds.
(24) Clocks and timepieces.
(25) Plumbing, heating or air conditioning supplies or
equipment.
(26) Electrical power tools.
m. Public and private schools in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-906 and the additional design regulations
in § 18-903M8 below. [Ord. No. 2017-51 § 22]
n. Publishing companies.
o. Office buildings.
p. Bottling plants.
q. Cold storage warehouses.
r. Hotels and motels.
s. Enameling or electroplating.
t. Facilities for on-site provision of health and human services,
including spas, gyms, health clubs and like facilities.
u. The finishing or assembling of articles made from previously
prepared or refined materials, such as bone, cellulose, cork,
feather, canvas, cloth, fiber, fur, glass, plastics, guns, textiles,
leaf products, wax, and wood.
v. Scientific or research laboratories devoted to research, design,
or experimentation and processing and fabricating incidental
thereto.
w. Restaurants.
x. United States governmental postal services, all phases.
y. Telephone and telegraph companies including ancillary offices.
18-903 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-903
AO:1159
z. Manufacture of chemicals and chemical products when such
manufactured products are manufactured under control so as
to assure against poisonous or unstable or hazardous
chemicals or components kept or used in such manner as may
tend to create a public nuisance or danger or tend to start a
conflagration.
2. Additional Permitted Uses:
a. Offices and Administrative buildings situated on the site of any
industrial use above set forth in connection with the operation
of or the administration of the permitted use.
b. Residential apartments or dwellings for the occupancy of
guards, watchmen or other plant or factory personnel that
must be in residence on the premises for the maintenance and
protection or administration of the principal use. No more than
one such apartment or dwelling shall be permitted. Provided,
however, that such facilities shall not be utilized by or for
general workers, administrative or executive personnel, or for
any residential use not related to the maintenance, protection,
or administration of the principal permitted use.
c. Showroom or retail sales departments for the exhibition or
retail sale of products manufactured by the principal use on
the premises.
d. Restaurant and kitchen facilities for the use of plant personnel
and business invitees with no outside advertising of such
facilities to the public.
e. Advertising signs advertising the principal use subject to the
restrictions otherwise set forth in the zoning ordinances of the
Township for advertising signs.
f. Garages and maintenance shops for vehicles used in
connection with the operation of the principal use.
g. Loading platforms, railroad sidings or other depots used in
connection with the operation of the principal use.
h. Radio towers or other electronic transmissions or reception
devices necessary in connection with the operation of the
principal use subject to the height limitations on structures in
the industrial zone.
i. Executive offices as headquarters for principal use.
j. Outdoor storage areas as an ancillary use to a principal
permitted use provided that adequate provisions are made for
screening, lighting and security, where necessary.
18-903 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-903
AO:1160
k. Wireless telecommunications towers and antennas, subject to
the special requirements detailed in § 18-1012.
3. Conditional Uses.
In addition to the above described permitted uses there may be
permitted in the industrial zone such uses of a general industrial
nature or necessary accessories to any one of the above described
permitted uses upon obtaining a conditional use permit from the
Zoning Board of Adjustment after study and favorable referral to
the Zoning Board by the Planning Board subject to the following
regulations.
a. No danger to life, limb or property is created beyond the limits
of the lot.
b. No objectionable noise, smell, smoke, dust, gas, glare or
effluent is emitted which may adversely affect or impair the
normal use of any property, structure or dwelling located in
any residential, rural or business zone.
c. No untreated liquid, effluent or soluble solid shall be disposed
of in such manner that subsurface water supplies shall be
rendered unfit for potable or recreational purposes. Such proof
may include:
(1) Site plans and architectural drawings showing the type
and location of all buildings, structures, parking and
loading facilities on the lot.
(2) Engineering drawings and specifications which will
adequately describe the operations to be carried on, the
means and devices to be used to preserve health and
safety.
(3) Descriptions of the products to be manufactured or
processed and the control of effluents incidental thereto.
(4) Sworn statements by the owner, developer, designer or
other agent to the effect that no danger, hazard or
nuisance will be created beyond the boundaries of the lot.
(5) Any change in use of manufacturing process within an
approved heavy industrial operation shall require
reapplication and study of the use permit.
d. Automobile Repair Services.
e. Digital billboards. [Ord. No. 2016-11 § 9]
f. Mixed Use Development—Cross Street Core in accordance
with the standards set forth in § 18-1022. [Ord. No. 2017-51
§ 22]
18-903 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-903
AO:1161
4. Requirements. Any permitted industrial use shall:
a. Dispose of its liquid wastes and effluents into an approved
existing sewage treatment plant in accordance with that
plant's regulations or shall treat its own liquid wastes and
effluents in a treatment plant or process which is in compliance
with the State Statutes and with the requirements of the State
Department of Health.
b. Comply with the State Statutes and requirements of the State
Department of Labor and Industry with regard to the health of
the workers, proper precautions against fire hazards, proper
handling and storage of materials and structural design.
c. Design and plan its buildings, facilities, operations, and
processes so that noises and glares generated by the use will
not violate the conditions which permit the use.
d. Submit in triplicate the Township's atmospheric pollution
forms when applying for a building permit.
5. Prohibited Uses:
a. All uses in the industrial zone are prohibited other than those
uses specified as permitted uses or as may be granted by
special permit pursuant to the conditions and requirements
heretofore set forth concerning permitted uses and special
permits in the industrial zone.
b. Under no circumstances shall the following uses be permitted.
The slaughtering of animals, rendering of fats and oils, the
commercial disposal of domestic refuse or the dumping of
garbage, trash or incinerated material, the dumping of waste
materials from cesspools or other sewerage disposal
installations, the manufacture or storage of high explosives,
refining or storage of gasoline and fuel, oil, except for local
retail consumption, the manufacture or processing of fertilizer,
manufacture or refining of asphalt, manufacture of or
processing of cork, manufacture of rubber, manufacture of
linoleum or oil cloth, manufacture of glue or gelatin, tanning
and curing of hides or skin, manufacture of paint or varnish,
manufacture of oil, the processing, sale, storage or reclamation
of junk of all kinds including automobile wrecking and storage,
excavation of sand or gravel or other natural mineral deposits,
any manufacturing process requiring the use of machinery or
power plants operated by or with atomic energy or fissionable
materials, the dumping of atomic waste materials, any industry
requiring the use of radioactive materials; manufacture of ink,
fireworks, manufacture of any product containing extremely
poisonous or unstable or hazardous chemicals or components,
such as may tend to create a public nuisance or danger or tend
to start a conflagration, fish processing, manufacture of lime or
18-903 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-903
AO:1162
cement, manufacture or processing of gypsum or plaster
except that cement, lime, gypsum or plaster may be used in
their finished form as a material in the manufacture of other
items.
c. No industrial use or manufacturing use in the industrial zone
shall be permitted which requires the emission of smoke, dust,
fumes, odors or noise in such quantities or in such manner as
to interfere with or be dangerous to the health, welfare and
safety of the adjoining properties or the general public situated
in or using the industrial zone or the facilities situated therein.
6. Off-Street Parking:
a. For industrial buildings having less than 20,000 square feet
floor area, one parking space shall be provided for each
employee on the maximum work shift plus five spaces for
executives.
b. For industrial buildings having 20,000 square feet floor area to
50,000 square feet floor area, one parking space for each
employee on the maximum work shift plus 10 for executives.
c. For industrial buildings having over 50,000 square feet floor
area, one parking space shall be provided for each employee
on the maximum work shift plus 20 for executives.
d. Adequate land area for the off-street parking requirements
must be provided by any industry in the Township. The land
area of a tract on which the industry is located may be used for
such parking area, except those portions thereof required for
setback and those areas otherwise designated on the site plan
of the industrial building as reserved for planting, screening or
other specified uses inconsistent with the use as a parking
area. In addition to the required parking, the industrial use
must provide adequate loading and unloading areas off-street
on the industrial lands of the owner to accommodate such
loading and unloading of vehicles as shall be necessary for the
services to and from the industry situated on the lands.
e. No on the street parking for unloading, loading or employee
parking shall be permitted in the industrial zones.
f. A developer of an industrial plant consisting of more than one
industry situated on a tract of land under one ownership shall
provide the same total off-street parking for the total of the
industry situated thereon as would otherwise be required were
all of the industrial buildings under single management. The
industrial park owner must therefore make completely
adequate provisions for off-street parking of the tenants in his
industrial park according to the number of employees and each
leasehold area on which a plant is situated in the industrial
18-903 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-903
AO:1163
park shall provide the necessary number of off-street parking
spaces to accommodate the total maximum work shift plus the
necessary executives requirements as though the plant were
under individual ownership, as well as necessary loading and
unloading areas.
g. For all uses listed in Subsection 18-903M1 and M2, one
parking space for every 400 square feet of floor space or one
for each employee whichever is greater. [Ord. No. 2017-28
§ 2; Ord. No. 2017-51 § 22]
7. Design Regulations:
a. Minimum Lot Area: 3 acres
b. Minimum Lot Width: 300 feet
c. Front Yard Setback: 50/100 feet
d. Rear Yard Setback: 30 feet
e. Side Yard Setback: 30 feet with an aggregate of 70 feet
f. Maximum Building Coverage: 40%
g. Maximum Building Height: 65 feet
h. Accessory Building
(1) Rear Yard Setback: 10 feet
(2) Side Yard Setback: 10 feet
8. Additional Design Regulations for Public and Private Schools.
[Ord. No. 2017-51 § 22]
a. Minimum On-site Parking Requirements: three spaces per
classroom. A classroom shall be defined as any space with an
area of 625 square feet or larger, not including any multipurpose
or dining room. Additional parking standards for office
spaces in a school shall be calculated separately and added to
the total minimum on-site parking requirement.
b. A circulation plan is required, which shall detail bus and traffic
movements.
c. All loading, unloading, and bus stacking shall be designed to
occur on site, and shall be in compliance with the requirements
of § 18-906.
d. All recreation and play areas shall be fully fenced.
e. No parking area shall be used as a recreation and play area.
18-903 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-903
AO:1164
f. Buffer requirements pursuant to § 18-906 (Public and Private
Schools) shall be addressed. Any variance relief of the
landscaping standards of the buffer requirements due to
unique or extenuating circumstances shall provide as a
minimum condition a six or eight foot high solid (100% closed)
fence while maintaining the required buffer dimensions.
g. All schools shall be in compliance with the noise requirements
of Township Code Chapter 3, § 3-22, Noise.
N. (Reserved) [Repealed by Ord. No. 2017-51 § 23]
O. (Reserved) [Repealed by Ord. No. 2017-51 § 24]
P. Industrial Park Limited Professional Service Zone (LP)
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Professional offices and office buildings.
b. Banks and other financial lending institutions.
c. Doctors, dentists, and other recognized medical practitioners.
d. Medical laboratories.
e. Assisted living facilities.
f. Nursing homes.
g. Corporate headquarters and executive offices.
h. Hotels and conference centers.
i. Public and private schools in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-906 and the additional design regulations
in § 18-903P4 below. [Ord. No. 2017-51 § 25]
j. Recreational facilities including ice skating rinks, bowling
alleys, and other indoor recreational activities.
k. Facilities for the provision of health and human services
including spas, gyms, health clubs and like facilities.
l. Scientific or research laboratories devoted to the research
design or experimentation and processing and fabricating
incidental thereto.
m. Restaurants.
n. Retail centers, department stores and supermarkets.
2. Area, Yard, and Lot Requirements. The area, yard and lot
requirements of this zone shall be the same as the M-1 Zone.
18-903 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-903
AO:1165
3. Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking requirements shall be in
accordance with § 18-807 entitled, "Off-street Parking
Requirements."
4. Additional Design Regulations for Public and Private Schools.
[Ord. No. 2017-51 § 25]
a. Minimum On-site Parking Requirements: three spaces per
classroom. A classroom shall be defined as any space with an
area of 625 square feet or larger, not including any multipurpose
or dining room. Additional parking standards for office
spaces in a school shall be calculated separately and added to
the total minimum on-site parking requirement.
b. A circulation plan is required, which shall detail bus and traffic
movements.
c. All loading, unloading, and bus stacking shall be designed to
occur on site, and shall be in compliance with the requirements
of § 18-906.
d. All recreation and play areas shall be fully fenced.
e. No parking area shall be used as a recreation and play area.
f. Buffer requirements pursuant to § 18-906 (Public and Private
Schools) shall be addressed. Any variance relief of the
landscaping standards of the buffer requirements due to
unique or extenuating circumstances shall provide as a
minimum condition a six or eight foot high solid (100% closed)
fence while maintaining the required buffer dimensions.
g. All schools shall be in compliance with the noise requirements
of Township Code Chapter 3, § 3-22, Noise.
Q. (Reserved) [Repealed by Ord. No. 2017-51 § 26]
R. Corporate Campus/Stadium Support Zone (B-6)
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Restaurants, cafes, pubs, sandwich shops, coffee shops and
similar eating establishments, with the exception of drive-in/
drive-through eating establishments.
b. Retail stores and shops.
c. Personal Services Establishments. Limited specifically to
barber and beauty shops, tailors, dry cleaning collections,
except processing and shoe repair.
d. Office buildings for professional, executive, engineering or
administrative purposes, including accounting and sale
functions, provided such uses are located above ground floor.
18-903 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-903
AO:1166
e. Fire Department facilities.
f. Facilities for the collection, recycling and processing of organic
waste into energy.
g. Facilities for the warehouse, packaging and distribution of food
products including administrative offices.
h. Residential uses and design standards permitted in the B-1
zoning district, except that no residential building of any type
shall be permitted to front on Cedarbridge Avenue or that
portion of New Hampshire Avenue that is within 350 feet from
the intersection of New Hampshire Avenue and Cedarbridge
Avenue.
2. Conditional Uses (See Article X):
a. Shopping Centers.
b. Service stations with convenience stores.
3. Design Regulations:
a. Minimum Lot Area — 2 acres
b. Minimum Lot Width — 200 feet
c. Front Yard Setback — 100 feet
d. Rear Yard Setback — 50 feet
e. Side Yard Setback — 50 feet with an aggregate of 100 feet
f. Maximum Building Coverage — 30%
g. Maximum Lot Coverage — 80%
h. Maximum Building Height — 50 feet
S. Hospital Support Zone (HS)
1. Permitted Principal Uses:
a. Hospitals and medical centers.
b. Physicians and other medical offices.
c. Clinics and other therapeutic and rehabilitation facilities.
d. Medical diagnostic offices and laboratories.
e. Emergency medical service facilities.
f. Pharmacies and other retail establishments for the sale of
medical surgical supplies, equipment and clothes or goods and
prescription eyeglasses.
18-903 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-903
AO:1167
g. Nursing homes, assisted living, and extended care facilities.
h. Child care centers.
i. Adult day care centers.
j. Professional, administrative and business offices.
k. Offices including banks, savings and loan, finance companies,
insurance, and brokerage companies/firms.
l. Clubs, lodges, and association buildings, meeting rooms and
halls.
m. Public recreational and community center buildings and
grounds.
n. Buildings used for administrative purposes for Federal, State,
County or municipal government for public purposes.
o. Places of worship, including parish house and classrooms in
accordance with the requirements of § 18-905 and the bulk
standards below.
p. Public and private schools in accordance with the
requirements of § 18-906 and the bulk standards below.
q. Essential services.
2. Permitted Accessory Uses:
a. Retail trade and services in conjunction with a principal use
and provided the floor area of the retail use does not exceed
15% of the ground floor area.
b. Off-street parking.
3. Permitted Conditional Uses: Fueling station and convenience mart.
4. Design Regulations:
a. (1) Minimum Lot Area — one acre
(2) Minimum Lot Frontage — 150 feet
b. (1) Front Yard Setback — 50 feet except that development
fronting on State Highway Route 9 (River Avenue) shall
provide a minimum front yard setback of 75 feet.
(2) Rear Yard Setback — 50 feet
(3) Side Yard Setback — 30 feet
(4) Accessory Structures:
(a) Rear Yard Setback — 40 feet
18-903 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-903
AO:1168
(b) Side yard Setback — 20 feet
(c) Maximum Height — 16 feet
(5) Maximum Building Coverage — 30%
(6) Maximum Building Height — 65 feet.
T. Airport Business Commercial Zone [Ord. No. 2017-51 § 27]
1. Permitted Uses:
a. Corporate headquarters and related offices and administrative
buildings;
b. Commercial office parks;
c. Business parks and office buildings;
d. Professional offices for physicians or dentists, so long as such
offices are not patient of a healthcare institution providing
medical, surgical, psychological care in a facility that operates
as a charitable or not-for-profit institution;
e. Professional offices for attorneys, engineers, accountants,
pharmacists and chemists;
f. Medical laboratories;
g. Pharmaceutical laboratories and research facilities;
h. High technology industry offices, and research and
development facilities;
i. Engineering offices and laboratories;
j. Computer service centers and related management offices;
k. Publishing companies;
l. Airports;
m. Retail banking facility provided same in ancillary to a
corporate office of a financial lending institution;
n. Hotels;
o. Conference centers;
p. Printing, photographic reproduction, or the manufacture of
equipment or supplies related to publishing and
communication;
q. Manufacture, assembly compounding, processing, packaging
or treatment of:
18-903 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-903
AO:1169
(1) Novelties, toys and paper products of all kinds;
(2) Aviation equipment, accessories, or aircraft control
equipment;
(3) Electronics equipment, electronic parts, components, or
electrical machinery and equipment except wherein
atomic or radioactive materials are used in the
manufacturing process;
(4) Radio, telephone or other communication equipment or
parts therefore;
(5) Restaurant or bar equipment;
(6) Embroidery, lace, clothing or wearing apparel of all kinds
including footwear;
(7) Glassware, cement products, china, tile;
(8) Carpets, rugs, drapes, textiles, synthetic tiles;
(9) Cotton or wood products or other manufactured fibrous
products;
(10) Cosmetics, ointments, beauty products, or creams;
(11) Optical instruments or supplies;
(12) Musical instruments or supplies;
(13) Doors, windows and sash and trim for building
construction;
(14) Elevators and elevator equipment;
(15) Lamps and electrical fixtures of all kinds;
(16) Clocks and timepieces;
(17) Plumbing, heating, or air-conditioning supplies or
equipment;
(18) Electrical power tools.
r. Warehouse and retail outlets and retail stores; as well as
showroom or retail sales departments for the exhibition or
retail sale of products manufactured by the principal use on
the premises;
s. Bottling plants;
t. Enameling and electroplating;
18-903 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-903
AO:1170
u. Facilities for the on-site provision of services such as spas and
health clubs, provided same are ancillary to a primary
permitted use;
v. The finishing or assembling of articles made from previously
prepared and refined materials, such as bone, cellulose, cork,
feathers, canvas, cloth, fiber, fur, glass, plastics, guns, textiles,
leaf products, wax and wood;
w. Restaurants;
x. Communication companies and ancillary offices; and
y. Restaurant or kitchen facilities for the use of plant personnel
and business invitees with no outside advertising of such
facilities to the public.
2. Permitted Accessory Uses:
a. Off-street parking and loading for the principal use.
b. Use customarily incidental and accessory to a principal
permitted use.
3. Design Regulations:
a. Minimum Lot Area - three acres
b. Minimum Lot Width - 300 feet
c. Front Yard Setback - 50/100 feet
d. Rear Yard Setback - 30 feet
e. Side Yard Setback - 30 feet with an aggregate of 70 feet
f. Accessory Structures:
(1) Rear Yard Setback - 10 feet
(2) Side yard Setback - 10 feet
(3) Maximum Height - 35 feet
g. Maximum Building Coverage - 40%
h. Maximum Building Height - 65 feet
4. Prohibited Uses:
a. Schools, houses of worship, and institutions of higher
education. However, if an institution of higher education
chooses to sponsor a medical laboratory, high technology
industry office, research and development facility, or
engineering offices and laboratories, such a use shall be
permitted.
18-903 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-903
AO:1171
18-904. Cluster Single-Family Residential Development.
U. Public Purpose Overlay Zone (PP) [Ord. No. 2017-51 § 28]
1. Purpose. The Public Purpose overlay zone is intended to provide for
optional development of public parks and emergent facilities in the
underlying zones to meet the needs of the community.
2. Location. The boundaries of the public purpose overlay zones are
delineated on the Lakewood Township Zoning Map. The underlying
zones for the Public Purpose overlay are the R-40 and R-M
residential zones in the southwest area of the municipality.
3. Use and Bulk Regulations to supplement the requirements of the
underlying zones.
a. R-40 sub-district.
(1) Permitted uses:
(a) Public Emergency service facilities such as first aid,
fire department, police substation or similar facility or
service.
(2) Bulk Regulations: None.
b. R-M sub-district.
(1) The R-M sub-district overlay area is intended to serve as a
consolidation of adjoining municipally-owned properties to
be used as a centrally-located public open space and park
to benefit surrounding development.
(2) Permitted uses:
(a) Public open space and parks consisting of active and/
or passive recreation facilities.
(3) Bulk Regulations: None.
A. General Concept. A cluster single-family residential development is a
form of development that permits a reduction in lot area and bulk
requirements, provided there is no increase in the number of lots
permitted under a conventional subdivision or increase in the overall
density of development, and the remaining land area is devoted to open
space, active recreation, preservation of environmentally sensitive
areas, or agriculture.
B. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a method of
developing single-family detached dwellings, which will preserve
desirable open spaces, conservation areas, floodplains, recreation and
park areas, and lands for other public purposes by permitting the
reduction of lot sizes and certain other regulations hereinafter stated
without increasing the number of lots in the total area to be developed.
18-903 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-904
AO:1172
C. General Requirements:
1. The minimum size of a tract of land proposed for development
under the cluster development provisions of this section shall be 15
acres.
2. The cluster option shall only be permitted in those Residential Zone
Districts where cluster single-family residential development is a
permitted development option.
3. The density and maximum number of residential building lots
under the cluster provision shall be such that the resulting net lot
density of the area to be subdivided shall be not greater than the
net lot density of the subdivision area without regard to the
provisions of this subsection and shall be computed in accordance
with the applicable area, yard, and bulk requirements. Applicants
shall be required to submit a lot yield plan showing the
development of the tract using the conventional zone district
requirements and strictly applying all limiting factors. Applicants
shall demonstrate that all lots are developable and usable in
accordance with any ordinance provision which may result in the
reduction of the lot yield. The number of building lots shown on the
lot yield plan shall be the maximum number of lots permitted.
4. Land left as open space may be offered to the Township.
a. The lands offered to the Township shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) Where possible, open space parcels should be large
enough to accommodate active recreation facilities. Lands
offered for recreational purposes shall be improved by the
developer in a manner consistent with the recreational
purpose intended for that particular area of the
development in order to qualify the lands for acceptance
by the Township. In order to provide continuous jogging
and bicycle paths, parcels of open space should be
interconnected using the regular sidewalks and/or
separate path systems.
(2) Any land offered to the Township shall be optimally related
to the overall plan and design of the development and
improved to best suit the purpose(s) for which it is
intended. Open space shall be so planned within the
development that a close visual and physical relationship
between the open space and as many dwelling units as is
reasonably possible is created. Open space areas should
weave between dwelling units generally respecting a
minimum width of 50 feet and periodically widening out
into significant and usable recreation areas.
18-904 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-904
AO:1173
18-904.1. Planned Development Noncontiguous Cluster (PDNC)
Overlay Zone.80 [Ord. No. 2017-52 § 1]
b. The lands proposed as open spaces shall be subject to review
by the Planning Board, which in its review and evaluation of
the suitability of such land, shall be guided by the Master Plan
of the Township, by the ability to assemble and relate such
lands to an overall plan, and by the accessibility and potential
utility of such lands. The Planning Board may request an
opinion from other public agencies or individuals as to the
advisability of the Township's accepting any lands to be offered
to the Township.
c. The parcels of land, whether to be offered to and accepted by
the Township or other organization, shall be conveyed by deed
on a pro-rata basis, as actual development commences, in
accordance with the following schedule:
(1) A conveyance by deed of a parcel equal to 25% of the
acreage proposed for dedication or conservation and other
purposes shall be conveyed to the Township prior to the
issuance of certificates of occupancy in a number equal to
25% of the total number of dwelling units proposed for the
entire tract.
(2) Not less than an additional 25% shall be conveyed to the
Township upon the issuance of certificates of occupancy
equal to 50% of the total number of dwelling units
proposed for the entire tract.
A. Planned Development Noncontiguous Cluster (PDNC) Overlay Zone.
1. Purpose: The purpose of the Planned Development Noncontiguous
Cluster (PDNC) Overlay Zone is to facilitate smart growth by
promoting development with a compact footprint while
simultaneously facilitating the permanent preservation of the most
ecologically important areas and valuable forested areas of the
municipality.
2. Location: The specific area of the Planned Development
Noncontiguous Cluster (PDNC) Overlay Zone is depicted in
Attachment 1.
3. Use and Bulk Requirements: The use and bulk requirements of the
underlying zone districts shall apply.
4. Tree Save Requirements:
80.Editor's Note: Attachments 1 through 4 can be found as attachments to this chapter.
Attachment 1 shows PDNC without Schedule A and Schedule B. Attachment 2 shows PDNC
with Schedule A and Schedule B.
18-904 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-904.1
AO:1174
a. The requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:7-13.4, N.J.A.C. 7:7-13.14, and
N.J.A.C. 7:7-13.18, as applicable, shall apply.
b. These requirements may be met through the noncontiguous
cluster provisions of § 18-904.1A5 below.
5. Noncontiguous Cluster Provisions:
a. Applicability: These provisions shall become an applicable
option when both of the following conditions are met:
(1) The development triggers the tree save requirements that
have been cited in § 18-904.1A4 above; and
(2) The development qualifies as a planned development,
subdivision, or site plan as defined in § 18-200.
b. Development and Preservation Areas: Areas for development
and preservation are depicted in Attachment 2. Areas for
development are the "Schedule B" areas that are depicted in
Attachment 2 and listed in Attachment 3. Areas for
preservation are the "Schedule A" areas that are depicted in
Attachment 2 and listed in Attachment 4.
c. No Increased Density: Use of these provisions shall not result
in density bonuses or similar bonuses. The minimum lot size
requirements of the underlying zone district in which the
"Schedule B" portions of the development tract are located
shall apply, and the maximum development yield shall be based
solely on the "Schedule B" portions of the development tract.
However, the area that is required to meet tree save
requirements does not reduce the development capacity of the
"Schedule B" portions of the development tract, because said
area is provided in the "Schedule A" portions of the
development tract.
d. Requirements:
(1) Development Requirements: All development shall be
designed and constructed in accordance with the
standards of the underlying zone districts.
(2) Development Location: All development shall be located in
the area designated as "Schedule B" in Attachment 2 and
listed in Attachment 3.
(3) Preservation Area Size: The size of the preservation area
shall be determined by the requirements provided at
N.J.A.C. 7:7-13.4, N.J.A.C. 7:7-13.14, and N.J.A.C.
7:7-13.18, as applicable.
18-904.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-904.1
AO:1175
(4) Preservation Area Location: The preservation area shall be
located in an area designated as "Schedule A" in
Attachment 2 and listed in Attachment 4.
(5) Preservation Required:
(a) Upon approval of the noncontiguous development, the
preservation area shall be permanently preserved by
conservation restriction.
(b) The form of conservation restriction shall conform
with current practice and standards of the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection.
e. Additional Application Requirements: In addition to the
application submission requirements that are outlined in other
applicable sections of Chapter 18 of the Unified Development
Ordinance, the following additional application submission
requirements shall apply:
(1) Boundary survey of all parcels for preservation.
(2) Proof of agreement between the owners of all properties in
the noncontiguous cluster development, if applicable.
(3) Draft or previously established conservation restriction.
(4) Deed of all parcels for preservation.
(5) Demonstration of full compliance with N.J.A.C. 7:7-13.4,
N.J.A.C. 7:7-13.14, and N.J.A.C. 7:7-13.18, as applicable.
f. Standards for Approval by Planning Board:
(1) The Planning Board shall find that:
(a) One or more parcels are designated for preservation.
(b) Parcels for preservation are located in an area that is
designated as "Schedule A" in Attachment 2 and listed
in Attachment 4.
(c) The parcels for preservation are available for use by
the applicant for use in a noncontiguous cluster
development application.
(d) One or more parcels are designated for development.
(e) Parcels for development are located in an area
designated as "Schedule B" in Attachment 2 and listed
in Attachment 3.
(f) The goals and objectives of the 2017 Lakewood
Township Master Plan are promoted.
18-904.1 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-904.1
AO:1176
18-905. Additional Regulations Pertaining to Places of Worship and
Religious Facilities. [Ord. No. 2009-17 § 1]
Residences situated on one lot or site that also has a religious or educational
use on the site shall be automatically determined as one of them being an
accessory use.
(g) The parcels for preservation are suitable for meeting
the tree save requirements of N.J.A.C. 7:7-13.4,
N.J.A.C. 7:7-13.14, and N.J.A.C. 7:7-13.18, as
applicable.
A. Parking Regulations:
1. If the place of worship contains less than 800 square feet of main
sanctuary space there shall be no requirements for parking, if more
than 800 square feet, then the following shall be required for main
sanctuary space (main sanctuary area shall not include secondary
sanctuary space, mikvah, hallways, bathrooms, kitchen, and other
ancillary and/or support rooms):
800 to 1999 square feet 1.0 spaces for every 100 sq. ft.
2000 to 2999 square
feet
1.25 spaces for every 100 sq. ft.
3000+ square feet 1.50 spaces for every 100 sq. ft.
If a catering facility is also on site, the following shall apply (in
addition to required parking for place of worship):
800 SF to 1999 SF 0.75 parking spaces for every 100 sq. ft.
2000+ SF 1.0 parking spaces for every 100 sq. ft.
2. No parking area shall be located closer than five feet to any side or
rear property line that are adjacent to residential zoned properties.
A decorative, solid, six foot fence plus shrubs will be required to
hide all parking adjacent to residential properties, unless there is a
buffer of greater than 20 feet in which case it shall not require
screening.
3. For all religious bathing facilities (mikvah) with less than five
changing rooms no parking shall be required. For facilities with five
or more changing rooms, there shall be one parking space per
changing room.
B. Buffer Requirements:
1. Perimeter Buffer: for properties adjacent to residential properties,
if the site leaves a 20 foot undisturbed area then there are no
requirements for buffering, if the 20 foot buffer is invaded or
disturbed then requirements indicated in Number 3 below shall be
put in place along the invaded area.
18-904.1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-905
AO:1177
a. From a nonresidential use or district - 10 feet.
b. From a residential use or district - 20 feet.
2. No parking area shall be located closer than five feet to any side or
rear property line that are adjacent to residential zoned properties.
Board-on-board fence six feet plus shrubs with a four foot arbor
vitae every four feet will be required to hide all parking adjacent to
residential properties, unless there is a buffer of greater than 20
feet in which case it shall not require screening
3. A required buffer shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, and other
suitable plantings for beautification and screening. Natural
vegetation should be retained to the maximum degree possible. On
those sites where no existing vegetation is present or existing
vegetation is inadequate to provide screening, the applicant shall
suitably grade and plant the required buffer area, such that this
planting shall provide an adequate screen of at least six feet in
height so as to continually restrict the view. A minimum on-center
distance between plantings shall be such that upon maturity the
buffer will create a solid screen. The buffer may be supplemented
with a fence of solid material where necessary.
C. Other Site Standards: The front yard, exclusive of walkways, pavilion
areas, or driveways, shall be landscaped with grass, trees, shrubs,
groundcover, flowers, existing vegetation, or any suitable combination
thereof. Plantings shall conform, however, to restrictions on corner lot
placement, in order to protect visibility.
D. Curb Cuts shall be provided in a manner that is consistent with safe
traffic flow, avoiding excessive proximity to intersections and other
hazardous situations. Curb cuts shall be minimal in number, with
enough provided to ensure reasonable ingress/egress to and from the
site. Those deemed by local, County and/or State traffic engineering
authorities to be unnecessary for providing said traffic service shall be
subject to deletion from plans.
E. Temporary Facilities for Places of Worship. The Township Zoning
Official may approve the installation of temporary portable facilities for
a place of worship at the site of a religious facility or proposed religious
facility for a period of one year. The approval may be renewed once for
one additional one year period and each approval is subject to the
following standards and requirements:
1. An application for permanent construction to replace the
temporary portable facilities has been filed and is deemed complete
by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment or has been
approved by the Board and is currently under construction or
awaiting permitting or State or County agency approvals.
2. The use of the trailer, modular unit or portable facility must be
limited to religious services only. The facility may not be used for
18-905 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-905
AO:1178
18-906. Public and Private Schools.
weddings, fund-raising or other events. The religious group obtains
the necessary Uniform Construction Code permits for the facility.
All installations are subject to applicable municipal, County and
State specifications, inspections and fees. The facility must at all
times comply with the Township's Uniform Fire Safety Code.
3. A site plan or plot plan showing setbacks, parking and buffer
requirements of this chapter is required for the temporary facility.
4. An ADA approved walkway shall be provided from existing
buildings or existing paved surfaces to the temporary portable
facilities.
A. Buffer Requirements.
1. From a nonresidential use or district - 10 feet.
2. From a residential use or district - 20 feet.
3. A required buffer shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, and other
suitable plantings for beautification and screening. Natural
vegetation should be retained to the maximum degree possible. On
those sites where no existing vegetation is present or existing
vegetation is inadequate to provide screening, the applicant shall
suitably grade and plant the required buffer area, such that this
planting shall provide an adequate screen of at least six feet in
height so as to continually restrict the view. A minimum on-center
distance between plantings shall be such that upon maturity the
buffer will create a solid screen. The buffer may be supplemented
with a fence of solid material where necessary.
B. Parking is not permitted in any required buffer.
C. One parking space shall be provided for each of the following:
1. Classrooms.
2. Tutor room.
3. Library.
4. Meeting room.
5. Office.
D. If a recreation area or areas are designated then details shall be
provided for such recreational areas. All play equipment shall meet all
required safety standards.
E. Bus Loading and Unloading Zones. [Ord. No. 2017-51 § 29]
18-905 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-906
AO:1179
1. An on-site bus loading and unloading zone shall be required at all
schools where bus transportation is provided.
2. Bus loading and unloading areas shall be situated in a manner so
that children do not cross any traffic lane or parking areas
whatsoever, unless it is in area that is curbed and physically
separated from traffic circulation and specifically designated solely
for bus loading and unloading.
F. A public or private school shall not be located on a site in an Industrial
Park or Industrial Zone where the mix of uses presents a health or
safety hazard to the occupants of the school.
G. Temporary Classrooms for Schools. The Township Zoning Officer may
approve the installation of temporary portable facilities at the site of a
school for a period not to exceed two school years, subject to the
following standards and requirements:
1. The trailer, modular unit or portable classroom facility must be
limited to educational purposes, including support offices,
libraries, or other such uses typically accessory or ancillary uses to
the educational use, and be of a type that is certified for this use by
applicable Federal, State, County and local agencies.
2. The school obtains the necessary Uniform Construction Code
permits for the facility. All installations are subject to applicable
municipal, County and State specifications, inspections and fees.
3. A site plan or plot plan showing setbacks, parking and buffer
requirements of this chapter is required for the temporary facility.
4. An ADA approved walkway shall be provided from existing
buildings or existing paved surfaces to the temporary portable
facilities.
5. The Township Zoning Officer may authorize two one year
extensions of the original two year time frame, set forth above,
subject to the following requirement:
An application for construction to replace the temporary portable
facilities has been filed and is deemed complete by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment or has been approved by the
Board and is currently under construction or awaiting permitting
or State or County agency approvals. [Ord. No. 2009-17 § 2]
H. Front Yard Setback Requirements. [Ord. No. 2017-51 § 29; Ord. No.
2019-15]
1. In all residential zones, namely the R-40, R-20, R-15, R-12, R-12A,
R-10, R-7.5, R-M, R-LM, R-10A, R-10B and R-20A zones, as well as
the A-1 zone, the minimum front yard setback requirement shall be
increased by 20 feet.
18-906 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-906
AO:1180
18-907. Prohibited Uses. [Ord. No. 2006-31 § 2]
18-908. Reduction of Residential Lot Requirements for
Recreational Purposes.
2. For all other zone districts that permit schools, except for the
Central Business (B-2) zone, increase minimum front yard setback
requirement by 40%. The increased front yard setback requirement
shall not apply to the B-2 zone.
A. All uses not expressly permitted in this chapter are prohibited. The
following uses are specifically prohibited in every district:
1. No single recreational vehicle or boat may be used for living or
housekeeping purposes within the Township, except as provided
for by § 909 herein.
2. Outdoor storage, in a shed or a trailer, of any type shall not be
permitted unless such storage is a part of the normal operation of a
use conducted on the premises subject to design and performance
standards for the prevailing district and provided further that the
following requirements are conformed with:
a. All outdoor storage facilities shall be enclosed by a solid fence
adequate to conceal the facilities from any adjacent properties.
b. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such
form or manner that may be transferred off the lot by natural
causes or forces.
c. All material or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or
which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or
otherwise be attractive to rodents or insects shall be stored
outdoors only in closed containers.
d. Flammable or explosive liquids, solids, or gases shall be
permitted to be stored in above ground storage tanks only if
the proposed use and structure meet the requirements of the
Uniform Construction Code (5:23 et seq.) and the Fire Code
(5:18 et seq.), as used by Lakewood Township officials. In
addition, above ground storage tanks are not permitted in any
front yard and shall be sufficiently buffered from any adjoining
use.
3. Private sanitary landfills.
4. Commercial resource extraction operations.
5. Mobile home parks.
6. Junk Yards.
18-906 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-908
AO:1181
18-909. Temporary Structures for Residents of Single-Family
Homes. [Ord. No. 2006-31 § 3]
A. A reduction in the minimum lot area and width requirements in any
residential subdivision in the R-20, R-15, R-12, R-12A, R-10, and R-7.5
zone districts may be allowed provided the gross residential density
established for the zone in question, as listed in Subsection 18-908B8 is
not exceeded and that the regulation and standards as established in
this section are complied with.
B. Regulations and Standards.
1. Required minimum lot area may be reduced up to 15%.
2. Required minimum lot widths may be reduced up to 10% except
that no lot width shall be reduced to less than 50 feet. All other
regulations of this chapter shall be complied with.
3. The land resulting from the reduction in lot size shall be set aside
for park, playground, or other recreational purposes.
4. This land shall be dedicated and deeded to the Township for
recreational purposes.
5. The soil, drainage, slope and location of the proposed recreation
area shall be deemed suitable by the Board for recreational
purposes. In its review of an application for lot reduction under this
section, the Board shall consider the location of the proposed
recreational area with respect to the location of the Township's
population, traffic, and the possible addition of more land to the
area proposed for dedication.
6. The land to be dedicated shall have direct access to a public right of
way.
7. The area set aside for the recreational purposes shall not be less
than one acre with its least dimension not less 150 feet, unless this
area is to be added to another recreational area at this time or
sometime in the future.
8. The maximum gross residential density for the respective
residential zones shall be as follows:
R-20 1.9 dwelling units per acre
R-15 2.5 dwelling units per acre
R-12&12A 3.1 dwelling units per acre
R-10 3.7 dwelling units per acre
R-7.5 4.8 dwelling units per acre
18-908 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-909
AO:1182
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to authorize temporary housing
for residents of a single-family home whose primary dwelling place is
destroyed by a natural disaster or catastrophic accident.
B. Applicability. This section will authorize the placement of a temporary
residential trailer on a lot where the principal dwelling has been
destroyed by a natural disaster or catastrophic accident and is being
repaired or replaced.
C. Permit. A person or representative of persons whose primary dwelling
place has been destroyed by a natural disaster or catastrophic accident
shall, within 30 days of the event that caused the destruction, make
application to the Zoning Officer for a permit to a place a temporary
residential trailer on the building lot of the dwelling place. The trailer
must conform to the requirements of a manufactured home as defined
in the Uniform Construction Code, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-121.
D. Notification. At the time of the application to the Zoning Officer for the
permit, the applicant shall notify all contiguous property owners by
certified mail of the application. The notice shall indicate the nature of
the application and the fact that the contiguous property may voice any
objection or comment regarding the application to the Zoning Officer
within 10 days of the receipt of the certified notice.
E. Setback. Any trailer so placed must be placed at a minimum setback of
20 feet from the front of the building lot property line, five feet from
each side of the building lot property line and 15 feet from the rear of
the building lot property line.
F. Duration. The temporary trailer so authorized shall be for the sole
purpose of temporary residence for the person or persons whose
primary dwelling place has been destroyed by a natural disaster or
catastrophic accident. The authorization shall not exceed six months,
except that additional authorization may be granted in the discretion of
the Zoning Officer on a month-to-month basis if the repair or
replacement of the dwelling house is not complete, however, in any
event, the authorization shall not exceed 12 months.
G. Approval. The temporary residential trailer may not be occupied unless
approval for such occupancy is granted after inspection by the
Township Construction Code Official. The Construction Code Official
shall inspect the temporary trailer for approval within three days of the
application for occupancy to the Zoning Officer.
H. Revocation. The Construction Code Official is authorized to make
periodic inspections of the temporary residential trailer at the request
of the Zoning Officer. After such inspections, the Construction Code
Official may recommend continued occupancy in accordance with the
provisions of this section or the Construction Code Official may
recommend that the permit for temporary occupancy be vacated if an
unsafe or unhealthy condition exists at the temporary residential trailer.
18-909 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-910
AO:1183
18-910. Basement Apartments. [Ord. No. 2008-39 §§ 1—9; Ord. No.
2014-19]
18-911. Zero Lot Line Residential Development. [Ord. No. 2009-38
§ 1]
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate basement
apartments as defined herein within the Township of Lakewood to
ensure the apartment's compliance with safety rules and regulations.
B. A basement apartment must meet all requirements of a basement as
defined by State codes and statutes.
C. Definitions. A basement apartment must have an address designation
and mailbox recognized by the USPS, along with a kitchen, bathroom,
bedroom and living area that is solely contained beneath the ground
floor and separate from the residence above the ground floor.
D. Permitted Use. Basement apartments are permitted uses in all
residential zones or those that have been grandfathered because they
have been established prior to any zone change except as set forth in
Subsection I of this section.
E. There shall be only one basement apartment per single-family
residence to include townhouses and condominiums. The said basement
apartment shall be a rental unit for lease.
F. The basement apartment must have its own independent means of
entry and exit as well as a secondary egress window or door in
accordance with all requirements of the State codes and statutes.
G. The basement apartment and upstairs unit must have access to all
utility meters and shutoffs.
H. The basement apartment and the area above ground level must be
separated by a fire separation system, have smoke and carbon dioxide
detectors pursuant to both State and local codes. It must totally comply
with all the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code.
I. Prohibitions. Basement apartments are prohibited in the A-1
Agricultural Zone and age restricted communities.
A. Purpose. The zero lot line residential development provisions of this
section are designed to provide a more affordable ownership housing
opportunity for a wide range of income groups while assuring
compatibility with, and maintaining the stability and quality of, existing
neighborhoods; to provide the opportunity for lower development costs
and lower per-unit land costs that subsequently lower the cost of
housing for the consumer; to provide an economical and logical
response to high-cost infill properties; to promote a more efficient
utilization of land; and to promote energy conservation.
18-910 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-911
AO:1184
B. Applicability. The provisions of this article are intended to serve as
conditions required for approval of zero lot line residential dwelling, as
they may be permitted within the R-10, R-7.5, R-M, B-1, and B-2 zoning
districts. It is not intended that this article apply to townhouse
developments involving no side yard setbacks on either side, or
condominium developments.
C. Buildings and Activities Allowed. Within the R-10, R-7.5, R-M, B-1, and
B-2 zones established by this section, the following duplex uses are
permitted, subject to other applicable provisions of this section.
1. A newly constructed or proposed duplex, where the duplex is
constructed to the development standards provided in this article
and intended to be divided into two separately owned structures
and lots, thereby creating two zero lot line dwellings.
2. Conversion of an existing duplex to a zero lot line dwelling,
provided that the other provisions of this article are met.
D. Property Development Standards.
1. Area:
a. Unless otherwise modified by other provisions of this article, a
minimum of 50% of the required lot area for duplex structures
in the respective zone shall be provided.
b. In the case of an existing irregular shaped lot that meets the
minimum lot of the zone, a zero lot line duplex may be
permitted where the two lots may not each be 50% in area of
the requirement of the zone, provided that other development
standards of this article are met.
c. In the case of an existing approved duplex on an undersized
lot, a zero lot line dwelling may be permitted where the two
lots are each 50% in area, provided that other development
standards of this article are met.
2. Setbacks:
a. Front yard — per the zone requirements.
b. Side yard - Except for the zero lot line setback on the line per
the zone requirements.
c. Rear yard — per the zone requirements.
3. Height: per the zone
4. Coverage: per the zone
5. Parking: Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with as
if each unit were a single-family dwelling.
18-911 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-911
AO:1185
6. Street Frontage: It is the legislative intent of this provision of the
Ordinance to provide zero lot line residential development with
clear, unencumbered public street frontage and vehicular access to
each unit. The minimum public street frontage requirements for
each zero lot line parcel shall be 50% of the frontage requirements
of the zone.
E. Procedures for Review.
1. The application shall include such information and documentation
as required by the Planning Board and shall meet all the
requirements of minor subdivision plats set forth in § 18-608.
2. The application shall be accompanied by such application and
escrow fees established by the Planning Board.
3. Applications for development or conversion of zero lot line
dwellings shall be processed, reviewed, and approved by the
Planning Board or Subdivision Committee of the Planning Board
appointed by the Chairman administratively in accordance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47 without the requirement of public
notice and public hearing.
F. Criteria for Approval of Development. In review of a proposed zero lot
line residential development, the following criteria shall be met.
1. The proposed development complies with all other applicable
provisions of this section.
2. A written agreement signed by the owner of the property, "Owners
Agreement," shall be filed with application for approval, and shall
include provisions as determined to be appropriate by the Planning
Board, for resolving the following items associated with the use,
maintenance and repair of common areas and facilities:
a. Assurance that the building and surrounding property will be
used for residential purposes only;
b. Provisions for mutual consent prior to making structural, paint,
or decorative changes to the building exterior;
c. Provisions granting access or easement to each owner for the
purpose of maintaining or repairing the structure and related
facilities;
d. Assurance that the owner(s) will obtain insurance coverage in
an amount not less than the full replacement value of the
structure;
e. Provisions for liability and equitable treatment in the event of
damage or destruction of the building due to fire or other
casualty;
18-911 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-911
AO:1186
18-912. Oak Street Core Residential Development. [Ord. No.
2016-40]
f. Provision for emergency action by one party in the absence of
the other where an immediate threat exists to the property of
the former; and
g. Provision that in the event all or part of the structure is
destroyed, the only structure that may be constructed on the
property is an attached zero lot line structure that is exactly
the same dimensions in the same location on the lot as the
original structure.
Such Owners Agreement shall be filed with the County Clerk upon
approval of the proposed development and shall become perpetual
deed restrictions to the property.
A. Purpose. The Oak Street Core Residential Development provisions of
this section are designed to provide a more affordable ownership
housing opportunity for a wide range of income groups while assuring
compatibility with, and maintaining the stability and quality of, existing
neighborhoods; to provide the opportunity for lower development costs
and lower per-unit land costs that subsequently lower response to highcost
infill properties; to promote a more efficient utilization of land, and
to promote energy conservation.
B. Applicability. The provisions of this section are intended to serve as
conditions required for approval of minor subdivisions for residential
development in the Oak Street Core, as they may be permitted within
the R-IOA, B-3 and HD-7 zoning districts. It is not intended that this
section apply to places of worship or schools.
C. Oak Street Core Area Allowed.
Within the R-10A, B-3 and HD-7 zones within the Oak Street Core,
the following blocks shall be permitted to submit for minor subdivision
approval in accordance with the provisions of this section:
Blocks 1016 thru 1025, 1026 thru 1029, 1032 thru 1050 as shown on
sheets 137 and 140 of the Lakewood Township Tax Maps, also known as
lots 4166 thru 4187, 4210 thru 4238, 4263 thru 4341 on Map F River
Avenue Section of Lakewood Filed as Map F-174 in the Ocean County
Courthouse on 12/16/1921; lots 7660 thru 7762, 7807 thru 7959, 7966
thru 8068, 8112 thru 8215, 8272 thru 8374, 8414 thru 8499, 8556 thru
8585 on Fifth Map of Lakewood Pines filed as Map C-158 in the Ocean
County Courthouse on 11/09/1920; and lots 7051 thru 7153, 7216 thru
7366, 7425 thru 7484 on Fourth Map of Lakewood Pines, filed as Map
B-158 in the Ocean County Courthouse on 04/20/1920; and lots 1 thru
66, 87 thru 152, 173 thru 239, 286 thru 372 on River Avenue Section N,
Map-A, filed as Map A-174 in the Ocean County Courthouse on 08/13/
1919.
18-911 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-912
AO:1187
D. Property Development Standards.
1. All bulk requirements shall comply with the requirements of the
R-10A zone, § 18-902, L. 4.
2. The property must be included in the CAFRA Permit
#1514-14-0005.1 CAF14001 approved by the NJDEP dated March
27, 2015, as shown on plans prepared by FWH Associates entitled
"Oak Street Corridor Improvement Plan" dated August 4, 2014 and
revised through November 20th, 2015.
3. Lot and road configuration shall be compatible with filed maps
referenced in 18-912C.
E. Procedure for Review.
1. The application shall include such information and documentation
as required by the Planning Board and shall meet all the
requirements of Minor Subdivision Plats set forth in § 18-608.
2. The application shall be accompanied by such application and
escrow fees established by the Planning Board.
3. Application for minor subdivision approval in accordance with this
section shall be processed, reviewed, and approved by the Planning
Board or subdivision committee of the Planning Board appointed by
the Chairman administratively in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47 without the requirement of public notice and
public hearing.
F. Criteria for Approval Development. In review of a proposed residential
development, the following criteria shall be met:
1. The proposed development complies with all other applicable
provisions of this section.
2. All improvements required per the aforementioned CAFRA Permit
#1514-14-0005.1 CAF 140001 which relates to the proposed
property must be installed or there is a Developer's Agreement in
place with a Developer and the Township of Lakewood which
includes provisions requiring the installation of the improvements.
3. Any residential development of the property will be required to
comply with the Storm Water Management Provision of § 18-815.
4. Zero lot line residential development must also comply with §
18-911.
18-912 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-912
AO:1188
ARTICLE X
CONDITIONAL USE REQUIREMENTS
18-1000. General Requirements.
18-1001. Adult Communities.
It having been determined that there is a need for alternative housing in
the Township of Lakewood for the adult population who no longer maintain
a residence for their children and which is comprehensively designed to
meet the needs of adults. Adult communities are hereby authorized to
be developed in those residential zones in which adult communities are
recognized as a permitted use, upon compliance with the design criteria
set forth in this section and approval of the general development plan,
preliminary and final subdivision/site plan approvals from the Planning
Board of the Township of Lakewood as hereinafter described:
A. Definitions.
1. ADULT COMMUNITY PROJECT ("ACP") – As described herein shall
mean a private residential community comprised of various
housing types and accessory uses intended for, and limited and
restricted to, use and occupancy of:
a. Any person of the age of 55 years or over; or
b. A husband or wife, regardless of age, residing with his or her
spouse, provided the spouse of such person is of the age of 55
years or over; or
c. The child or children residing with a permissible occupant,
provided the child or children is or are of the age of 19 years or
over; or
d. The individual or individuals, regardless of age, residing with
and providing physical or economic support to a permissible
occupant.
The foregoing occupancy restrictions shall not be construed to prohibit
the occupants of any unit in an adult community project from
entertaining guests, of any age, in their units, including temporary
residency not to exceed three months with no financial or other
pecuniary consideration to be paid therefor.
2. ATTACHED UNIT – As used herein shall mean a unit which is
connected to another unit by a party wall, trellis, fence, overhang
or other similar appurtenances.
3. DETACHED UNIT – As used herein shall mean a unit which is not
physically connected to any other unit.
18-1000 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1001
AO:1189
4. GARDEN FLAT UNITS – As used herein shall mean attached units
which are both horizontally and vertically connected to other
attached units.
5. MULTI-UNIT BUILDING – As used herein shall mean any building
containing attached units or garden flat units.
6. UNIT – As used herein shall mean a single family residence.
B. Minimum tract size. An ACP may only be developed on one or more
contiguous parcels of land having a total gross area of not less than 100
acres within the R-40 zone. An ACP may also be developed on one or
more contiguous parcels of land having a total gross area of not less
than 50 acres within the R-20/R-12 zone, provided that the tract is
abutting or directly across an existing public street from an existing
ACP. An ACP within the R-20/R-12 zone must meet the recreation
facility and amenity requirements of this subsection.
C. Permitted principal uses. The principal uses of buildings in an ACP shall
be limited to the following:
1. Units of all types provided that they comply with the area and bulk
zoning requirements of this subsection.
2. Recreation facilities.
3. Sales and administrative offices required for the construction, sale,
resale and management of the ACP.
4. Maintenance buildings.
5. The commercial uses permitted under this subsection.
D. Permitted accessory uses. The accessory uses of buildings and
structures in an ACP shall be limited to the following:
1. Master television antenna system and/or cable television antenna/
reception facilities.
2. Common parking areas for guest parking or dedicated for specific
parking purposes such as a recreational vehicle and trailer parking.
3. Buildings for storage of vehicles, equipment and supplies.
4. Outbuildings and structures as part of recreation facilities.
E. Area requirements. The following area requirements shall apply to any
ACP:
1. Maximum building coverage: 25 percent of gross area of ACP tract.
2. Maximum building density: 4.5 units per gross acre of ACP tract
exclusive of commercial uses.
18-1001 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1001
AO:1190
3. Minimum open space: 50 percent of gross area of ACP tract. For
purposes of this requirement "open space" shall mean those
portions of the ACP tract not covered by buildings structures of any
kind, streets or other surfaces paved with impervious materials.
F. Bulk requirements. The following bulk requirements shall apply to the
applicable unit types in an ACP.
1. For detached units on individual lots: All detached units to be
constructed on individual lots in an ACP shall comply with and
conform to the following requirements:
a. Minimum lot area:
(1) Corner lot: 7,000 square feet
(2) Interior lot: 5,000 square feet
b. Minimum lot width and frontage:
(1) Corner lot: 70 feet
(2) Interior lot: 50 feet
(3) In the case of an irregularly shaped lot, the minimum lot
frontage may be reduced to 60 percent of the minimum
requirement.
c. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet
d. Minimum setbacks:
(1) Front yard: 20 feet
(2) One side yard: 0 feet
(3) Combined side yards: 10 feet
(4) Rear yard: 20 feet
e. Minimum distance between buildings: 10 feet
f. All units having a zero lot line shall have a windowless wall
utilizing solid or opaque materials or obscure glass along the
zero lot line.
2. For detached units on common property:
a. Minimum setback from interior roadway or circulation
driveway: 20 feet
b. Minimum distance between detached units:
(1) For units oriented side-to-side to each other the minimum
distance between buildings shall be 20 feet, except in such
cases where the facing wall of one unit is windowless,
18-1001 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1001
AO:1191
whereupon the minimum distance may be reduced to 10
feet.
(2) For units oriented at 90 degrees to each other the
minimum distance between buildings shall be 20 feet.
(3) For units oriented rear-to-rear to each other the minimum
distance between buildings shall be 40 feet.
3. For attached units on individual lots:
a. Minimum lot width: 30 feet
b. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet
c. Minimum setback from interior roadway or circulation
driveway: 20 feet
4. For attached units on common property:
a. Minimum setback from interior roadway or circulation
driveway: 20 feet
5. For garden flat units on common property:
a. Minimum setback from interior roadway or circulation
driveway: 25 feet
b. Minimum setback from interior parking lot: 10 feet
6. Minimum distance between multi-unit buildings:
a. For multi-unit buildings oriented at 90 degrees to each other
the minimum distance between same shall be equal to the
building height.
b. For multi-unit buildings oriented end-to-end to each other, the
minimum distance between same shall be equal to one-half
(0.5) the building height.
c. For multi-unit buildings oriented with parallel axis facing each
other, the minimum distance between same shall be one and
one-half (1.5) times the building height.
7. Maximum units per multi-unit building: 8
8. Minimum parking requirements.
a. For each detached unit: 2.0 spaces
b. For each unit in a multi-unit building: 2.0 spaces
c. At a minimum, each detached unit shall contain one garage
space which will count as one space. A private driveway with
the capacity for off-street parking for one automobile shall be
deemed to constitute one parking space.
18-1001 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1001
AO:1192
d. Construction, design, lighting, screening and landscaping of
parking areas and streets shall conform to the applicable
provision of this chapter. To the extent that the Township's
standards for the construction and design of parking facilities
including the size and number of parking spaces as well as the
design of internal streets and circulation driveways is
inconsistent with the Residential Site Improvement Standards
(RSIS), then the RSIS code standards shall govern the parking
area and street design.
9. Maximum building height: 35 feet or two and one-half (2.5) stories
except as provided in Subsection l below.
G. Utilities. An ACP must be fully serviced by central water transmission
and sanitary sewerage facilities owned and operated by the Lakewood
Township Municipal Utilities Authority or duly franchised public utility
companies.
H. Recreation facilities. Any ACP shall contain and provide for the benefit,
use and enjoyment of its residents, the following recreation facilities:
1. Any ACP located within all zoning districts shall contain a
recreation area which shall contain a recreation building
comprised of at least 15 square feet of floor area (inclusive of
basement area) for each unit intended to be developed in the ACP.
If the developer proposes to develop the ACP in phases or sections
with separate recreation facilities for each phase or section each
building shall contain 15 square feet of floor area (inclusive of
basement area) for each unit intended to be developed in the phase
or section to be served by that recreation building.
2. Swimming pool with a minimum area of twenty-eight hundred
(2,800) square feet plus an additional area equal to five square feet
for each unit in excess of 500 units to be service by said pool. The
size of the swimming pool shall be able to accommodate swimming
lanes (each swimming lane is currently 25 meters in length by two
and two-thirds (2-2/3) meters in width) in accordance with National
Recreation and Park Standards. Each swimming pool shall be
serviced by an adjacent improved sitting area surrounding all sides
of the pool with an aggregate area equal to twice the water surface
area of the pool. Indoor and outdoor pool areas may be combined to
meet the minimum area requirements.
3. Parking facilities serving the recreation area with a minimum
number of parking spaces equal to one space for each 50 square
feet of area comprising the recreation building.
I. Optional recreation facilities. An ACP may provide, in addition to the
recreation facilities prescribed in Subsection H above any one or more
of the following facilities:
1. Golf course ("ACP golf course").
18-1001 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1001
AO:1193
2. Picnic-barbeque areas.
3. Paddle tennis courts.
4. Six bocce courts.
5. Jogging trail.
6. Three tennis courts.
7. Fitness-exercise courses.
8. Gardening areas (including greenhouses).
9. Six shuffleboard courts.
10. Such other activities which the planning board shall find to be
consistent with the lifestyle of residents of an ACP and which are
subordinate to the residential character of an ACP.
J. Ownership of recreation facilities. Except for an ACP golf course,
recreation facilities shall be owned by the homeowner's association
(defined below). Provided, however, that in the event that an ACP golf
course is intended to be owned by other than the homeowners'
association ("private ownership") the ACP golf course must be so
identified in the application for preliminary subdivision or site plan
approval and must satisfy the following criteria:
The developer-applicant shall provide adequate assurances (through
recorded deed restrictions or agreements) that the ACP golf course
shall be available for use and enjoyment by all residents of the ACP
upon terms and conditions no less favorable than offered to any person
not a resident of the ACP and at a cost to the homeowners' association
not greater than the homeowners' association would incur for its
operation, upkeep, repair and maintenance if owned by the
homeowners' association.
K. Setback and distance measurements. Building setbacks and minimum
distances between all buildings shall be measured to building
foundation lines, excluding foundations for fireplaces, porches and
other exterior protrusions of a building which do not protrude beyond
six feet from the building foundation line.
L. Perimeter boundary setbacks. No buildings or structures, other than
entrance gate-houses, walls or fences, shall be located within 75 feet of
any exterior boundary line of the ACP tract. The building height of any
residential building adjacent to any perimeter boundary setback
abutting an R-20 Residential Zone shall not exceed 25 feet.
M. Homeowners' association; recorded covenants. Any ACP shall be
governed and regulated by one or more recorded declaration of
covenants and restrictions ("C&Rs") which shall provide for and create
one or more incorporated membership organizations under Title 15 of
18-1001 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1001
AO:1194
the New Jersey Statutes in which all unit owners in the ACP shall be
required to be members (the "homeowners' association"). The C&Rs
shall provide for (i) the ownership, maintenance, operation and upkeep
of all recreation facilities, open space, streets and other common areas
within the ACP by the homeowners' association, (ii) the restrictions on
unit occupancy set forth in Subsection A above, (iii) the procedure for
creating, imposing and collecting assessments from each unit owner
to finance the foregoing, and (iv) the organization, operation and
management of the homeowners' association. A complete copy of the
proposed C&Rs and all documents creating and organizing the
homeowners' association shall be submitted to the planning board for
review and approval with the first application for final subdivision and/
or site plan approval submitted for the ACP or the first section thereof.
N. Streets and roads. All streets and roads in an ACP shall conform to the
provisions of this chapter and the requirements of the Residential Site
Improvement Standards except as hereinafter specifically provided.
1. Provided that the developer-applicant of an ACP shall expressly
condition the preliminary subdivision and/or site plan approval of
the ACP upon all streets and roads within the ACP being privately
owned and maintained by the homeowners' association in
perpetuity, such streets and roads shall be constructed in
accordance with this chapter, except as follows: (i) minor streets
(i.e. streets of not more than 1,200 feet in length which shall be
through streets or terminate in a cul-de-sac) shall have an overall
paved roadway width of 22 feet; (ii) minor collector streets shall
have a paved roadway width of 30 feet and (iii) major collector
streets shall have a paved roadway of 40 feet. All ACP streets shall
be constructed with a six inch road gravel base conforming to the
New Jersey Highway Specifications Grade A or B, with a CABC-1 of
one and one-half (1.5) inch thickness of bituminous concrete binder
course and a one inch bituminous concrete surface course. If roll
curbing is utilized, the measurement of the parcel roadway width
shall include roll curb. Curbs shall be constructed in accordance
with this chapter except as follows: (i) minor streets shall have a
curb radius of 15 feet and minor collector and major collector
streets shall have a curb radius of 20 feet; (ii) cul-de-sac of minor
streets and minor collector shall have a minimum curb radius of 40
feet and no parking shall be allowed in the cul-de-sac. Sidewalks
where proposed shall have a minimum width of three and one-half
(3.5) feet. Additional sidewalks may be required by the planning
board.
2. In the event a developer-applicant of an ACP intends to seek, or
reserve unto the homeowners' association the option to seek, to
have the Township accept for maintenance some or all of the
streets and roads within the ACP at some future time, then all
streets, roads, curbs and sidewalks shall strictly conform to the
applicable design requirements of this chapter. Provided, however,
18-1001 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1001
AO:1195
that the Township shall be under no obligation to accept said
streets and roads.
O. Drainage. All on-site drainage shall be provided for in accordance with
Lakewood Township storm drainage requirements and applicable
Township ordinances pertaining to subdivision and development of
lands.
P. Driveways, walks and parking areas. There shall be provided a safe and
convenient system of driveways, walks and parking areas. Due
consideration shall be given in planning walks, ramps and driveways to
prevent slipping or stumbling. Gradients of walks shall not exceed 7%
except where required to meet handicapped access requirements.
Q. Commercial uses. As part of an ACP, a developer-applicant may
designate one or more parcels of the ACP tract for development of
those commercial uses hereinafter designated as permitted commercial
uses in an ACP, subject to the following requirements:
1. The aggregate amount of land in the ACP tract designated for all
commercial uses shall not exceed the lesser of 10 acres or 5% of
the total area of the ACP tract.
2. The aggregate finished floor area of all commercial uses in an ACP
shall not exceed 20% of the aggregate land area of the ACP
designated for commercial use.
3. No commercial use or parking area serving a commercial use shall
be located less than 300 feet from any perimeter boundary line of
an ACP.
4. No commercial building shall exceed 30 feet in height. Provided,
however, that any building originally constructed within an ACP for
residential use and subsequently converted to commercial use shall
not exceed 35 feet in height.
5. Parking areas shall be provided to serve all commercial uses with a
capacity of one parking space for each 200 square feet of
commercial space. Provided, however, that the planning board may
approve parking areas designed to serve both commercial uses and
recreation facilities in the ACP upon finding that the proposed
parking areas are adequate to serve both uses.
6. No commercial use shall be located closer than (i) 35 feet from the
curb line of any major or minor collector street, or (ii) 15 feet from
the curb line of any minor street.
7. No parking area serving commercial uses shall be located closer
than 20 feet from the curb line of any major collector or minor
collector street.
18-1001 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1001
AO:1196
18-1002. Agricultural Uses and Stables.
18-1003. Golf Courses.
8. No commercial use shall be located closer than 100 feet from any
residential building and all commercial uses shall be screened from
adjoining residential uses by landscaped buffer areas.
9. The following are the only commercial uses permitted in an ACP
and, in each instance, shall be designed, operated and maintained
for the principal use of ACP residents and their guests:
a. Medical and dental offices for all recognized fields of medicine.
b. Professional offices for attorneys, accountants and real estate,
insurance and stock brokers.
c. Personal service offices for travel agencies, interior decorators
(which use shall be limited to retail sales to residents of the
ACP in conjunction with the sale of units in the ACP), banks,
barber and beauty shops.
A. Minimum lot size - 6 acres.
B. Minimum setback from all property lines - 100 feet.
C. Where permitted, an application for stables shall include a detailed site
plan showing the location of the stables, the number of horses to be
located in each stable, the relationship on the property to riding trails
and the streets in the area. Stables are subject to the following
standards:
1. If horses are to be used for horse-back riding, the property shall
have direct access to riding trails.
2. A commercial stable must provide one off-street parking space for
every horse stabled.
3. Access to and from the property for horse-drawn vehicles shall be
on minor roads as determined by the Planning Board.
D. The number of livestock per acre (exclusive of a minimum area of one
acre devoted to residential use) shall not exceed one adult horse or
cattle, or two adult sheep or goats with their young under six months of
age. Commercial kennels are prohibited.
A. The golf course grading shall be consistent with a stormwater
management plan designed to result in all stormwater being collected
and retained on-site where the ponds can provide stormwater
management, flood control, water supply for irrigation purposes to
reduce demands on off-tract ground and surface water supplies,
aesthetic appearances and/or water hazards for golfers. This shall
include off-site drainage arriving at the golf course and any associated
18-1001 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1003
AO:1197
residential development and drainage originating from any associated
residential development.
B. The applicant shall provide a water resource monitoring program,
designed to minimize the use of off-tract surface water and
groundwater resources while maximizing the use of stormwater
retained on the site. This plan shall provide for ground and surface
water quality monitoring for nutrients, pesticides and other parameters
to be determined by the approving authority.
C. The applicant shall provide a turf management plan which is consistent
with the grading and landscaping plans and shall discuss and define the
use of drought-tolerant turf and landscaping material, the area to be
irrigated, the required capacity of the irrigation system and the need
for any water diversion permits. The plan shall also provide a proposed
integrated pest management and turf management plan that defines
the nature and use of the pesticides and other chemicals and fertilizers
involved.
D. All plans shall be integrated and coordinated in an effort to absorb and
filter fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides and other non-point source
pollutants to minimize contamination of streams and groundwater
supplies. The course shall be required to have a golf course
superintendent, certified by the Golf Course Superintendents
Association of America, on staff and an ongoing site management
program to monitor water use and weather conditions in conjunction
with the application of fertilizer, pesticides and herbicides in order to
adhere to the turf management plan and the water resources
monitoring program. The monitoring and reporting data shall be
submitted to the Township Engineer on a quarterly basis.
E. A water use budget and water recycling plan shall be prepared and
submitted as part of any golf course/clubhouse site plan application.
This plan shall detail the source of potable and irrigation water, the
projected amounts which will be required and the water supply
capacity of any aquifer from which such water will be withdrawn, as
outlined in the Water for the 21st Century: The Vital Resources, New
Jersey Statewide Water Supply Master Plan (1996) including basis and
background documents.
F. Following the installation of any well intended to serve as a water
supply source for the golf course, and prior to the issuance of a
construction permit, a pump test shall be conduced at the maximum
projected pumping rate. The test shall be in accordance with an
approved New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP)
Bureau of Water Allocation Aquifer Test Plan and subject to review by
the Township and County Board of Health to assess the impacts on
other well users in the vicinity and effects on stream base flows. If
significant well interference (domestic observation well) on an existing
well is demonstrated during interference tests, the new well cannot be
18-1003 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1003
AO:1198
certified for use. If a significant adverse impact cannot be remedied,
the Board of Health will deny certification of the new well.
G. The golf course application shall include a project specific integrated
Turf Management Plan and an Integrated Pest Management Plan. The
application shall also include a project-specific golf course operation
manual which incorporates the guidelines and best management
practices established by the "Draft Guidance Manual: Best
Management Practices for Golf Course Management for Golf Course
Construction and Operation in New Jersey" published by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) dated January,
2000, and subsequent amendments and shall take into account
guidelines promulgated by the United States Golf Association (USGA)
and the Golf Course Superintendents Association (GCSAA).
H. The golf course application shall include a ground water and surface
water monitoring plan and proposed protocols to mitigate any adverse
impacts. The plan shall be specifically for the proposed golf course/
clubhouse and shall be approved by the approving authority in
consultation with the Township Board of Health. Such monitoring
program shall detail the type. Timing and frequency of testing and
identify the specific chemical parameters to be tested. The plan must
include background pre-construction monitoring and sampling and a
continuing monitoring program and results of such water quality
monitoring shall be submitted by the owner/operator to the Township
Board of Health within 30 days of receipt of such results. In addition,
continuous water level monitoring equipment (data logger) shall be
installed and maintained as specified by the Board of Health. Test
results of such water quantity monitoring shall be submitted by the
owner/operator to the Board of Health within 30 days of receipt of such
results by the owner/operator.
I. A vegetated buffer at least 100 feet wide consisting of native trees,
shrubs and ground covers, shall be provided and maintained between
any turf area which will be treated with fertilizers or pesticides and the
closest point of any 100-year floodplain or, if there is no floodplain, the
top of bank of any permanent, intermittent stream. Pond frontage shall
be exempt from this requirement upon a showing of good cause by the
applicant.
J. Grasses selected for use on a golf course shall be drought, pest and
disease resistant to minimize the use of chemicals and irrigation.
K. Soil erosion and sedimentation shall be minimized through golf course
design which minimizes the need for mass grading for greens, tees and
fairways, through coordinated soil erosion and sediment control
measures and through construction phasing that limits the extent of
clearing and soil exposure prior to revegetation.
L. No portion of any golf tee, fairway or green shall be located closer than
50 feet to any tract boundary or public road right of way.
18-1003 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1003
AO:1199
18-1004. Hospitals/Assisted Living/Nursing Homes.
M. Golf carts are allowed.
N. No more than 50% of wooded areas (as shown on the most recent aerial
photographs available) shall be cleared and priority shall be given to
preservation of larger, healthy, mature trees. Any clearing beyond 40%
of the wooded acreage of the tract shall be mitigated by replacement
with native trees and shrubs elsewhere on the tract. Priority for such
replacement shall be given to locations where stream corridors are not
shaded by vegetation at the time of development.
O. No clearing, grading or site improvement related to the golf course/
clubhouse shall be conducted in areas of 15% slope or greater, except
that areas of play (tees, greens, bunkers, fairways and practice
facilities) created as part of the golf course which result in new areas of
steep slope shall not be deemed to violate these requirements.
P. Wherever a waterway crossing is proposed, such crossing shall be
designed to minimize the removal of trees and other shading
vegetation. All crossings other than access driveways shall be bridged,
not designed with culverts.
Q. Habitat for wildlife species which help control pests (e.g., bats,
bluebirds, purple martins, etc.) should be protected. Additional habitat
for these beneficial species should be created whenever feasible and
environmentally desirable.
R. Exterior site lighting shall be limited to parking lot areas and shall be
limited to that necessary for safety and security. There shall be no
spillover of lighting beyond the tract boundaries. The lighting shall
conform to the lighting requirements of the Township.
S. The golf course/clubhouse shall comply with the noise control limits
established by N.J.A.C. 7:29-1.1 et seq. and shall not exceed 60 decibels
at any tract boundary line.
T. The golf course/clubhouse shall be designed to preserve the rural
character of the viewshed and shall minimize the visual impact on the
landscape.
U. Major site plan approval shall be required for a golf course/clubhouse.
A. Hospitals, assisted living facilities and nursing homes are permitted
conditionally in all non-residential zones:
1. Minimum lot area - two acres.
2. Minimum lot width - 100 feet.
3. Minimum setbacks - 50 feet from all property lines.
18-1003 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1004
AO:1200
18-1005. Motels.
4. Off-street parking - three-quarters (0.75) parking space for each
bed.
5. Parking may be permitted in all yards to within 10 feet of any
property line.
6. A barrier of evergreen vegetation with a minimum natural height of
eight feet shall be planted between the parking area and the
property line everywhere the parking area is within 50 feet of the
property line. If an opaque artificial barrier five feet in height is
erected between the parking area and the property line, parking
may take place within five feet of the property line.
A. Minimum lot area - Two acres.
B. Minimum lot width - 200 feet.
C. Minimum yard requirements:
1. Front yard - 75 feet.
2. Rear yard - 30 feet; except for the B-3 zone where a minimum rear
yard setback of 20 feet is permitted.
3. Side yards (both) - 40 feet; except for the B-3 zone where a
minimum side yard setback of 30 feet is permitted.
D. Minimum off-street parking - One space for each unit.
E. Accessory uses may be permitted on the same lot as the motel and may
include a swimming pool, motel office and permanent living quarters
for one household.
F. One access road may be permitted onto a public road: the access road
shall not exceed 24 feet in width. The center line of an access road
where it intersects with a public road shall be perpendicular to the
street line, 50 feet from any side property line or street line other than
the street line with which the access road intersects and 75 feet from
the center line of any other access road.
G. The proposed motel site shall be so located that it shall have direct
access to a major arterial road, which for the purpose of this section
shall include on federal and state maintained roads.
H. Any motel unit within 100 feet of an adjacent property line shall not
face on that property, unless the unit is sufficiently buffered or
concealed from the adjacent property.
I. Any swimming pool shall be buffered from adjacent properties by
means of buildings, trees, shrubs or screen fencing.
J. No unit shall include full kitchen facilities.
18-1004 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1005
AO:1201
18-1006. Public Buildings.
18-1007. Shopping Centers.
K. Minimum number of units - 50.
L. Signs may be permitted and shall be subject to the regulations
controlling signs for the business zones.
A. Minimum lot size - 1 acre.
B. Minimum lot width - 100 feet.
C. Minimum side yard setback (each yard):
1. From a non-residentially zoned lot or use - 50 feet.
2. From a residentially zoned lot or use - 75 feet.
D. Minimum rear yard setback:
1. From a non-residentially zoned lot or use - 50 feet.
2. From a residentially zoned lot or use - 75 feet.
E. Maximum building height - 35 feet except that the height may be
increased to a maximum permitted height of 50 feet at the rate of 2 feet
in height for each additional one foot that the building is setback from
the building setback lines.
F. Building setback from another freestanding building within the same
development - 50 feet.
G. Maximum building coverage (includes all principal and accessory
buildings located on a site) - 35%.
H. Maximum impervious coverage (includes all buildings, pavement etc.) -
70%.
I. Accessory structures shall be subject to the same locational
requirements as principal buildings and shall not have a ground floor
area in excess of 5% of the area of the site.
J. Buffers and landscaping shall be provided as follows:
1. Adjacent to a street line - 25 feet.
2. Adjacent to a residential district - 30 feet.
3. Adjacent to a non-residential district - 20 feet
A. The development of a shopping center on a lot more than two acres in
size is permitted subject to the following:
1. Minimum lot width - 200 feet.
18-1005 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1007
AO:1202
18-1008. Service Stations and Public Garages. [Ord. No. 2013-50]
18-1009. Club, Lodges or Similar Fraternal Organization.
2. Minimum front yard setback - 50 feet.
3. Minimum side and rear yard setbacks shall be equal to the building
height plus 10 feet.
4. Maximum height of building - 45 feet.
5. Maximum Impervious Lot Coverage - 80 percent.
A. Where permitted, any application for a service station or public garage
shall include a site plan which identifies the location and number of fuel
pumps and their proposed depth and capacity. In addition, the site plan
should identify the number or capacity of automobiles that may be
garaged within the principle building and on-site.
B. All fuel tanks shall be installed underground.
C. The minimum size lot shall be 20,000 square feet. The minimum lot
width and depth shall be 100 feet.
D. Driveways shall cross the sidewalk at right angles and shall be not more
than 36 feet wide at any point thereof. Driveways must be at least 10
feet from any side lot line or from the intersection of street lines. There
shall be no more than one driveway on any one street frontage unless
the street frontage is in excess of 99 feet, in which case, there may be a
maximum of two driveways on the street frontage provided the
driveways are 10 feet apart.
E. The entire area of the station or garage traversed by motor vehicles
shall be hard surfaced.
F. Illumination of the service station or public garage shall be such that no
direct glare from the lights used shall fall upon adjacent property.
G. For all existing service stations and in all zones where service stations
are permitted, a service station may have at the same location a fastfood
convenience store as duel use. Service Stations operated with a
fast-food convenience store as a dual use shall be subject to the
following supplemental conditions that must be satisfied in order for a
conditional use permit to be issued:
1. The minimum lot area for a combined fast-food convenience store/
service station shall be 20,000 square feet.
2. The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) of the dual use convenience
store operated in conjunction with a gasoline station shall be 0.12.
The floor area ratio (FAR) shall not include any area relating to the
canopy for the gasoline dispensing.
18-1007 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1009
AO:1203
18-1010. Townhouses.
A. Minimum lot size - 1 acre.
B. Minimum lot width - 100 feet.
C. All structures shall meet all applicable front, side and rear yard
setbacks in the zoning district in which it is located.
D. Maximum building coverage- 35%
F. Maximum impervious coverage - 70%.
G. Maximum height of any structure - 35 feet.
A. In those Zone Districts in which townhouses are a permitted conditional
use, townhouse developments shall be subject to the following
conditions:
1. Minimum tract size shall be one-half (0.5) acre in all districts in
which townhouses are permitted with the exception of the HD-7
zone in which the minimum tract size shall be one acre.
2. Tract Boundaries: from a state highway - 100 feet. From all other
right-of-way lines - 20 feet. From all other property lines - 20 feet.
3. Maximum Density — eight townhouses or 16 dwelling units per
acre. Notwithstanding the definition of a townhouse in this chapter,
a townhouse may consist of a two family building structure, which
shall be considered two dwelling units for the purposes of
calculating the density of the tract.
4. Minimum tract width - 125 feet.
5. Minimum tract depth - 100 feet.
6. Maximum building coverage for the entire tract - 35%.
B. In addition to the conditions set forth in § 18-1010A, townhouse
developments shall be subject to the following bulk and yard
regulations, design standards, and administrative requirements, which
shall not be deemed as required conditions for the proposed use.
1. The overall townhouse tract may be subdivided to provide feesimple
ownership for the individual townhouse units. The following
shall apply to the individual townhouse lots:
a. Minimum front yard setback - 25 feet from internal streets
b. Minimum side yard setback (for end units) - 12 feet.
c. Minimum rear yard setback - 20 feet.
d. Maximum height - 35 feet or 2.5 stories, whichever is less.
18-1009 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1010
AO:1204
2. Minimum distance between buildings - 25 feet.
3. Maximum units per structure — eight.
4. Maximum building length - 240 feet.
5. A structure shall not have more than two connected townhouse
units on one facade without providing a variation in setback of at
least two feet.
6. Each unit shall have an area designated for the storage of trash and
recycling containers. All trash containers shall be screened from
view. Screening should blend with the building exterior. The size of
the trash enclosure should be approved by the Department of
Public Works.
7. All residential development shall provide a usable rear yard depth
of at least 20 feet, including the rear yard setback. Decks shall be
permitted within the usable yard area, but detention/retention
facilities, drainage swales, or any easements which would inhibit
the use of the rear yard are prohibited. For the purposes of this
section a drainage swale with side slopes exceeding 1:10 and a
depth exceeding 18 inches shall be established as the limit which
inhibits use of this yard and is therefore prohibited.
8. Architectural drawings of the front, side and rear elevations shall
be provided. Architectural drawings should also be provided if the
HVAC equipment is to be located on the roof.
9. All areas put into common ownership for common use by all
residents shall be owned by a non-profit homeowners association in
accordance with the requirements of the Department of
Community Affairs and the following:
a. Deed restrictions and covenants shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements and standards of the
Department of Community Affairs.
b. The homeowners association shall be responsible for the
ownership and maintenance of all common space and any
streets not accepted by the Township.
c. This organization shall not be dissolved nor shall it dispose of
any common open space, by sale or otherwise, except to
another organization conceived and established to own and
maintain the common open space and non-dedicated streets.
d. The homeowners association shall be established prior to any
certificates of occupancy being issued. Membership of the
association shall be automatic and mandatory for each owner
of a dwelling unit and any succeeding owner thereto, being
accomplished by the purchase of a dwelling unit in the
development.
18-1010 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1010
AO:1205
18-1011. Age-Restricted Multi-Family Housing. [Ord. No. 2005-111
§ 1]
e. The association shall guarantee access to all the common areas
to all persons legally residing in the development.
f. The association shall be responsible for liability insurance,
taxes and the maintenance of the common areas and
undedicated streets. The certificate of incorporation shall
contain provisions so that adequate funds will be available for
maintenance.
g. The documents establishing the association shall provide a
plan for the maintenance of all common areas and undedicated
streets.
A. Age-Restricted Multi-Family Housing shall be a permitted conditional
use in the B-5 Zone district subject to the following conditions:
1. Multi-family dwellings shall be permitted provided there shall be no
more than 12 dwelling units per building.
2. Occupancy of the housing shall be age-restricted to those 55 and
older.
3. Minimum tract area: 15 acres.
4. Minimum lot width, depth and frontage: 500 feet.
5. Maximum residential density: 10 dwelling units/acre.
6. Minimum perimeter principal building setback contiguous to a
residential property line: 100 feet. No building or structure other
than roadways or an entrance security station shall be located in
the perimeter setback. The perimeter principal building setback
area shall be adequately landscaped to buffer the buildings from
view from any adjacent public roadways. No access road, driveway,
or parking area except for the site entrance/exit locations shall be
located closer than 35 feet to any property line.
7. Minimum distance between buildings: 50 feet.
8. Maximum building coverage: 25 percent.
9. Maximum impervious coverage: 30 percent.
10. Maximum building height: 5 stories/60 feet, provided, however, no
building shall have more than four stories utilized for residential
purposes.
11. Maximum principal building length: 150 feet when viewed from any
elevation.
18-1010 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1011
AO:1206
18-1012. Wireless Telecommunications Towers and Antennas. [Ord.
No. 2006-3 § 3]
Wireless Telecommunications Towers and Antennas shall be permitted in
the M-1 Zone upon meeting the conditions set forth herein:
12. Amenities: In order to insure accessibility and convenience for the
residents, private elevators shall be provided in all multi-story
buildings.
13. Required Accessory Uses:
a. On-site parking. The number of on-site parking spaces
required by the applicable New Jersey Residential Site
Improvement Standards (RSIS).
b. Clubhouse, community center and/or recreation facilities.
(1) Such amenities shall be provided for the use of the
residents and employees of the facility only and shall not
be open to the general public. Sufficient employee and
resident/guest parking shall be provided.
(2) Amenities shall be buffered from the view from adjacent
public streets.
(3) All outdoor storage areas shall be screened from view from
any public road by a landscaped buffer.
14. Prohibited Accessory Uses:
Individual sheds and detached garages shall not be permitted.
A. Purpose. The purpose of these regulations for the siting of wireless
telecommunications towers and antennas is to: (1) protect residential
areas and land uses from potential adverse impacts of towers and
antennas; (2) encourage the location of towers in appropriate locations;
(3) minimize the total number of towers throughout the Township; (4)
strongly encourage the joint use of approved tower facilities as a
primary option rather than construction of new or additional single-use
towers; (5) encourage uses of towers and antennas to locate them, to
the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal; (6) encourage users of towers and antennas to
configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the
towers and antennas through care design, siting, landscape screening,
and innovative camouflaging techniques; (7) enhance the ability of the
providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to
the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; (8) consider the
public health and safety of communication towers; and (9) avoid
potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure through
engineering and care siting of tower structures. In furtherance of these
goals, Lakewood Township shall give due consideration to the Township
18-1011 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1012
AO:1207
master plan, zoning map, existing land uses, and environmentally
sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of towers and
antennas.
B. Nonapplicability to Amateur Radio Stations and to Receive-Only
Antennas. The provisions of this section shall not govern any antenna
that is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio
station operator or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna in
accordance with Federal Communications Commission regulations.
C. Antennas and Towers Permitted on Township Property. Wireless
communications towers and antennas which are located on property
owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the Township of Lakewood
and which are approved by the Township Committee shall be deemed to
be permitted as a municipal facility in any zone district.
D. Antennas and Towers Which are Not Municipal Facilities. Wireless
telecommunications towers and antennas may be permitted on nonmunicipal
property in only the M-1 Zone, upon submission and approval
of a site plan and conditional use permit in accordance with the
regulations set forth below:
1. General Requirements.
a. Principal or Accessory Use. Wireless telecommunications
towers and antennas may be considered either principal or
accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing structure
on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an
antenna or tower on such lot.
b. Lot Size. For purposes of determining whether the installation
of a tower or antenna complies with district development
regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements,
the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the
antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within
such lot.
c. Inventory of Existing Sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/
or tower shall provide to the Township as part of the
application and inventory of its existing towers, antennas, or
sites approved for towers or antennas, that are either within
the jurisdiction of Lakewood Township or within one mile of the
border thereof, including specific information about the
location, height, and design of each tower. The Township may
share such information with other applicants applying for
approvals under this section or other organizations seeking to
locate antennas with the jurisdiction of Lakewood Township,
provided, however, that the Township is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or warranting that such
sites are available or suitable.
18-1012 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1012
AO:1208
d. Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following
requirements.
(1) Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or,
subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted
a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(2) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related
structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials,
colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will
blend them into the natural setting and surrounding
buildings.
(3) If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower,
the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical
equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or
closely compatible with, the color of the supporting
structure so as to make the antenna and related
equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
e. Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless
required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is
required, the lighting alternatives and design chosen must
cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views.
f. State or Federal Requirements. All towers must meet or exceed
current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and
any other agency of the State or Federal government with the
authority to regulate towers and antennas.
g. Uniform Construction Code: Safety Standards. To ensure the
structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall
ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards
contained in applicable State and municipal codes including
the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code and the applicable
standards for towers that are published by the Electronic
Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon
inspection, the Township concludes that a tower fails to comply
with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to
persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the
owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such
tower into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring
such tower into compliance within said 30 days shall constitute
grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's
expense.
h. Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks
and separation distances shall be calculated and applied to
facilities located in Lakewood Township irrespective of
municipal and County jurisdictional boundaries.
18-1012 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1012
AO:1209
i. Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas
shall certify that all franchises required by law for the
construction and/or operation of a wireless communication
system in Lakewood Township have been obtained and shall
file a copy of all required franchises with the Township.
j. Public Notice. For purposes of this section any variance
request or request for site plan approval shall require public
notice to all abutting property owners and all property owners
of properties that are located within the corresponding
separation distance listed in § 1012D1s in addition to any
notice otherwise required by this chapter.
k. Signs. No advertising signs shall be allowed on an antenna or
tower.
l. Buildings and Support Equipment. Buildings and support
equipment associated with antennas or towers shall comply
with the requirements of § 1012D2.
m. Multiple Antenna/Tower Plan. Lakewood Township encourages
the users of towers and antennas to submit a single application
for approval of multiple towers and/or antenna sites.
Applications for approval of multiple sites shall be given
priority in the review process.
n. Maximum Height. The tower shall meet the following
maximum height and usage criteria:
(1) For a single user, up to 90 feet in height;
(2) For two users, up to 120 feet in height; and
(3) For three or more users, up to 150 feet in height.
A licensed New Jersey Professional Engineer must certify that the
tower can structurally accommodate the number of shared users
proposed by the applicant.
o. Information Required. In addition to any information required
for applications for site plan review pursuant to this chapter,
applicants for approval for a tower shall submit the following
information:
(1) A location plan drawn to scale and clearly indicating the
location, type and height of the proposed tower, on-site
land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning
(including when adjacent to other municipalities), Master
Plan classification of the site and all properties within the
applicable separation distances set forth in § 1012D1s,
adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks
from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed
tower and any other structures, topography, and parking.
18-1012 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1012
AO:1210
(2) Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
(3) The setback distance between the proposed tower and the
nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned
properties, and unplatted residentially zoned properties.
(4) The separation distance from other towers described in
the inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to §
1012D1s shall be shown on an updated site plan or map.
The applicant shall also identify the type of construction of
the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of the
existing tower(s), if known.
(5) A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
(6) Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable,
the method of camouflage and illumination.
(7) A description of compliance with D1c, d, e, f, g, and all
applicable Federal, State or local laws.
(8) A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether
construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of
additional antennas for future users.
(9) Identification of the entities providing the backhaul
network for the tower(s) described in the application and
other cellular sites owned or operated by the applicant in
the municipality.
(10) A description of the suitability of the use of existing
towers, other structures or alternative technology not
requiring the use of towers or structures to provide the
services to be provided through the use of the proposed
tower.
(11) A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Township based upon existing
physical, engineering, technological or geographical
limitations in the event the proposed tower is erected.
p. Factors Considered in Granting Approval for Towers. In
addition to any standards for consideration of site plans
pursuant to this chapter, the municipal agency shall consider
at least the following factors in determining whether to issue
an approval:
(1) Height of the proposed tower;
(2) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and
residential district boundaries;
18-1012 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1012
AO:1211
(3) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(4) Surrounding topography;
(5) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(6) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or
eliminating visual obtrusiveness;
(7) Proposed ingress and egress; and
(8) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or
structures, as discussed in § 1012D1q of this chapter.
q. Availability of Suitable Existing Towers, Other Structures, or
Alternative Technology. No new tower shall be permitted
unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable
satisfaction of the municipal agency that no existing tower,
structure or alternative technology that does not require the
use of towers or structures can accommodate the applicant's
proposed antenna. An applicant shall submit information
requested by the municipal agency related to the availability of
suitable existing towers, other structures or alternative
technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no
existing tower, structure or alternative technology can
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of
any of the following:
(1) No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area which meet applicant's engineering
requirements.
(2) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet applicant's engineering requirements.
(3) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient
structural strength to support applicant's proposed
antenna and related equipment.
(4) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the
existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the
existing towers or structures would cause interference
with the applicant's proposed antenna.
(5) The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the
owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to
adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development
are presumed to be unreasonable.
18-1012 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1012
AO:1212
(6) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting
factors that render existing towers and structures
unsuitable.
(7) The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology
that does not require the use of towers or structures, such
as a cable microcell network using multiple low-powered
transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is
unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed
new tower or antenna development shall not be presumed
to render the technology unsuitable.
r. Minimum Required Setback. The following setback
requirements shall apply to all towers for which site plan
approval is required.
(1) Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 100%
of the height of the tower from any adjoining lot line, but in
no event shall the tower be located in the minimum
required yard area or buffer area of the zone district.
(2) Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum
zoning district setback and buffer requirements.
s. Minimum Separation Requirement Between Uses. The
following separation requirements shall apply to all towers and
antennas for which site plan approval is required:
(1) Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
(a) Tower separation shall be measured from the base of
the tower to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or
designated areas as specified in (b), below, except as
otherwise provided.
(b) Towers shall maintain a minimum radial separation
distance of 1,500 feet from residential dwelling units
or lands zoned for residential use.
(2) Separation distances between towers. Separation
distances between towers shall be applicable for and
measured between the proposed tower and pre-existing
towers or other proposed towers. The separation distances
shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line
between the base of the existing tower and the proposed
base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower. The
separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as
shown below in the table of required separation distances
between towers.
18-1012 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1012
AO:1213
Schedule 1: Required Separation Distances Between Wireless Communications
Towers
Tower Type Lattice Guyed
Monopole 75
Feet in Height
or Greater
Monopole Less
than 75 Feet in
Height
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Monopole 75 Feet
in Height or
Greater
1,500 1,500 1,500 750
Monopole Less
than 75 Feet in
Height
750 750 750 750
t. Security Fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing
no less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with
an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided, however, that
the municipal agency may waive such requirements, as it
deems appropriate.
u. Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers for which site plan approval is
required; provided, however, that the municipal agency may
waive such requirements if the goals of this section would be
better served thereby.
(1) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower
compound from property used for residences.
(2) In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced.
(3) Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the
site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In
some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots,
natural growth around the property perimeter may be
sufficient buffer.
v. In approving the tower, the municipal agency may impose
conditions, including the use of an alternative tower structure,
to the extent the municipal agency concludes such conditions
are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed
tower on adjoining properties.
2. Buildings or Other Equipment Storage.
18-1012 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1012
AO:1214
18-1013. Mixed Use Mid-Rise Development. [Ord. No. 2008-12 § 3]
a. Antennas Mounted on Structures or Rooftops. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall
comply with the following:
(1) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 200
square feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in
height. In addition, for buildings and structures which are
less than 65 feet in height, the related unmanned
equipment structure, if over 200 square feet of gross floor
area or 10 feet in height, shall be located on the ground
and shall not be located on the roof of the structure.
(2) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a
building, the area of the equipment structure and other
equipment and structure shall not occupy more than 10%
of the roof area.
(3) Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with
all applicable building codes.
b. Antennas Located on Towers, Utility Poles, or Light Poles. The
related unmanned equipment structure shall not contain more
than 200 square feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet
in height, and shall be located in accordance with the minimum
yard and buffer requirements of the zoning district in which
located and shall be screened from view of all residential
properties.
3. Removal of Abandoned Antennas and Towers. Any antenna or
tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months
shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or
tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice
from the Township of Lakewood notifying the owner of such
abandonment. Failure to remove any abandoned antenna or tower
within said 90 days shall be grounds to remove the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a
single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all
users cease using the tower.
4. Pre-existing Towers. Pre-existing towers which are operating at the
time of the adoption of this section shall be allowed to continue
their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance is
permitted on such pre-existing towers. New construction other
than routine maintenance on a pre-existing tower shall comply with
the requirements of this section. If the use of a tower has
terminated and the use is determined to be abandoned, the
requirements for removal in Subsection 3 above shall apply.81
81.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2006-3, codified herein, was adopted February 9, 2006.
18-1012 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1013
AO:1215
A. Mixed Use Mid-Rise Developments shall be subject to the following
conditions:
1. Minimum tract size — 60 acres.
2. Maximum gross residential density — 18 dwelling units per acre.
3. Maximum building coverage for the entire tract — 25%
4. Maximum building height — 65 feet.
5. The tract must have at least 1,000 feet of frontage on a State
highway.
6. All development within 500 feet of the center line of the State
highway or 1,000 feet of a residential zone must comply with the
Highway Development (B-5) zoning district (§ 18-903E)
regulations.
7. Minimum Tract Setbacks:
a. Tract boundary: 50 feet
b. Interior roadway/circulation driveway: 25 feet.
c. Interior parking lot paved surface: 15 feet.
B. Once applicable provisions of Subsection A are met, any subdivision to
show ownership, responsibility, deed restrictions, or covenants shall
only be subject to lot provisions set forth herewith: minimum lot size
within the Mixed-Use Mid-Rise Development shall be two acres, and the
placement of any building on such lot shall be at the discretion of the
developer of the Mixed Use Mid-Rise Development. If the developer
proposes to construct the development in phases, the undeveloped
lands shall be subject to public ownership requirements until such
lands are integrated within the initially approved overall development
plan, subject to deed restrictions and covenant requirements
established by the homeowner's association.
C. If the tract meets the conditions as specified in § 18-1012A above, the
following uses shall be permitted in addition to the uses permitted in
the Highway Development (B-5) zone:
1. Principal Uses.
a. Mid-Rise Family Residential.
b. Community facilities related to the cultural, social and
recreational needs of the residents of the development,
including public or private parks, religious, ceremonial and
ritual facilities, churches and other places of worship.
2. Accessory Uses.
a. Off-street parking and common parking areas.
18-1013 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1013
AO:1216
b. Maintenance and utility facilities intended to service the
residents of the planned development.
D. In addition to the conditions set forth in § 18-1012A, Mixed Use Mid-
Rise Developments shall be subject to the following bulk and yard
regulations, design standards, and administrative requirements, which
shall not be deemed as required conditions for the proposed use:
1. Residential Dwelling Unit Types. Multi-Family — A multi-story
building containing multiple dwelling units, other than a
townhouse, that are attached both vertically and horizontally, with
each unit having either a separate exterior entrance or access from
a common hallway.
2. Minimum Tract Size. A Mixed Use Mid-Rise Development may only
be developed on a single site of one or more contiguous parcels of
land having a minimum gross acreage of 60 acres.
3. Bulk Requirements. The following bulk requirements shall apply to
the permitted dwelling unit types in a Mixed Use Mid-Rise
Development:
a. Multi-Family Structures on Common Property.
(1) Clusters of multi-family dwellings may be arranged on a
tract subject to the applicable design standards contained
in this chapter.
(2) Minimum average floor area for a dwelling unit shall be
1,000 square feet.
(3) Each unit above the ground floor may have a balcony or
terrace, which if provided shall be at least 24 square feet
in area.
(4) Maximum building height is 65 feet.
4. Design Requirements.
a. Minimum distance between buildings that are designed on
common property — 40 feet.
b. Multi-family structures shall provide for variety in roof height
and avoid the appearance of one continuous multi-story
building through the introduction of offsets or other
architectural features.
c. Off-street parking requirements as outlined in the Residential
Site Improvement Standards (RSIS) for residential land uses
shall apply to the permitted dwelling units.
d. Facilities to serve the recreational needs of the residents of the
Mixed Use Mid-Rise Development shall be appropriately sized
to the scale and type of the development. A minimum
18-1013 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1013
AO:1217
18-1014. Duplexes. [Ord. No. 2010-61; Ord. No. 2014-8]
18-1015. Mixed Use Townhouse Development. [Ord. No. 2011-17
§ 3]
recreational open space area equal to 5% of the tract area of
a Mixed Use Mid-Rise Development shall be provided, which
may include passive and active recreation. Common open
space area shall conform to the requirements for such open
space.
e. Construction, design, light, screening and landscaping of
parking areas and streets shall conform to the applicable
provisions of this chapter. To the extent that the Township's
standards for the construction and design of parking facilities,
including the size and number of parking spaces as well as the
design of internal streets and circulation driveways, is
inconsistent with the Residential Site Improvement Standards
(RSIS), then the RSIS code standards shall govern the parking
area and street design.
A. In those zone districts in which duplexes are a permitted conditional
use including the HD-7 Zone, duplexes shall be subject to the following
conditions:
1. Minimum lot size for existing lots shall be 10,000 square feet,
except for zone districts in which townhouses are a permitted
conditional use, in which case the minimum lot size shall be 8,500
square feet. The tract density, including roadways and common
areas, shall not exceed eight duplex dwelling units per acre.
2. Minimum lot size for newly created lots shall be 10,000 square feet,
except for zoning districts in which townhouses are also a
permitted conditional use in which case the minimum lot size shall
be 8,500 square feet, and all shall have a minimum lot width of 60
feet. The tract density, including roadways and common areas,
shall not exceed eight duplex dwelling units per acre.
3. Front Yard Setback — 25 feet, except any development along a
State Highway shall provide a minimum front yard setback of 75
feet.
4. Rear Yard Setback — 15 feet.
5. Side Yard Setback — 7 feet with an aggregate of 15 feet.
6. Maximum building coverage — 30% except for zoning districts in
which townhouses are also a permitted conditional use in which
case the maximum building coverage shall be 40%.
7. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet.
18-1013 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1015
AO:1218
A. Mixed Use Townhouse Developments shall be subject to the following
conditions:
1. Minimum tract size - 20 contiguous acres, excluding freshwater
wetlands, associated NJDEP wetlands buffers, Riparian buffers and
flood hazard areas.
2. Maximum gross residential density - seven dwelling units per acre.
3. Maximum building coverage for the entire tract - 30%.
4. Maximum building height - 35 feet.
5. The tract must have at least 1,000 feet of frontage on a State
highway.
6. The tract must have a minimum lot depth of 500 feet.
7. Minimum tract setbacks:
a. Building setbacks from State highway: (75) feet (residential),
(25) feet (nonresidential).
b. Building setbacks (other): Residential (35) feet, nonresidential
(50) feet.
c. Interior roadway/circulation driveway: (25) feet.
d. Interior parking lot paved surface: (15) feet.
8. A minimum of 15% of the tract shall be utilized for non-residential
uses, including nonresidential buildings, parking, infrastructure
and open space.
B. Once applicable provisions of Subsection A are met, any subdivision to
show ownership, responsibility, deed restrictions, or covenants shall
only be subject to lot provisions set forth herewith; and the placement
of any building on such lot shall be at the discretion of the developer of
the Mixed Use Townhouse Development. If the developer proposes to
construct the development in phases, the undeveloped lands shall be
subject to public ownership requirements until such lands are
integrated within the initially approved overall development plan,
subject to deed restrictions and covenants requirements established by
the homeowner's association.
C. If the tract meets the conditions as specified in 18-1014 above, the
following uses shall be permitted in addition to the uses permitted in
the Highway Development (B-5) zone.
1. Principal Uses.
a. Multi-Family Townhouse Residential.
b. Community facilities related to the cultural, social and
recreational need of the residents of the development,
18-1015 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1015
AO:1219
including public or private parks, religious, ceremonial and
ritual facilities, churches and other places of worship.
c. Retail and commercial businesses, hotels, financial institutions
and personal service establishments as specified herein.
2. Accessory Uses.
a. Off-street parking and common parking areas.
b. Maintenance and utility facilities intended to service the
residents of the planned development.
D. In addition to the conditions set forth in § 18-1014, Mixed Use
Townhouse Development shall be subject to the following bulk and yard
regulations, design standards, and administrative requirements which
shall not be deemed as required conditions for the proposed use:
1. Residential Dwelling Unit Types. Townhomes.
2. Minimum Tract Size. A Mixed Use Townhouse Development may
only be developed on a single site of one or more contiguous
parcels of land having a minimum gross acreage of 20 contiguous
acres, exclusive of wetlands, buffers, flood hazard or riparian buffer
areas, or environmentally constrained lands as referenced herein.
3. Bulk Requirements. The following bulk requirements shall apply to
the townhouse dwelling unit types in a Mixed Use Townhouse
Development.
a. Townhouse structures on common property:
(1) Clusters of townhouse dwellings may be arranged on a
tract subject to the applicable design standards contained
in this chapter.
(2) Maximum building length - 160 feet.
(3) A structure shall not have more than two connected
townhouse units on one facade without providing a
variation in setback of at least two feet.
(4) Maximum units per structure - six.
(5) Minimum distance between buildings - 12 feet.
(6) Minimum front yard setback - 25 feet from internal streets.
(7) Minimum side yard setback (for end units) - six feet.
(8) Minimum rear yard setback - 20 feet.
(9) Minimum usable rear yard depth - 20 feet, 10 feet for rear
yards adjacent to perimeter buffers. Decks shall be
permitted within the usable yard area, but detention/
18-1015 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1015
AO:1220
18-1016. Automobile Repairs and Service. [Ord. No. 2012-4 § 3]
retention facilities, drainage swales, or any easements
which would inhibit the use of the rear yard are prohibited.
For purposes of this section a drainage swale with side
slopes exceeding 1:10 and a depth exceeding 18 inches
shall be established as the limit which inhibits use of this
yard and is therefore prohibited.
(10) Maximum building height is 35 feet or 2.5 stories,
whichever is less.
4. Design Requirements.
a. Off-street parking requirements as outlined in the Residential
Site Improvement Standards (RSIS) for residential land uses
shall apply to townhouse units. Including parking spaces
available within nonresidential portions of a Mixed-Use
Townhouse Development, a minimum of four parking spaces
shall be provided per townhouse unit.
b. Facilities to serve the recreational needs of the residents of the
Mixed-Use Townhouse Development shall be appropriately
sized to the scale and type of the development. A minimum
recreational open space area equal to 5% of the tract area of a
Mixed-Use Townhouse Development shall be provided, which
may include passive and active recreation, or combination
thereof.
c. Construction, design, light, screening and landscaping of
parking areas and streets shall conform to the applicable
provisions of this chapter. To the extent that the Township's
standards for the construction and design of parking facilities,
including the size and number of parking spaces as well as the
design of internal streets and circulation driveways, is
inconsistent with the Residential Site Improvements Standards
(RSIS), then the RSIS code standards shall govern the parking
area and street design.
A. Where permitted, any application for an automobile repair and service
facility shall include a site plan that identifies the number or capacity of
automobiles that may be garaged within the principal building and
onsite.
B. Any fuel tanks shall be installed underground.
C. Driveways shall cross the sidewalk at right angles and shall not be more
than 16 feet wide at any point thereof. Driveways must be at least 10
feet from any side lot line or from the intersection of street lines. There
shall be no more than one driveway on any one street frontage unless
the street frontage is in excess of 99 feet, in which case, there may be a
18-1015 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1016
AO:1221
18-1017. Mixed-Use Multifamily Development. [Ord. No. 2012-52
§ 3]
maximum of two driveways on the street frontage provided the
driveways are 10 feet apart.
D. The entire area of the facility traversed by motor vehicles shall be hard
surfaced.
E. Illumination of the automobile repair facility and any parking areas
shall be such that no direct glare from the lights used shall fall upon
adjacent property.
F. All automobile repairs and services shall be conducted indoors within
the automobile repair facility.
A. Mixed-Use Multifamily Development shall be subject to the following
conditions:
1. Minimum Tract Size — 20 contiguous acres, excluding freshwater
wetlands, associated NJDEP wetlands buffers, riparian buffers and
flood hazard areas.
2. Maximum Gross Residential Density — 18 units per acre.
3. Maximum Building Coverage for the Entire Tract — 30%.
4. Maximum Building Height — 55 feet.
5. The tract shall have at least 500 feet of frontage on a State
highway.
6. The tract shall have a lot depth of 500 feet.
7. Minimum Tract Setbacks.
a. Building setbacks from State Highway Route 70: 75 feet
residential, 25 feet nonresidential.
b. Building setbacks (other): Residential 35 feet; nonresidential
50 feet.
c. Interior roadway/circulation driveway: 25 feet.
d. Interior paved parking lot: 15 feet.
8. A minimum of 15% of the tract shall be utilized for nonresidential
uses, including nonresidential buildings, parking, infrastructure
and open space.
B. Permitted Uses.
1. Multifamily dwellings, such as rental apartments or condominiums.
18-1016 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1017
AO:1222
2. Retail and commercial businesses, financial institutions and
personal service establishments.
3. Places of worship.
4. Public and private schools.
C. Permitted Accessory Uses.
1. Off-street parking and common parking area.
2. Maintenance and utility structures intended to service the
residents of the mixed-use multifamily development.
3. Recreational or clubhouse facilities intended to service the
residents of the mixed-use multifamily development.
4. Signage.
5. Fencing.
D. Bulk Requirements. The following bulk requirements shall apply to the
permitted uses in a Mixed-Use Multifamily Development:
1. Minimum tract size of the residential portion of a mixed-use
multifamily development shall be 15 acres.
2. Minimum distance between buildings shall be equal to the building
height of the taller building.
E. Design Requirements.
1. A mixed-use multifamily development shall be designed and
planned as a single entity according to an overall site development
plan. The entire development shall be constructed with a common
architectural theme which shall be subject to the review of the
board of proper jurisdiction. The architectural theme shall include
all residential and nonresidential buildings, common elements,
signage, fencing, lighting and other similar physical features.
2. Off-Street Parking Requirements.
a. Residential land uses shall comply with the off-street parking
requirements as outlined in the New Jersey Residential Site
Improvements Standards.
b. The total off-street parking provided on the site for the
residential and the nonresidential portions of the development
may be reduced based on a shared parking analysis at the
discretion of the Board. The determination shall be based on a
shared parking analysis submitted by the applicant and
prepared in accordance with Institute of Traffic Engineers'
(ITE) standard methodology and subject to Board review.
18-1017 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1017
AO:1223
18-1018. Mixed Use Development. [Ord. No. 2013-31 § 3]
c. Separate off-street parking for the clubhouse/community
center shall not be required.
3. Recreation. Each Mixed-Use Multifamily Development shall contain
active recreational facilities such as a tot lot, playground, sports
court or play field and passive recreation such as sitting areas. The
land area of the recreational facility shall be equal to 100 square
feet for each proposed dwelling unit.
4. Buffers. The Mixed-Use Multifamily Development shall provide a
buffer to any adjoining lot which is zoned for single-family
residences or currently developed as a single-family residence
neighborhood. The buffer shall provide a vegetative screen
between the two uses of at least two staggered rows of evergreen
plantings. The minimum width of vegetation shall be 25 feet.
A. Mixed Use Developments shall be subject to the following conditions:
1. Minimum Tract Size — 15 contiguous acres, excluding freshwater
wetlands associated NJDEP wetlands buffers, riparian buffers and
flood hazard areas.
2. Maximum Gross Residential Density — 15 dwelling units per acre
for multifamily dwellings, and seven dwelling units per acre for
townhomes, where the maximum total combined gross density for
the tract including townhomes and multifamily dwellings shall be
15 dwelling units per acre.
3. Maximum Building Coverage for the Entire Tract — Maximum
allowable under NJDEP/CAFRA regulations.
4. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet for townhomes and 55 feet for
commercial, multifamily and mixed-use buildings.
5. The tract must have at least 400 feet of frontage on a State
highway.
6. The tract must have a minimum lot depth of 500 feet.
7. Minimum Tract Setbacks:
a. Building setbacks from State highway: 75 feet for residential
buildings, 50 feet for mixed-use buildings, and 25 feet for
nonresidential buildings.
b. From tract boundary other than State highway: 35 feet for
residential buildings and 50 feet for nonresidential and mixeduse
buildings.
c. Interior roadway/circulation driveway: 15 feet.
d. Interior parking lot paved surface to building: 15 feet.
18-1017 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1018
AO:1224
8. A minimum of fifteen (15%) of the tract shall be utilized for
nonresidential uses, including nonresidential buildings, parking,
infrastructure and open space.
B. Once applicable provisions of § 18-1018A are met, any subdivision to
show ownership, responsibility, deed restrictions, or covenants shall
only be subject to lot provisions set forth herewith; and the placement
of any building on such lot shall be at the discretion of the developer of
the Mixed Use Development. Restrictions and covenant requirements
shall be established by the homeowners' association.
C. If the tract meets the conditions as specified in Subsection 18-1018A
above, the following uses shall be permitted in addition to the uses
permitted in the Highway Development (B-5) Zone as part of a Mixed-
Use Development as defined in this chapter.
1. Principal Uses:
a. Multifamily dwellings located in mixed-use or stand-alone
buildings.
b. Townhouse dwellings.
c. Community facilities related to the cultural, social and
recreational need of the residents of the development,
including public or private parks, religious, ceremonial and
ritual facilities, churches and other places of worship.
d. Retail and commercial businesses, hotels, financial institutions
and personal service establishments as specified herein.
2. Accessory Uses:
a. Off-street parking and common parking areas.
b. Maintenance and utility facilities intended to service the
residents of the planned development.
D. In addition to the conditions set forth in Subsection 18-1018A, Mixed
Use Development shall be subject to the following bulk and yard
regulations, design standards, and administrative requirements which
shall not be deemed as required conditions for the proposed use:
1. Bulk Requirements. The following bulk requirements shall apply to
the residential dwelling unit types in a Mixed Use Development.
a. Townhouse structures on common property:
(1) Clusters of townhouse dwellings may be arranged on a
tract subject to the applicable design standards contained
in this chapter.
(2) Maximum building length — 250 feet.
18-1018 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1018
AO:1225
18-1019. Digital Billboards. [Ord. No. 2013-51 § 9; Ord. No.
2014-31; Ord. No. 2016-11 § 10]
Digital Billboards shall be permitted as conditional uses in the B-1, B-3, B-4,
HD-6, HD-7 and M-1 zones subject to the following conditions:
(3) Minimum distance between buildings — 12 feet, unless
part of a mixed-use commercial/residential building.
(4) Minimum front yard setback— 25 feet from internal
streets.
(5) Minimum side yard setback (for end units) — 12 feet.
(6) Minimum rear yard setback — 20 feet.
(7) Minimum usable rear yard depth — 15 feet, 10 feet for
rear yards adjacent to perimeter buffers. Decks shall be
permitted within the usable yard area, but detention/
retention facilities, drainage swales, or any easements
which would inhibit the use of the rear yard are prohibited.
For purposes of this section a drainage swale with side
slopes exceeding 1:10 and a depth exceeding 18 inches
shall be established as the limit which inhibits use of this
yard and is therefore prohibited.
(8) Maximum building height is 35 feet.
2. Design Requirements.
a. Off-street parking requirements as outlined in the Residential
Site Improvement Standards (RSIS) for residential land uses
shall apply to all residential units.
b. Facilities to serve the recreational needs of the residents of the
Mixed Use Townhouse Development shall be appropriately
sized to the scale and type of the development. A minimum
recreational open space area equal to 5% of the tract area of a
Mixed Use Townhouse Development shall be provided, which
may include passive and active recreation, or a combination
thereof.
c. Construction, design, lighting, screening and landscaping of
parking areas and streets shall conform to the applicable
provisions of this chapter. To the extent that the Township's
standards for the construction and design of parking facilities,
including the size and number of parking spaces as well as the
design of internal streets and circulation driveways, is
inconsistent with the Residential Site Improvements Standards
(RSIS), then the RSIS code standards shall govern the parking
area and street design.
18-1018 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1019
AO:1226
A. Up to five digital billboards shall be permitted to be constructed within
the Township. All digital billboards must be in full compliance with all
Federal, State and local regulations. This includes but is not limited to
all building, zoning and land use permits.
B. Each billboard is subject to a permitting process as established by this
chapter. Each application for a billboard permit must be accompanied
by $200 to be deposited with the Township Clerk. Permits may be
issued by the Township Clerk after a public bidding process has been
completed. Each billboard permit application shall require a separate
public bid to be advertised in the Township's designated newspaper and
website no less than 30 days before the scheduled opening of the bid.
C. The successful bidder must pay an annual fee of $500 for each billboard
and must comply with all of the terms and conditions of this chapter. No
billboard may be constructed without the application for the billboard
or permit without having first obtained a building permit from the
construction official of the Township.
D. Each operator or owner of a digital billboard shall provide the Township
of Lakewood access up to a maximum of 10% of the static display panels
in addition to an 18 inch high LED message board for public messages
and public service announcements. This will include a minimum of two
hours of total Township access time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. This time may be expanded during Federal or State declared
emergencies in the interest of public safety.
E. Each face of the digital billboards may be oriented towards travelers on
the following roadways only:
1. Route 9.
2. Route 88.
3. Cedarbridge Avenue.
4. Highway 70.
5. County Road 623.
6. County Road 549.
7. West County Line Road.
8. Lanes Mill Road.
F. A digital billboard may only be located at least 3,000 feet from any
other digital billboard located on the same roadway or highway and in
the same direction of travel as measured from any part of the sign to
any other digital billboard within the Township.
G. Digital billboards must be located at least 500 feet from any residential
property.
18-1019 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1019
AO:1227
18-1020. (Reserved)82
H. Each face of each digital billboard shall not exceed a height of 14 feet, a
length of 48 feet, and an area of 672 square feet along with the 18 inch
LED message area along the bottom. The height shall not exceed 40
feet, and the display face shall be located not less than 15 feet above
the adjacent street grade.
I. Digital billboards shall have a frame hold time of visibility of no less
than eight seconds. The use of streaming video, full motion video,
animation or frame effects is prohibited.
J. No digital billboard shall be permitted to operate unless it is equipped
with the following:
1. A default mechanism that shall freeze the sign in one position as a
static message if there is a malfunction; and
2. A mechanism able to automatically adjust the brightness of the
display on the billboard according to ambient light conditions by
means of a light detector/photocell.
K. No billboard may be located on top of, cantilevered over or otherwise
suspended above any building or structure.
L. Digital display brightness shall be as follows:
1. No digital billboard shall be permitted if its brightness is such that
it interferes with the effectiveness of a traffic control device.
2. Maximum brightness levels for each digital billboard shall not
exceed 0.2 foot-candles over ambient light levels measured within
150 feet of the sign. Each billboard must guarantee that the sign
has been preset to automatically adjust the brightness to these
levels or lower. A certification of same shall be presented to the
appropriate Township board for which the billboard is subject to
approval. The Township shall have the right at any reasonable time
to ensure that the specified brightness levels are maintained at all
times.
3. Brightness of the digital billboard must be measured as follows:
a. At least 30 minutes following sunset, a foot candle meter shall
be used to obtain an ambient light reading for the location.
This is done while the sign is off or dark. The reading shall be
made with the meter aimed directly at the sign area at the preset
location.
b. The sign shall then be turned on to take another reading with
the meter in the same location.
c. If the difference between the two readings is 0.2 foot-candles
or less, the brightness is properly adjusted.
18-1019 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1021
AO:1228
18-1021. Planned Unit Development. [Ord. No. 2017-51 § 30]
It having been determined that there is a need for housing in the Township
of Lakewood that is comprehensively designed to meet the needs of
Lakewood's residents, planned unit developments are hereby authorized to
be developed as a conditional use in the R-40 (Residential) zone districts,
upon compliance with the design criteria set forth in this section and
approval of the general development plan, preliminary and final subdivision/
site plan approvals from the planning board of the Township of Lakewood
as hereinafter described:
A. Planned unit development without any age-restriction requirements are
permitted conditionally in the R-40 (Residential) zone district.
1. This section shall become effective upon the adoption of the
Amended Zoning Map as specified in § 18-901B2.83
B. Minimum Tract Size. A planned unit development may only be
developed on one or more contiguous parcels of land having a total
gross area of not less than 100 acres within the R-40 (Residential) zone
district.
C. Permitted Principal Uses. The principal uses of buildings in a planned
unit development shall be limited to the following:
1. Residential units of all types provided that they comply with the
area and bulk zoning requirements of this subsection.
2. Recreation facilities.
3. Sales and administrative offices required for the construction, sale,
resale and management of the planned community.
4. Maintenance buildings.
5. The commercial uses permitted under this subsection.
6. Community centers and recreation buildings, which may include
buildings for religious worship and related activities.
D. Permitted Accessory Uses. The accessory uses of buildings and
structures in a planned unit development shall be limited to the
following:
1. Master television antenna system and/or cable television antenna/
reception facilities.
2. Common parking areas for guest parking or dedicated for specific
parking purposes such as a recreational vehicle and trailer parking.
82.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2013-79 was repealed by Court Order on June 2, 2017
deleting commercial uses on properties with frontage County Route No. 526.
83.Editor's Note: The Amended Zoning Map was adopted 12-7-17 by Ord. No. 2017-51.
18-1021 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1021
AO:1229
3. Buildings for storage of vehicles, equipment and supplies.
4. Outbuildings and structures as part of recreation facilities.
E. Area Requirements. The following area requirements shall apply to any
planned unit development:
1. Maximum building coverage: 25 percent of gross area of planned
unit development tract.
2. Maximum building density: 3.6 units per gross acre of planned unit
development tract.
3. Minimum open space: 50 percent of gross area of planned unit
development tract. For purposes of this requirement "open space"
shall mean those portions of the planned unit development tract
not covered by buildings structures of any kind, streets or other
surfaces paved with impervious materials.
F. Bulk Requirements. The following bulk requirements shall apply to the
applicable unit types in a planned unit development.
1. For detached units on individual lots: All detached units to be
constructed on individual lots in a planned unit development shall
comply with and conform to the following requirements:
a. Minimum lot area: 12,000 square feet
b. Minimum lot width and frontage: 90 feet
c. Minimum setbacks:
(1) Front yard: 30 feet
(2) One side yard: 10 feet
(3) Combined side yards: 25 feet
(4) Rear yard: 20 feet
d. Accessory building:
(1) Side yard setback: 10 feet
(2) Rear yard setback: 10 feet
e. Minimum distance between buildings: 20 feet
2. For attached units on individual lots:
a. Minimum lot width: 30 feet
b. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet
c. Minimum setback from interior roadway or circulation
driveway: 20 feet
18-1021 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1021
AO:1230
3. For attached units on common property:
a. Minimum setback from interior roadway or circulation
driveway: 20 feet
4. For garden flat units on common property:
a. Minimum setback from interior roadway or circulation
driveway: 25 feet
b. Minimum setback from interior parking lot: 10 feet
5. Minimum distance between multi-unit buildings:
a. For multi-unit buildings oriented at 90 degrees to each other
the minimum distance between same shall be equal to the
building height.
b. For multi-unit buildings oriented end-to-end to each other, the
minimum distance between same shall be equal to one-half
(0.5) the building height.
c. For multi-unit buildings oriented with parallel axis facing each
other, the minimum distance between same shall be one and
one-half (1.5) times the building height.
6. (Reserved)
7. Maximum units per multi-unit building: 8 units
8. Minimum parking requirements shall comply with § 18-807 and the
following:
a. Construction, design, lighting, screening and landscaping of
parking areas and streets shall conform to the applicable
provision of this chapter. To the extent that the Township's
standards for the construction and design of parking facilities
including the size and number of parking spaces as well as the
design of internal streets and circulation driveways is
inconsistent with the Residential Site Improvement Standards
(RSIS), then the RSIS code standards shall govern the parking
area and street design.
9. Maximum building height: 35 feet or two and one-half (2.5) stories
except as provided in Subsection L below.
G. Utilities. A planned unit development must be fully serviced by central
water transmission and sanitary sewerage facilities owned and
operated by the Lakewood Township Municipal Utilities Authority or
duly franchised public utility companies.
H. Recreation Facilities. Any planned unit development shall contain and
provide for the benefit, use and enjoyment of its residents, the following
recreation facilities:
18-1021 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1021
AO:1231
1. Any planned unit development shall contain a recreation area
which shall contain a recreation building comprised of at least 15
square feet of floor area (inclusive of basement area) for each unit
intended to be developed in the planned community. If the
developer proposes to develop the planned community in phases or
sections with separate recreation facilities for each phase or
section each building shall contain 15 square feet of floor area
(inclusive of basement area) for each unit intended to be developed
in the phase or section to be served by that recreation building.
2. Active and passive recreation in compliance with the minimum
open space requirement of § 18-1021E3.
3. Parking facilities serving the recreation area with a minimum
number of parking spaces equal to one space for each 50 square
feet of area comprising the recreation building.
I. Optional Recreation Facilities. A planned unit development may
provide, in addition to the recreation facilities prescribed in Subsection
H above any one or more of the following facilities for the use of the
residents of the planned unit development and their guests:
1. Golf course.
2. Picnic-barbeque areas.
3. Tennis courts.
4. Jogging trail.
5. Fitness-exercise courses.
6. Gardening areas (including greenhouses).
7. Playgrounds.
8. Tot lots.
9. Basketball courts.
10. Shuffleboard courts.
11. Bocce courts.
12. Such other activities which the Planning Board shall find to be
consistent with the lifestyle of residents of a planned unit
development and which are subordinate to the residential
character of a planned community.
J. Ownership of Recreation Facilities. Except for a planned community
golf course, recreation facilities shall be owned by the homeowners'
association (defined below). Provided, however, that in the event that a
planned community golf course is intended to be owned by other than
the homeowners' association ("private ownership") the planned
18-1021 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1021
AO:1232
community golf course must be so identified in the application for
preliminary subdivision or site plan approval and must satisfy the
following criteria:
1. The developer-applicant shall provide adequate assurances
(through recorded deed restrictions or agreements) that the
planned community golf course shall be available for use and
enjoyment by all residents of the planned community upon terms
and conditions no less favorable than offered to any person not a
resident of the planned community and at a cost to the
homeowners' association not greater than the homeowners'
association would incur for its operation, upkeep, repair and
maintenance if owned by the homeowners' association.
K. Setback and Distance Measurements. Building setbacks and minimum
distances between all buildings shall be measured to building
foundation lines, excluding foundations for fireplaces, porches and
other exterior protrusions of a building which do not protrude beyond
six feet from the building foundation line.
L. Perimeter Boundary Setbacks. No buildings or structures, other than
entrance gate-houses, walls or fences, shall be located within 75 feet of
any exterior boundary line of the planned community tract. The
building height of any residential building adjacent to any perimeter
boundary setback abutting an R-20 Residential zone shall not exceed 25
feet.
M. Homeowners' Association; Recorded Covenants. Any planned unit
development shall be governed and regulated by one or more recorded
declaration of covenants and restrictions ("C&Rs") which shall provide
for and create one or more incorporated membership organizations
under Title 15 of the New Jersey Statutes in which all unit owners in the
planned unit development shall be required to be members (the
"homeowners' association"). The C&Rs shall provide for (i) the
ownership, maintenance, operation and upkeep of all recreation
facilities, open space, streets and other common areas within the
planned community by the homeowners' association, (ii) the
restrictions on unit occupancy set forth in Subsection A above, (iii) the
procedure for creating, imposing and collecting assessments from each
unit owner to finance the foregoing, and (iv) the organization, operation
and management of the homeowners' association. A complete copy of
the proposed C&Rs and all documents creating and organizing the
homeowners' association shall be submitted to the Planning Board for
review and approval with the first application for final subdivision and/
or site plan approval submitted for the planned unit development or the
first section thereof.
N. Streets and Roads. All streets and roads in a planned unit development
shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and the requirements of
the Residential Site Improvement Standards except as hereinafter
specifically provided.
18-1021 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1021
AO:1233
1. Provided that the developer-applicant of a planned unit
development shall expressly condition the preliminary subdivision
and/or site plan approval of the planned unit development upon all
streets and roads within the planned community being privately
owned and maintained by the homeowners' association in
perpetuity, such streets and roads shall be constructed in
accordance with this chapter, except as follows: (i) minor streets
(i.e. streets of not more than 1,200 feet in length which shall be
through streets or terminate in a cul-de-sac) shall have an overall
paved roadway width of 22 feet; (ii) minor collector streets shall
have a paved roadway width of 30 feet and (iii) major collector
streets shall have a paved roadway of 40 feet. All planned
community streets shall be constructed with a six inch road gravel
base conforming to the New Jersey Highway Specifications Grade A
or B, with a CABC-1 of one and one-half (1.5) inch thickness of
bituminous concrete binder course and a one inch bituminous
concrete surface course. If roll curbing is utilized, the
measurement of the parcel roadway width shall include roll curb.
Curbs shall be constructed in accordance with this chapter except
as follows: (i) minor streets shall have a curb radius of 15 feet and
minor collector and major collector streets shall have a curb radius
of 20 feet; (ii) cul-de-sac of minor streets and minor collector shall
have a minimum curb radius of 40 feet and no parking shall be
allowed in the cul-de-sac. Sidewalks where proposed shall have a
minimum width of four feet. Additional sidewalks may be required
by the Planning Board.
2. In the event a developer-applicant of a planned unit development
intends to seek, or reserve unto the homeowners' association the
option to seek, to have the Township accept for maintenance some
or all of the streets and roads within the planned unit development
at some future time, then all streets, roads, curbs and sidewalks
shall strictly conform to the applicable design requirements of this
chapter. Provided, however, that the Township shall be under no
obligation to accept said streets and roads.
O. Drainage. All on-site drainage shall be provided for in accordance with
Lakewood Township storm drainage requirements and applicable
Township ordinances pertaining to subdivision and development of
lands.
P. Driveways, Walks and Parking Areas. There shall be provided a safe and
convenient system of driveways, walks and parking areas. Due
consideration shall be given in planning walks, ramps and driveways to
prevent slipping or stumbling. Gradients of walks shall not exceed 7%
except where required to meet handicapped access requirements.
Q. Commercial Uses. As part of a planned unit development, a developerapplicant
may designate one or more parcels of the planned community
tract for development of those commercial uses hereinafter designated
18-1021 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1021
AO:1234
18-1022. Mixed-Use Development—Cross Street Core. [Ord. No.
2017-51 § 31]
as permitted commercial uses in a planned unit development, subject
to the following requirements:
1. The aggregate amount of land in the planned unit development
tract designated for all commercial uses shall not exceed the lesser
of 10 acres or 5% of the total area of the planned unit development
tract.
2. The aggregate finished floor area of all commercial uses in a
planned unit development shall not exceed 20% of the aggregate
land area of the planned unit development designated for
commercial use.
3. No commercial building shall exceed 30 feet in height. Provided,
however, that any building originally constructed within a planned
unit development for residential use and subsequently converted to
commercial use shall not exceed 35 feet in height.
4. Parking areas shall be provided to serve all commercial uses with
per § 18-807. Provided, however, that the Planning Board may
approve parking areas designed to serve both commercial uses and
recreation facilities in the planned unit development upon finding
that the proposed parking areas are adequate to serve both uses.
5. No commercial use shall be located closer than (i) 35 feet from the
curb line of any major or minor collector street, or (ii) 15 feet from
the curb line of any minor street.
6. No commercial use shall be located closer than 100 feet from any
residential building and all commercial uses shall be screened from
adjoining residential uses by landscaped buffer areas.
7. Permitted business/commercial uses in a planned unit development
shall be the same as those permitted in the B-1 zone, except for bus
passenger stations, terminals, railroad stations, taxi stands, car/
van rental agencies and combined business-residential uses.
A. Mixed Use Developments shall be subject to the following conditions:
1. Minimum Tract Size — three contiguous acres, excluding
freshwater wetlands associated NJDEP wetlands buffers, riparian
buffers and flood hazard areas.
2. Maximum Gross Residential Density: 3.6 dwelling units per gross
acre for all dwelling types.
3. Maximum Building Coverage for the Entire Tract — Maximum
allowable under NJDEP/CAFRA regulations.
18-1021 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1022
AO:1235
4. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet for townhomes and 55 feet for
commercial, multi-family and mixed-use buildings.
5. The property, parcel or tract is located wholly within the M-1
Industrial or R-M Multi-Family zone districts with the Cross and
Prospect Street Core (CPSC) overlay zone as delineated.
6. All ingress and egress to the proposed development will be on
Prospect Street.
7. Minimum Tract Setbacks:
a. Building setbacks: 50 feet for residential buildings, 50 feet for
mixed-use buildings, and 25 feet for nonresidential buildings.
b. From tract boundary other than State highway: 35 feet for
residential buildings and 50 feet for nonresidential and mixeduse
buildings.
c. Interior roadway/circulation driveway 15 feet.
d. Interior parking lot paved surface to building: 15 feet.
8. A minimum of 25% of the tract shall be utilized for nonresidential
uses, including nonresidential buildings, parking, infrastructure
and open space.
B. Once applicable provisions of § 18-1022A (above) are met, any
subdivision to show ownership, responsibility, deed restrictions, or
covenants shall only be subject to lot provisions set forth herewith; and
the placement of any building on such lot shall be at the discretion of
the developer of the Mixed-Use Development. Restrictions and
covenant requirements shall be established by the homeowners'
association.
C. If the tract meets the conditions as specified in § 18-1022A (above), the
following uses shall be permitted:
1. Principal Uses:
a. Multifamily dwellings located in mixed-use or stand-alone
buildings.
b. Townhouse dwellings.
c. Community facilities related to the cultural, social and
recreational need of the residents of the development,
including public or private parks, religious, ceremonial and
ritual facilities, churches and other places of worship.
d. Neighborhood-level retail and commercial sales and service
businesses, financial institutions and office spaces with a
maximum floor area of 5,000 square feet on the ground level.
18-1022 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1022
AO:1236
2. Accessory Uses:
a. Off-street parking and common parking areas.
b. Maintenance and utility facilities intended to service the
residents of the planned development.
D. In addition to the conditions set forth in § 18-1022A (above), Mixed Use
Development shall be subject to the following bulk and yard
regulations, design standards, and administrative requirements which
shall not be deemed as bulk standards and therefore subject to "c"
variance relief:
1. Bulk Requirements. The following bulk requirements shall apply to
the residential dwelling unit types in a Mixed-Use Development.
a. Townhouse structures on common property:
(1) Clusters of townhouse dwellings may be arranged on a
tract subject to the applicable design standards contained
in this chapter.
(2) Maximum building length — 250 feet.
(3) Minimum distance between buildings — 12 feet, unless
part of a mixed-use commercial/residential building.
(4) Minimum front yard setback— 25 feet from internal
streets.
(5) Minimum side yard setback (for end units) — 12 feet.
(6) Minimum rear yard setback — 20 feet.
(7) Minimum usable rear yard depth — 15 feet, 10 feet for
rear yards adjacent to perimeter buffers. Decks shall be
permitted within the usable yard area, but detention/
retention facilities, drainage swales, or any easements
which would inhibit the use of the rear yard are prohibited.
For purposes of this section a drainage swale with side
slopes exceeding 1:10 and a depth exceeding 18 inches
shall be established as the limit which inhibits use of this
yard and is therefore prohibited.
(8) Maximum building height is 35 feet.
2. Design Requirements.
a. Off-street parking requirements shall be provided as outlined
in the Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS) for
residential land uses or as provided in § 18-807, whichever
standard requires a higher number of parking spaces. Nonresidential
land uses shall comply with the off-street parking
requirements as provided in § 18-807B.
18-1022 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1022
AO:1237
18-1023. Mixed-Use Development—Oak Street Core. [Ord. No.
2017-51 § 31]
b. Facilities to serve the recreational needs of the residents of the
Mixed-Use Townhouse Development shall be appropriately
sized to the scale and type of the development. A minimum
recreational open space area equal to 5% of the tract area of a
Mixed-Use Townhouse Development shall be provided, which
may include passive and active recreation, or a combination
thereof.
c. Construction, design, lighting, screening and landscaping of
parking areas and streets shall conform to the applicable
provisions of this chapter. To the extent that the Township's
standards for the construction and design of parking facilities,
including the size and number of parking spaces as well as the
design of internal streets and circulation driveways, is
inconsistent with the Residential Site Improvements Standards
(RSIS), then the RSIS code standards shall govern the parking
area and street design.
d. Residential structures and units which abut Cross and
Prospect Streets shall be screened with a 20 foot-wide bermed
year-round landscape screen. A fence shall not be substituted
for the landscaping.
e. Sign requirements for the commercial component mixed-use
developments shall comply with same provisions of Chapter 18
which regulate the B-5 district.
A. Mixed Use Developments shall be subject to the following conditions:
1. Minimum Tract Size — three contiguous acres, excluding
freshwater wetlands associated NJDEP wetlands buffers, riparian
buffers and flood hazard areas.
2. Maximum Gross Residential Density — 4.36 dwelling units per
gross acre for all dwelling types.
3. Maximum Building Coverage for the Entire Tract — Maximum
allowable under NJDEP/CAFRA regulations.
4. Maximum Building Height — 35 feet for townhomes and 55 feet for
commercial, multifamily and mixed-use buildings.
5. The property, parcel or tract is located wholly within the R-10 A
zone district and within the Mixed-Use Development area in the
Oak Street Core, as outlined and delineated in the adopted 2013
Smart Growth Plan.
6. All ingress and egress to the proposed development will be on a
major or minor collector street.
18-1022 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1023
AO:1238
7. Minimum Tract Setbacks:
a. Building setbacks: 25 feet for all residential buildings and 30
feet for all mixed use and non-residential buildings.
b. Interior roadway/circulation driveway 15 feet.
c. Interior parking lot paved surface to building: 15 feet.
8. A minimum of 25% of the tract shall be utilized for nonresidential
uses, including nonresidential buildings, parking, infrastructure
and open space.
B. Once applicable provisions of § 18-1023A (above) are met, any
subdivision to show ownership, responsibility, deed restrictions, or
covenants shall only be subject to lot provisions set forth herewith; and
the placement of any building on such lot shall be at the discretion of
the developer of the Mixed-Use Development. Restrictions and
covenant requirements shall be established by the homeowners'
association.
C. If the tract meets the conditions as specified in § 18-1023A (above), the
following uses shall be permitted:
1. Principal Uses:
a. Multifamily dwellings located in mixed-use or stand-alone
buildings.
b. Townhouse dwellings.
c. Community facilities related to the cultural, social and
recreational need of the residents of the development,
including public or private parks, religious, ceremonial and
ritual facilities, churches and other places of worship.
d. Neighborhood-level retail and commercial sales and service
businesses, financial institutions and office spaces with a
maxim floor area of 5,000 square feet on the ground floor.
2. Accessory Uses:
a. Off-street parking and common parking areas.
b. Maintenance and utility facilities intended to service the
residents of the planned development.
D. In addition to the conditions set forth in § 18-1023A, mixed-use
development shall be subject to the following bulk and yard regulations,
design standards, and administrative requirements which shall not be
deemed as bulk standards and therefore subject to "c" variance relief:
1. Bulk Requirements. The following bulk requirements shall apply to
the residential dwelling unit types in a Mixed-Use Development.
18-1023 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1023
AO:1239
a. Townhouse structures on common property:
(1) Clusters of townhouse dwellings may be arranged on a
tract subject to the applicable design standards contained
in this chapter.
(2) Maximum building length — 250 feet.
(3) Minimum distance between buildings — 12 feet, unless
part of a mixed-use commercial/residential building.
(4) Minimum front yard setback— 25 feet from internal
streets.
(5) Minimum side yard setback (for end units) — 12 feet.
(6) Minimum rear yard setback — 25 feet.
(7) Minimum usable rear yard depth — 15 feet, 10 feet for
rear yards adjacent to perimeter buffers. Decks shall be
permitted within the usable yard area, but detention/
retention facilities, drainage swales, or any easements
which would restrict or inhibit the use of the rear yard are
prohibited. For purposes of this section a drainage swale
with side slopes exceeding 1:10 and a depth exceeding 18
inches shall be established as the limit which inhibits use
of this yard and is therefore prohibited.
(8) Maximum building height is 35 feet.
2. Design Requirements.
a. Off-street parking requirements shall be provided as outlined
in the Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS) for
residential land uses or as provided in § 18-807, whichever
standard requires a higher number of parking spaces.
b. Facilities to serve the recreational needs of the residents of the
Mixed-Use Oak Street Development shall be appropriately
sized to the scale and type of the development. A minimum
recreational open space area equal to 5% of the tract area of a
Mixed-Use Oak Street Core Development shall be provided,
which may include passive and active recreation, or a
combination thereof.
c. Construction, design, lighting, screening and landscaping of
parking areas and streets shall conform to the applicable
provisions of this chapter. To the extent that the Township's
standards for the construction and design of parking facilities,
including the size and number of parking spaces as well as the
design of internal streets and circulation driveways, is
inconsistent with the Residential Site Improvements Standards
18-1023 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1023
AO:1240
(RSIS), then the RSIS code standards shall govern the parking
area and street design.
d. Residential structures and units which abut a major or minor
collector street shall be screened with a 20 foot-wide berm
with year-round landscape vegetative screen. A fence shall not
be substituted for the landscaping.
e. Sign requirements for the commercial component mixed-use
developments shall be limited to wall signs and shall comply
with the specific provisions relating to wall signs pursuant to §
18-812 Signs.
18-1023 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1023
AO:1241

ARTICLE XI
ADMINISTRATION
18-1100. Enforcement.
18-1101. Resolution Compliance.
A. It shall be the Zoning Officer's duty to examine all applications for
permits, issue zoning permits only for uses which are in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter. The Zoning Officer shall also
record and file applications for permits with any accompanying plans
and documents and make such reports as the Committee may require.
Permits for construction and uses which are a conditional use or
variance to requirements of this chapter shall be issued only upon order
of the Planning Board or the Zoning Board.
B. The Township Committee may appoint a Deputy Zoning Administration
officer who shall perform all of the duties of the Zoning Officer during
absences, disability or unavailability, or when so directed by the Zoning
Administration Officer. The terms of appointment shall be for the
calendar year.
A. After approval of site plans or subdivisions by the Planning Board/Board
of Adjustment, and prior to the commencement of construction the
applicant must complete the following:
1. Plans shall be submitted to the Planning/Zoning Board
professionals to be reviewed for compliance with the Board's
resolution of approval, including the receipt of all required outside
agency approvals.
2. Once the Board professionals determine the revised plans are in
compliance with the approving resolution, a bond estimate will be
prepared by the Township Engineer in accordance with Article IV,
Improvement Guarantees, of this chapter.
3. Inspection Escrows shall be posted in accordance with Article IV,
Improvement Guarantees, and § 18-704, Inspection and Escrow
Fees, of this chapter.
4. Once the inspection fees have been received and the bonds have
been approved and any other conditions of the resolution including
outside agency approvals have been satisfied, the plans may be
submitted and signed. Board escrow funds must be current and
taxes paid to date prior to the releasing of the signed maps.
5. Following the receipt of the signed plans, the applicant may begin
site work. The applicant must notify the Township's Engineering
Department 72 hours prior to the anticipation of the
commencement of site work and keep the Department informed of
the need for inspections throughout the development process.
18-1100 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1101
AO:1243
18-1102. Requirements of Permits.
6. A building permit application may be submitted for structures
relative to a site plan simultaneous with commencement of site
work. A residential subdivision requires Board approval and filing
(with the County Clerk) of a final subdivision map or deed prior to
applying for a building permit.
7. Before a building permit can be issued for a structure related to a
site plan or a subdivision "prior approvals" are required:
a. A plot plan shall be submitted to the Construction Office to be
reviewed by the Township Engineer in accordance with the
applicable requirements of this chapter.
b. The Zoning Officer reviews the building permit application and
issues a zoning permit.
c. Following the review and approval of the building permit by
the Engineering Department, the building permit application is
resubmitted to the Building Department for construction
review. Depending upon the scope of development the
applicant may also require Ocean County Planning Board,
Ocean County Soil Conservation District, Utility Companies,
Shade Tree, DEP and/or DOT approvals prior to receiving a
building permit.
A. A zoning permit ("Zoning Permit") issued by the Zoning Officer stating
that the project complies with Township ordinance requirements shall
be required prior to:
1. The erection or structural alteration of any building, structure, or
portion thereof;
2. The use or change in use of a building or land;
3. Any excavation;
4. The change or extension of a nonconforming use;
5. The erection, creation or alteration of a permanent or temporary
sign;
6. The erection or structural alteration of a shed of a size of 100
square feet or less;
7. The erection of a fence six feet high and under; and
8. The commencement of any home occupation.
The fee for each zoning permit shall be $35.
18-1101 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1103
AO:1244
18-1103. Application for Permits.
Application for permits shall be in writing to the Zoning Administration
Officer on such forms as may be furnished by the Township. All site plans
submitted shall contain the limits of all wetlands, and wetland buffers
wherever present. All submitted plans shall be submitted to all applicable
law.
18-1104. Issuance of Permits.
Permits shall be granted or refused within the applicable time period as
specified by law. Upon completion of the erection or alteration of any
building or portion thereof authorized by any permit and prior to occupancy
or use, the holder of such permit shall notify the Zoning Administration
Officer of such completion. No permit shall be considered complete or
permanently effective until the Zoning Administration Officer has certified
that the work has been inspected and approved as being in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable ordinances. All
applications with accompanying plans and documents shall become a public
record.
18-1105. Fees.84
A. The Township is hereby authorized and directed to charge fees for
services and materials extended and furnished to or for the benefit of
any individual person or entity. The Township Committee shall adopt
annually a schedule of fees by ordinance. Such fees and charges may be
amended from time to time by the Township Committee. If any fee
established by the Township Committee conflicts with a mandatory fee
established by State or Federal law, regulation, order, or rule, such
State or Federal fee will govern.
B. Fees for permits shall be paid in accordance with a fee schedule
adopted by the Township Committee and all such fees shall be paid into
the Township Treasury.
C. Each applicant shall at the time of making application, pay a fee in
accordance with the aforementioned fee schedule, for the cost of
advertising and mailing notices as required by this and other Township
ordinances and the rules of the Zoning or Planning Board.
D. A municipality may by ordinance exempt, according to uniform
standards, a disabled person, or a parent or sibling of a disabled
person, from the payment of any fee charged under this act in
connection with any application for development, which promotes
accessibility to their own living unit.
84.Editor's Note: Fees for applications or for the rendering of any service by the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment or any members of their administrative staffs may
be found in Chapter 2 Administration, Subsection 2-36.4 Fees of the Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Lakewood, 1999.
18-1103 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1105
AO:1245
18-1106. Returned Check Fee.
18-1107. Escrow Fees.
E. For the purpose of this subsection, "disabled person" means a person
who has the total and permanent inability to engage in any substantial
gainful activity by reason of any medically determinable physical or
mental impairment, including blindness, and shall include, but not be
limited to, any resident of this State who is disabled pursuant to the
Federal Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. 416), or the Federal Railroad
Retirement Act of 1974 (45 U.S.C. 231 et seq.), or is rated as having a
60% disability or higher pursuant to any Federal law administered by
the United States Veterans' Act. For purposes of this Subsection
"Blindness" means central visual acuity of 20/200 or less in the better
eye with the use of a corrective lens. An eye which is accompanied by a
limitation in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the
visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20 degrees shall be
considered as having a central visual acuity of 20/200 or less.
A. If a check or other negotiable instrument delivered to the Township or
any agency or instrumentality thereof in payment of any tax, fee,
assessment, fine, interest, late charge escrow, judgment or other debt
due and owing from such person or entity pursuant to any law, rule,
regulation, ordinance, resolution or code provision of the State, County
or the Township or pursuant to any contract or agreement to which the
Township is a party is returned to the Township as uncollectible due to
insufficient funds or other reasons, there shall be insufficient funds or
other reasons, there shall be added to the amounts due from such
person or entity to the Township a service charge as established by the
Township Committee per check or other negotiable instrument per
return.
B. Service charges, which become due pursuant to Subsection A above
shall be collected in the same manner as the original tax, fee,
assessment, fine, interest, late charge, escrow, judgment or other debt
may be collected. Such service charges attributable to payment of taxes
or special assessments shall be included on the list of delinquent
accounts prepared for the enforcement of the lien of such tax or special
assessment.
C. Payment of the original tax, fee, assessment, fine, interest, late charge,
escrow, judgment or other debt and all service charges due pursuant to
this article after any check or other negotiable instrument for the
original payment thereof is returned uncollected due to insufficient
funds or other reasons shall only be accepted by the Tax Collector or
other authorized officer if presented in the form of cash or a certified or
cashier's check.
A. All fees other than application fees and miscellaneous fees shall be
escrow fees to pay the services of any professional personnel employed
18-1105 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1107
AO:1246
18-1108. Return of Fees Paid Upon the Withdrawal of Application.
If an applicant for site plan approval, subdivision approval, or a zoning
permit or certificate of conformance withdraws such application or request
prior to action by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment or
issuance of the permit or certificate, the fees paid for such approval, permit
by the Planning Board, Zoning Board or Township Committee to
process, review, inspect, study or make recommendations to such
Planning, Zoning Board or Township Committee concerning the nature
and substance of the applicant's application and/or to pay the services
of any such professional personnel and the costs and expenses incurred
by such professional personnel and/or the Planning Board, Zoning
Board and/or Township Committee to create, amend or modify,
including but not limited to the costs and expenses to draft, finalize
and publish the official Tax Map and/or Zoning Map of the Township,
which creation, amendment and/or modification is necessitated by the
approval of the applicant's application.
B. If during the existence of this escrow account the balance of funds held
by the Township shall be insufficient to cover vouchers submitted by the
professionals, the applicant shall deposit additional sums with the
Township to cover the amount of the deficit and the anticipated amount
to cover all remaining work within 10 days after receipt of written
notice from the Township Finance Office in the amounts owed. In the
event that an application fails to deposit the additional escrow moneys
as required within the time set forth in this division, the Township,
through its agents and employees, shall take whatever action deemed
necessary in order to compel the payment of the escrow amount. In
addition, the professional personnel may take any action individually as
they deem necessary to satisfy the vouchers submitted.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any applicant who does not deposit
such additional escrow moneys within 30 days after receipt of written
notice from the Township Finance Office of the amounts owed shall be
charged a late fee equal to 10% times the amounts owed from the date
such sums were due pursuant to such notice until paid in full (including
all accrued late fees). No permit, approval or certificate shall be issued
to any applicant or property owner by any Board, Zoning Officer,
Township Committee, Township Clerk or any other agency of the
Township unless all amounts owed pursuant to this section by such
applicant or owner or with respect to the subject property are paid in
full.
C. All excess monies in the escrow account will be returned at the time of
final release of maintenance bonds for improvements to the applicant
with a statement of money expended against the account. If at any time
prior to final approval the applicant elects to withdraw his request for
approval and abandon the project, any moneys remaining in the escrow
account, after all proper charges have been paid, will be returned to the
applicant with a statement of money expended against the account.
18-1107 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1108
AO:1247
or certification pursuant to this section shall be refunded to the applicant,
except that the Township shall be permitted to retain such portion of
such fees as shall pay for actual out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the
Township in connection with such application (including but not limited to
engineering and legal review charges) and an administrative charge equal
to 15% of the fees paid by such applicant.
18-1109. Remedies and Penalties.
18-1110. Validity.
18-1111. Zone Change.
A. For each and every violation of any provision of this chapter, the owner
contractor, or other persons interested as general agent, architect,
building contractor, owner, tenant, or any other persons who commit
any violation of this chapter, or who maintain any building or premises
in which any violation of this chapter shall exist, and who shall have
refused to make a reasonable attempt abate said violation within 10
days after written notice shall have been served upon them either by
mail or by personal service, shall for each and every violation be
imprisoned in the Township or County Jail for a period not exceeding 30
days or be fined an amount not exceeding $1,000 or both, at the
discretion of the Court before whom a conviction may be had. For each
and every 30 day period that such violation continues after such notice
shall be considered a separate and specific violation of this chapter.
B. In addition to the remedy or remedies hereinbefore provided, any
person, persons, company or corporation violating this chapter or any
provision or section thereof, may be proceeded against by the Township
of Lakewood by appropriate action or by proceeding in equity or
otherwise to enjoin any violation of this chapter or to prevent and enjoin
any threatened violation of this chapter.
A. If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter.
B. This chapter shall take effect upon the filing thereof with the County
Planning Board after final passage, adoption and publication in the
manner prescribed by law.
A. Any interested part may submit to the Township Committee a request
for a zoning change of the parcel.
B. The applicant shall clearly indicate the requested zoning district in
which the parcel will be located.
C. The applicant shall submit the necessary application and escrow fees as
specified.
18-1108 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1111
AO:1248
18-1112. Land Development Checklist. [Ord. No. 2017-10]
CHECK LIST
Minor
Subdiv
Prelim
Maj Sub
Final
Maj
Sub
Major
Site
Plan
Minor
Site
Plan
A. PLAT
SPECIFICATIONS
1. Plat clearly and
legibly drawn or
produced at a scale
not smaller than one
inch equals 50 feet.
X X X X X
2. Sheet size either
8.5" x 11",
11" x 17", 18" x 24",
or 24" x 36" [Ord.
No. 2017-10]
X X X X X
3. Plans shall be
prepared by an
architect or engineer
if application involves
only the location of
proposed buildings
and their relationship
to the site and the
immediate environs.
X X
4. Plans shall be
prepared by an
architect, planner, or
engineer if
application involves
only the location of
drives, parking
layout, pedestrian
circulation, and
means of ingress and
egress.
X X
D. The applicant should indicate all uses located within two hundred feet
(200) of the parcel in which the zoning change is requested.
E. The Township Planner shall issue a report to the Township Committee
which analyzes the requested zone change.
18-1111 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1112
AO:1249
CHECK LIST
Minor
Subdiv
Prelim
Maj Sub
Final
Maj
Sub
Major
Site
Plan
Minor
Site
Plan
5. Plans shall be
prepared by an
engineer if
application involves
only drainage
facilities for site plan
of ten acres or more,
or involving storm
water detention
facilities, or traversed
by water course.
X
6. Plans shall be
prepared by a
licensed land
surveyor which shows
existing conditions
and exact location of
physical features
including metes and
bounds, drainage,
waterways, specific
utility locations and
easements. Survey
information may,
however, be
transposed to a site
plan if the date of the
survey and by whom
and for whom it was
prepared is noted on
the site plan, and a
signed sealed copy of
the survey prepared
by a licensed land
surveyor must
accompany the site
plan submission.
X X X X X
7. Property line
shown in degree,
minutes, and seconds.
X X X X X
18-1112 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1112
AO:1250
CHECK LIST
Minor
Subdiv
Prelim
Maj Sub
Final
Maj
Sub
Major
Site
Plan
Minor
Site
Plan
8. Key map or tax
map showing location
of tract to be
considered in relation
to surrounding area
X X X X X
9. Title block
containing name of
preparer, lot and
block numbers, tax
map sheet number,
date prepared, and
date of last
amendment.
X X X X X
10 Each block and lot
numbered in
conformity with the
municipal Tax map as
determined by the
municipal tax
assessor.
X X X X
11. Scale of map, both
written and graphic.
12. North arrow
giving reference
meridian.
X X X X X
13. Space for
signatures of
chairman, secretary,
and engineer of the
approving authority
and all required
certifications
pursuant to the NJ
Map Filing Law.
X X X X X
14. Names of all
property owners
within 200 feet of
subject property
attached thereto
X X X X X
18-1112 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1112
AO:1251
CHECK LIST
Minor
Subdiv
Prelim
Maj Sub
Final
Maj
Sub
Major
Site
Plan
Minor
Site
Plan
15. Location of
existing and proposed
property lines with
dimensions in feet to
the nearest two
decimal places.
X X X X X
16. Zoning district in
which parcel is
located and a zoning
schedule listing all
requirements of the
zone district and a
notation of any
variances.
X X X X X
17. General notes
identifying the name
and address of the
property and
applicant, acreage of
affected parcel to the
nearest hundredth of
an acre, and the
existing and proposed
use.
X X X X X
18. Number and size
of lots after
subdivision to be
designated.
X X X X X
19. Digital PDF copies
of all submissions
should be submitted
in the mode
requested by the
Board Secretary (such
as CD, email, etc.).
[Ord. No. 2017-10]
X X X X X
18-1112 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1112
AO:1252
CHECK LIST
Minor
Subdiv
Prelim
Maj Sub
Final
Maj
Sub
Major
Site
Plan
Minor
Site
Plan
20. Written approval
of the project by the
Department of Public
Works with respect to
trash pick up and
snow plowing. [Ord.
No. 2017-10]
X X
21. Traffic Study.
[Ord. No. 2017-10]
X X
22. Proof of
Submission to the
Ocean County
Planning Board.
[Ord. No. 2017-10]
X X X X X
B. SITE FEATURES
1. Topography of the
site.
X X X X
2. Topography within
200 feet thereof.
X X
3. Contours on the
site to determine the
natural drainage of
the land.
X X X X
4. Contours of the
area within 200 feet
of the site boundaries.
X X
5. Flood plains,
wetlands, wetland
buffers. If any portion
of the project
contains wetlands or
wetland buffers, proof
of submission of a
letter of
interpretation to the
NJDEP shall be
required.
X X X X X
18-1112 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1112
AO:1253
CHECK LIST
Minor
Subdiv
Prelim
Maj Sub
Final
Maj
Sub
Major
Site
Plan
Minor
Site
Plan
6. Natural and
artificial water
courses, streams,
shore lines, water
boundaries, and
encroachment lines.
X X X X X
7. Wooded areas. X X X X
8. Areas in which
construction is
precluded due to
presence of stream
corridors and/or steep
slopes.
X X X X X
9. Man-made features
on-site.
X X X X X
10. Man-made
features within 200
feet thereof.
X X
C. IMPROVEMENTS
1. Location of existing
and proposed
structures and their
set backs from
existing and proposed
property lines.
X X X X X
2. Location of all
existing and proposed
easements or rights of
way, including power
lines.
X X X X X
3. Location of existing
railroads, bridges,
culverts, drain pipes,
water and sewer
mains, and other
man-made
installations affecting
the tract.
X X X X X
18-1112 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1112
AO:1254
CHECK LIST
Minor
Subdiv
Prelim
Maj Sub
Final
Maj
Sub
Major
Site
Plan
Minor
Site
Plan
4. Location of existing
and proposed wells
and septic systems.
X X X X X
5. When applicant
intends to use
conventional septic
disposal system,
location of test holes,
test results and
approximate location
of the intended
disposal field.
X X
6. Plans and profiles
of proposed utility
layouts such as
sewers, storm drains,
and water, showing
feasible connection to
existing proposed
utility systems.
X X X
7. Location and
description of
monuments and other
survey markers
whether set or to be
set.
X X
8. Location, names,
and widths of all
existing and proposed
streets on the
property and within
200 feet of tract.
X X X X X
9. Required road
dedication or road
widening easements.
X X X X
10. Shade trees. X X X X
11. Proposed or
existing easements
(i.e., utility, sight
triangle, access).
X X X X X
18-1112 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1112
AO:1255
CHECK LIST
Minor
Subdiv
Prelim
Maj Sub
Final
Maj
Sub
Major
Site
Plan
Minor
Site
Plan
12. Proposed
drainage easements
where required.
X X X X X
13. Environmental
Impact Statement.
X X
14. Tree Protection
Management Plan.
X X
15. Landscaping plan
including the types,
quantity, size and
location of all
proposed vegetation.
The scientific and
common names of all
vegetation shall be
included.
X
16. Soil erosion and
sediment control plan
consistent with
requirements of the
local soil conservation
district.
X X
17. Design calculation
showing proposed
drainage facilities to
be in accordance with
the appropriate
drainage runoff
requirements.
X X
18. The purpose of
any proposed
easement of land
reserved or dedicated
to the public or
common use shall be
designated and the
proposed use of sites
other than residential
shall be noted.
X X X X
18-1112 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1112
AO:1256
CHECK LIST
Minor
Subdiv
Prelim
Maj Sub
Final
Maj
Sub
Major
Site
Plan
Minor
Site
Plan
19. Identification by
type and nearest
street intersection of
existing public
utilities.
X
20. Shade tree
easement, if
necessary.
X X X X
21. Architectural
drawings of the
proposed structuresgeneralized
elevations
(all four sides of nonresidential)
and floor
plans. [Ord. No.
2017-10]
X X X X
PLANS PREPARED BY:
Print Company & Preparer's Name
Preparer's Signature Date
WAIVER REQUESTS:
(Submit Reasons)
18-1112 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1112
AO:1257

ARTICLE XII
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROVISIONS
18-1200. through §18-1208. (Reserved)
18-1209. Development Fees to Fund Affordable Housing. [Ord. No.
2018-9]
A. Purpose
1. In Holmdel Builder's Association v. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550
(1990), the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory
development fees are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985
(the Act), N.J.S.A. 52:27D-301 et seq., and the State Constitution,
subject to the Council on Affordable Housing's (COAH's) adoption
of rules.
2. Pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, § 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2), and the
Statewide Nonresidential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-8.1 through 40:55D-8.7), COAH is authorized to adopt and
promulgate regulations necessary for the establishment,
implementation, review, monitoring and enforcement of municipal
affordable housing trust funds and corresponding spending plans.
Municipalities that are under the jurisdiction of the Council or
court of competent jurisdiction and have a COAH-approved or
court-approved spending plan may retain fees collected from
nonresidential development.
3. This section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance
and expenditure of development fees pursuant to COAH's
regulations and in accordance P.L. 2008, c. 46, §§ 8 and 32 through
38. Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be used for the sole
purpose of providing low- and moderate-income housing. This
section shall be interpreted within the framework of COAH's rules
on development fees, codified at N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.
B. Basic requirements.
1. This section shall not be effective until approved by the Superior
Court of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.
2. The Township of Lakewood shall not spend development fees until
the Superior Court of New Jersey has approved a plan for spending
such fees in conformance with N.J.A.C. 5:93-5.1(c).
3. Because the Township of Lakewood is an urban aid municipality
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-178 et seq., its adoption of a Municipal
Development Fee Ordinance is governed by N.J.A.C. 5:94-6.3,
which provides that its Municipal Development Fee Ordinance can
be approved without first petitioning for substantive certification.
Additionally, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:94-6.2(b), because the Township
is an urban aid municipality, the approval of its Municipal
18-1200 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1209
AO:1259
Development Fee Ordinance does not require that the Township
first petition with an adopted housing element and fair share plan.
C. Definitions. The following terms, as used in this section, shall have the
following meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — A development included
in the Housing Element and Fair Share Plan and includes, but is not
limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal construction
project or a one-hundred-percent affordable development.
COAH OR THE COUNCIL — The New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing, established under the Act, or such other Agency as is created
by the Legislature which has primary jurisdiction for the administration
of housing obligations in accordance with sound regional planning
consideration in the state.
DEVELOPER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of
any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having
an enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.
DEVELOPMENT FEE PERIOD — The period of time for which the Court
or COAH specifies that the Township's Development Fee Ordinance will
be in effect pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:94-6.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — The assessed value of a property
divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value for
the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with §§ 1, 5 and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a
through N.J.S.A. 54:1-35c).
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES — Those strategies that minimize the
impact of development on the environment and enhance the health,
safety and well-being of residents by producing durable, lowmaintenance,
resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of
existing infrastructure and community services.
D. (Reserved)
E. Nonresidential development fees.
1. Imposed fees.
a. Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except
for developers of the types of development specifically
exempted, shall pay a fee equal to two and one-half (2.5%)
percent of the equalized assessed value of the land and
improvements for all new nonresidential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
18-1209 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1209
AO:1260
b. Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types
of development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee
equal to two and one-half (2.5%) percent of the increase in
equalized assessed value resulting from any additions to
existing structures to be used for nonresidential purposes.
c. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an
existing structure is demolished and replaced. The
development fee of two and one-half (2.5%) percent shall be
calculated on the difference between the equalized assessed
value of the preexisting land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e.,
land and improvement, at the time a final certificate of
occupancy is issued. If the calculation required under this
section results in a negative number, the nonresidential
development fee shall be zero.
2. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for
nonresidential development:
a. The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or
market rate development shall be subject to the development
fee of two and one-half (2.5%) percent, unless otherwise
exempted below.
b. The fee of two and one-half (2.5%) percent shall not apply to an
increase in equalized assessed value resulting from alterations,
change in use within existing footprint, reconstruction,
renovations and repairs.
c. Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the
payment of nonresidential development fees in accordance
with the exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as
specified in the Form N-RDF, State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption form.
Any exemption claimed by a developer shall be substantiated
by that developer.
d. A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from
the nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c.
46, or P.L. 2016, c. 14 shall be subject to it at such time the
basis for the exemption no longer applies and shall make the
payment of the nonresidential development fee, in that event,
within three years after that event or after the issuance of the
final certificate of occupancy of the nonresidential
development, whichever is later.
e. If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit
the fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid
18-1209 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1209
AO:1261
nonresidential development fees under these circumstances
may be enforceable by the Township of Lakewood as a lien
against the real property of the owner.
F. Collection procedures.
1. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable
approval for a development, the applicable approving authority
shall direct its staff to notify the Zoning Officer.
2. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF, State of New Jersey
Nonresidential Development Certification/Exemption, to be
completed as per the instructions provided. The developer of a
nonresidential development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the
instructions provided. The Construction Official shall verify the
information submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the
instructions provided in Form N-RDF. The Tax Assessor shall verify
exemptions and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the
instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
3. The Construction Official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local tax assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a
development fee.
4. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the Municipal Tax Assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
5. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which
is subject to a development fee.
6. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the Municipal Assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements
of the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter
notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
7. Should the Township of Lakewood fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business
days of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate
the amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the
dispute process set forth in Subsection b of § 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.6).
8. 50% of the development fee shall be collected by the Zoning Officer
at the time of issuance of the zoning permit. The remaining portion
shall be collected at the issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
The developer shall be responsible for paying the difference
18-1209 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1209
AO:1262
between the fee calculated at the time of the issuance of the
zoning permit and that determined at issuance of the certificate of
occupancy.
9. Appeal of development fees.
a. (Reserved)
b. A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the Director of the Division
of Taxation. Pending a review and determination by the
Director, which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the
challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interest-bearing
escrow account by the Township of Lakewood. Appeals from a
determination of the Director may be made to the Tax Court in
accordance with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform
Procedure Law, N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
G. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
1. Establishment of fund. There is hereby established in the Township
of Lakewood an interest-bearing account known as the "Lakewood
Township Affordable Housing Trust Fund," which shall have as its
primary purpose support of low- and moderate-income housing in
the Township of Lakewood and the region in which it is included, in
furtherance of the mandates of the Constitution of the State of New
Jersey. Trustees of the fund shall be the Township Committee of the
Township of Lakewood, and, in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.19, the Superior Court of the State of New Jersey
may, upon notice to the Township Clerk, direct the disbursement of
development fees.
2. The Township Committee, acting as trustees of the fund, shall have
the power to appoint a person or organization as Housing Officer to
administer the fund on its behalf and at its direction.
3. Development fees collected from nonresidential developers and
proceeds from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be
deposited in the Township of Lakewood's affordable housing trust
fund maintained by the Chief Financial Officer.
4. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source
and amount:
a. Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
b. Developer-contributed funds to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached
development accessible;
18-1209 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1209
AO:1263
c. Rental income from municipally operated units;
d. Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
e. Recapture funds;
f. Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
g. Any other funds collected in connection with the Township of
Lakewood's affordable housing program.
5. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on
eligible affordable housing activities approved by COAH or the
Court.
6. The Township of Lakewood shall provide COAH and/or the DCA
with written authorization, in the form of a three-party escrow
agreement between the Township, the bank, and COAH and/or DCA
to permit COAH and/or DCA to direct the disbursement of the funds
as provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.19.
H. Use of Funds.
1. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan
approved by COAH or the Court. Funds deposited in the housing
trust fund may be used for any activity approved by COAH or the
Court to address the Township of Lakewood's fair share obligation
or the need for Affordable Housing in Lakewood and may be set up
as a grant or revolving loan program. Such activities include, but
are not limited to, preservation or purchase of housing for the
purpose of maintaining or implementing affordability controls,
rehabilitation, new construction of affordable housing units and
related costs, accessory apartment, market to affordable or
regional housing partnership programs, conversion of existing
nonresidential buildings to create new affordable units, green
building strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance
with accepted national or state standards, purchase of land for
affordable housing, improvement of land to be used for affordable
housing, extensions or improvements of roads and infrastructure to
affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase
affordability, administration necessary for implementation of the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan or any other activity as
permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.16 and specified in the
approved spending plan.
2. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse the Township of
Lakewood for past housing activities.
3. At least 30% of all development fees collected and interest earned
shall be used to provide affordability assistance to low- and
moderate-income households in affordable units included in the
municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the affordability assistance
18-1209 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1209
AO:1264
portion of development fees collected shall be used to provide
affordability assistance to those households earning 30% or less of
median income by region.
a. Affordability assistance programs may include down payment
assistance, security deposit assistance, low-interest loans,
rental assistance, assistance with homeowners' association or
condominium fees and special assessments and assistance with
emergency repairs.
b. Affordability assistance to households earning 30% or less of
median income may include buying down the cost of low- or
moderate-income units in the municipal Fair Share Plan to
make them affordable to households earning 30% or less of
median income.
c. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and
funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls shall be
exempt from the affordability assistance requirement.
4. The Township of Lakewood may contract with a private or public
entity to administer any part of its Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan, including the requirement for affordability assistance, in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:93–8.16(d).
5. No more than 20% of all revenues collected from development fees
may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to,
salaries and benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees
necessary to develop or implement a new construction program,
and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the case of a
rehabilitation program, no more than 20% of the revenues
collected from development fees shall be expended for such
administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be used for
income qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale
and rental units and compliance with COAH's or the Court's
monitoring requirements. Legal or other fees related to litigation
opposing affordable housing sites or objecting to the Council's
regulations and/or action are not eligible uses of the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund.
I. Monitoring. The Township of Lakewood shall complete and return to
COAH and/or the Court all monitoring forms included in monitoring
requirements related to the collection of development fees from
nonresidential developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable
units on site, funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls,
barrier-free escrow funds, rental income, repayments from affordable
housing program loans and any other funds collected in connection with
the Township of Lakewood's housing program, as well as to the
expenditure of revenues and implementation of the plan certified by
COAH or approved by the Court. All monitoring reports shall be
completed on forms designed by COAH and/or the Court.
18-1209 ADOPTING ORDINANCE 18-1209
AO:1265
18-1210. (Reserved)
J. Ongoing collection of fees. The ability for the Township of Lakewood to
impose, collect and expend development fees shall expire at the end of
the Development Fee Period. If the Township of Lakewood fails to
renew its ability to impose and collect development fees prior to the
expiration of the Development Fee Period, it may be subject to
forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its municipal trust fund.
Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the New Jersey Affordable
Housing Trust Fund established pursuant to § 20 of P.L. 1985, c. 222
(N.J.S.A. 52:27D-320). Unless extended, the Township of Lakewood
shall not expend development fees after the expiration of the
Development Fee Period.
18-1209 LAKEWOOD CODE 18-1210
AO:1266
Chapter UDDL
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT DISPOSITION LIST
§ UDDL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION.
Adopted by
Ordinance No. 2005-59 July 14, 2005
Amended by
Ordinance No. 2005-77 August 11, 2005
Ordinance No. 2005-94 September 22, 2005
Ordinance No. 2005-95 October 27, 2005
Ordinance No. 2005-96 October 27, 2005
Ordinance No. 2005-111 December 1, 2005
Ordinance No. 2006-3 February 9, 2006
Ordinance No. 2006-16 March 9, 2006
Ordinance No. 2006-22 March 23, 2006
Ordinance No. 2006-29 May 4, 2006
Ordinance No. 2006-30 April 6, 2006
Ordinance No. 2006-31 April 6, 2006
Ordinance No. 2006-38 June 8, 2006
Ordinance No. 2006-39 June 8, 2006
Ordinance No. 2007-1 February 1, 2007
Ordinance No. 2007-07 February 15, 2007
Ordinance No. 2008-12 February 28, 2008
Ordinance No. 2008-39 August 28, 2008
Ordinance No. 2009-17 April 23, 2009
Ordinance No. 2009-19 April 23, 2009
Ordinance No. 2009-28 June 4, 2009
Ordinance No. 2009-38 August 20, 2009
Ordinance No. 2009-40 August 20, 2009
Ordinance No. 2009-51 September 24, 2009
Ordinance No. 2009-53 September 24, 2009
Ordinance No. 2010-11 February 18, 2010
Ordinance No. 2010-19 April 8, 2010
Ordinance No. 2010-20 March 25, 2010
18-1210 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § UDDL-1
AO:1267
Amended by
Ordinance No. 2010-22 May 13, 2010
Ordinance No. 2010-28 May 27, 2010
Ordinance No. 2010-29 May 27, 2010
Ordinance No. 2010-32 May 27, 2010
Ordinance No. 2010-54 August 19, 2010
Ordinance No. 2010-56 August 19, 2010
Ordinance No. 2010-61 August 19, 2010
Ordinance No. 2010-62 August 19, 2010
Ordinance No. 2010-65 September 2, 2010
Ordinance No. 2010-78 October 21, 2010
Ordinance No. 2011-3 February 3, 2011
Ordinance No. 2011-11 March 24, 2011
Ordinance No. 2011-17 April 7, 2011
Ordinance No. 2011-27 May 26, 2011
Ordinance No. 2011-40 July 28, 2011
Ordinance No. 2012-4 February 2, 2012
Ordinance No. 2012-15 March 1, 2012
Ordinance No. 2012-16 March 1, 2012
Ordinance No. 2012-26 April 19, 2012
Ordinance No. 2012-52 August 16, 2012
Ordinance No. 2013-7 February 20, 2013
Ordinance No. 2013-16 March 21, 2013
Ordinance No. 2013-17 March 21, 2013
Ordinance No. 2013-18 March 21, 2013
Ordinance No. 2013-29 April 18, 2013
Ordinance No. 2013-30 May 23, 2013
Ordinance No. 2013-31 April 18, 2013
Ordinance No. 2013-40 June 6, 2013
Ordinance No. 2013-46 July 11, 2013
Ordinance No. 2013-49 July 25, 2013
Ordinance No. 2013-50 July 25, 2013
Ordinance No. 2013-51 July 25, 2013
Ordinance No. 2013-58 September 12, 2013
Ordinance No. 2013-59 October 3, 2013
§ UDDL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § UDDL-1
AO:1268
Amended by
Ordinance No. 2013-60 September 12, 2013
Ordinance No. 2013-62 September 12, 2013
Ordinance No. 2013-70 November 7, 2013
Ordinance No. 2013-74 November 21, 2013
Ordinance No. 2013-76 November 21, 2013
Ordinance No. 2013-79 December 5, 2013
Repealed by Court Order on June 2, 2017
Ordinance No. 2014-8 March 20, 2014
Ordinance No. 2014-10 March 20, 2014
Ordinance No. 2014-11 March 20, 2014
Ordinance No. 2014-12 March 20, 2014
Ordinance No. 2014-13 May 8, 2014
Ordinance No. 2014-19 May 8, 2014
Ordinance No. 2014-20 May 8, 2014
Ordinance No. 2014-31 June 12, 2014
Ordinance No. 2014-32 May 22, 2014
Ordinance No. 2014-37 May 22, 2014
Ordinance No. 2014-47 June 26, 2014
Ordinance No. 2014-51 July 24, 2014
Ordinance No. 2014-52 July 24, 2014
Ordinance No. 2014-53 July 24, 2014
Ordinance No. 2014-56 August 7, 2014
Ordinance No. 2014-61 August 21, 2014
Ordinance No. 2014-85 November 6, 2014
Ordinance No. 2015-30 May 21, 2015
Ordinance No. 2015-33 June 11, 2015
Ordinance No. 2015-35 July 9, 2015
Repealed by Court Order on April 24, 2017
§ UDDL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § UDDL-1
AO:1269
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2015-42 7-23-15 Amends Ch. 18, Unified
Development Ordinance;18-200,
Definitions-basketball courts;
garage private, shed
15
2015-43 7-23-15 Amends Ch. 18, Unified
Development Ordinance;18-12E,
Temporary advertising signs at
local events
15
2015-61 11-12-15 Amends Ch. 18, Unified
Development Ordinance, creates
18-506, Oak Street Corridor
Improvement District
15
2016-11 2-18-16 Amends Ch. 18, Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-200,
Definitions (digital billboard);
18-812A12b, Prohibited signs;
18-903, Conditional Uses; 18-1019,
Digital Billboards
16
2016-34 8-18-16 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-902L
Single-Family Residential (R-10A)
17
2016-40 8-18-16 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; adds
18-912 Oak Street Core
Residential Development
17
2016-43 9-15-16 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-506
Oak Street Corridor Improvement
District in entirety
17
2015-35 Repealed by
Court Order
4/24/17
Removed from Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance;
18-901A43. Single-Family
Residential (R-40B) now Reserved;
18-901B1a(14) Zoning Map
amendment now Reserved;
18-902U Single-Family Residential
(R-40B) now Reserved.
18
§ UDDL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § UDDL-1
AO:1270
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2013-79 Repealed by
Court Order
6-2-17
Removed from Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; All
sections and subsections Reserved
pertain to Commercial Uses on
Properties with Frontage on CR
526: 18-902C2f Conditional Uses
in the Singe-Family Residential
(R-20) now Reserved; 18-902D2f
Conditional Uses in the Single-
Family Residential (R-15) now
Reserved; 18-902E2b Conditional
Uses in the Single-Family
Residential
(R-12/R-12A) now Reserved;
18-902F2b. Conditional Uses in
the Single-Family Residential
(R-10) now Reserved; 18-902G2b.
Conditional Uses in the Single-
Family Residential (R-7.5) now
Reserved; 18-1020 Commercial
Uses on Properties with Frontage
on Ocean County Route No. 526
now Reserved
19
2016-30 8-4-16 Amends Ch. 18 Unified Land
Development Ordinance;
18-601.02C Site Plan Exceptions
19
2017-10 3-2-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance;
18-1112A, C Land Development
Checklist
19
2017-11 3-2-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; Article
IX, 18-903E Highways
Development Zone
(B-5) Permitted Uses
19
2017-13 5-4-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; Article
IX, 18-903D Wholesale Service
Zone (B-4) Permitted Uses
19
§ UDDL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § UDDL-1
AO:1271
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2017-17 6-8-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; Article V,
18-505D Transportation
Improvement District Impact Fees;
Exhibit B, Summary of Cost
Estimates for Lakewood TID 1 and
2
19
2017-24 12-7-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-901
Establishment of Zoning Districts
and Zoning Map to add Riparian
Buffer Conservation Overlay; adds
18-902V Riparian Buffer
Conservation Overlay Zone
20
2017-27 11-8-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-200
Definition of Terms; amends
18-807A Off-Street Parking,
Loading and Circulation
20
2017-28 8-31-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-807B
Off- Street Parking, Loading and
Circulation; amends 18-903M
Industrial Zone (M-1), Residential
Zoning Districts
20
2017-30 10-18-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance, 18-812
Signs
20
2017-42 12-7-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-815B
Stormwater Management/
Residential Site Improvement
Standards
20
§ UDDL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § UDDL-1
AO:1272
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2017-51 12-7-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-807B
Off-Street Parking, Loading and
Circulation; 18-901 Establishment
of Zoning Districts and adopts
Zoning Map dated December 7,
2017 and Amended Zoning Map
dated December 7, 2017; 18-902B
Residential (R-40); 18-902H Multi-
Family Residential (R-M); 18-902L
Single Family Residential (R-10A);
18-902M Oak Street Core
Neighborhood Overlay Zone-1;
18-902N Oak Street Core
Neighborhood Zone-2; repeals in
18-902 Residential Zoning
Districts: O (R-12B), P (R-12C), Q
(R-10B), R (R-12D), S (R-20A);
amends 18-903F Highway
Development Zone (B-5A); 18-903J
renames Crystal Lake Preserve
(CLP) to Open Space Preservation
(OSP); 18-903M Industrial Zone
(M-1); repeals 18-903N Industrial
Zone (M-2), repeals 18-903O
Industrial Park Professional
Service Zone (PS); amends
18-903P Industrial Park Limited
Professional Service Zone (LP);
repeals 18-903Q Open Space (OS);
repeals and replaces 18-903T
Airport Business Commercial
Zone; adds 18-903U Public
Purpose Overlay Zone (PP);
amends 18-906E and 18-906H
Public and Private Schools; adds
18-1021 Planned Unit
Development; adds 18-1022
Mixed-Use Development—Cross
Street Core; adds 18-1023 Mixed-
Use Development—Oak Street
Core
20
§ UDDL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § UDDL-1
AO:1273
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2017-52 12-7-17 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; amends
18-200 Definitions; creates
18-904.1 Planned Development
Noncontiguous Cluster (PDNC)
Overlay Zone and Attachment 1
PDNC Overlay Zone Map,
Attachment 2 PDNC Overlay Zone
Map (Sch. A and B), Attachment 3
List of Properties (Sch. B);
Attachment 4 List of Properties
(Sch. A)
20
2018-9 3-8-18 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; adds
Article XII Affordable Housing
Provisions, adds 18-1200—18-1208
Reserved, 18-1209 Development
Fees to Fund Affordable Housing,
18-1210 Reserved
21
2018-27 5-31-18 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-815
Stormwater Management/
Residential Site Improvement
Standards, 18-815.1.1, 18-815.1.9
21
2018-35 7-12-18 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-900
Zoning Districts and Regulations,
General
21
2018-54 10-11-18 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; 18-903E,
Highway Development Zone (B-5)
21
2018-65 12-13-18 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance; Design
Standards, 18-803F Paving
Materials, Walls and Fences;
18-815 Stormwater Management/
Residential Site Improvement
Standards, Maintenance and
Repair, 18-815.1.9
21
2019-31 8-15-2019 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance, §18-901,
Establishment of Zoning Districts
and Zoning Map
22
§ UDDL-1 LAKEWOOD CODE § UDDL-1
AO:1274
Ord. No. Adoption Short Title/Disposition Supp. No.
2019-50 11-14-2019 Amends Ch. 18 Unified
Development Ordinance, § 18-200,
Definitions of Terms
22
§ UDDL-1 ADOPTING ORDINANCE § UDDL-1
AO:1275