Municipal Code
Chapter 1
GENERAL
§ 1-1. SHORT TITLE. [New]
The book shall be known and may be cited as "The Revised General
Ordinances of the Township of Lyndhurst, 1979," and is herein referred to
as the "revision."
§ 1-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #1424; New]
For the purpose of this revision, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require:
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS — Shall mean the governing body of the
township constituted and elected pursuant to law.
CLERK or TOWNSHIP CLERK — Shall mean the municipal clerk duly
appointed pursuant to law.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean an organizational unit of the government
established or designated by ordinance or this revision as a department,
together with any agency or instrumentality of the government assigned to
such organizational unit by the township committee.
LICENSED — Shall mean licensed in accordance with the appropriate
section or chapter of this revision.
MONTH — Shall mean a calendar month unless otherwise specifically
provided.
ORDINANCE — Shall mean any act of local legislation heretofore or
hereafter adopted, and including this revision, so long as it is adopted by
the procedure required for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it
remains in force and effect pursuant to law.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, natural persons, partnerships, joint
ventures, societies, associations, clubs, trustees, trusts, corporations or
unincorporated groups; or any officers, agents, employees, servants, factors
or any kind of personal representatives of any thereof in any capacity,
acting either for himself or for any other person, under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
STREET — Shall include a street, avenue, road, alley, lane, highway,
boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk, and crosswalk, and every
class of road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general
public.
1:1
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Lyndhurst in the County of
Bergen and State of New Jersey.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
Technical words and phrases, and words and phrases having a special or
accepted meaning in the law, shall be construed in accordance with such
technical or special and accepted meaning.
§ 1-3. CONSTRUCTION. [New]
For the purpose of this revision and any other ordinances heretofore or
hereafter adopted, except as the context may otherwise require:
The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future, the
present.
The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive.
The time within which an act is to be done shall be computed by excluding
the first and including the last day and if the last day be a Sunday, a legal
holiday, or a day on which the offices of the township are closed, that day
shall be excluded.
"Writing" and "written" shall include printing, typewriting and any other
mode of communication using paper or similar material which is in general
use, as well as legible handwriting.
Whenever a specific time is used in this revision, it shall mean the prevailing
and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey during any day in
any year.
Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this revision shall be
deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended, whether or
not such designation is included in the citation.
"Chapter" shall mean one of the major divisions of the revisions identified
by an arabic number and divided by subject matter.
"Section" shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
"Subsection" shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a decimal
number.
"Paragraph" shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by an
alphabetical letter or Arabic number.
§ 1-4. SEVERABILITY. [Ord. #1424]
If any chapter, section, subsection or paragraph of this revision shall be
declared to be unconstitutional, invalid, or inoperative, in whole or in part,
§ 1-2 LYNDHURST CODE § 1-4
1:2
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such chapter, section, subsection or
paragraph shall, to the extent that it is not unconstitutional, invalid or
inoperative, remain in full force and effect, and no such determination shall
be deemed to invalidate the remaining chapters, sections, subsections or
paragraphs of this revision.
§ 1-5. TOWN SEAL. [Ord. #1424]
The seal heretofore provided and used by and for the town is hereby
established and continued as the seal of the town.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION
[The form of government under which the Township operates is the
Commission Form of Government Law, comprising Chapters 70 to 76
of Title 40 of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated. The administrative
code has been drafted in conformity with this law and many of its
provisions are based on clauses found in Chapters 72 and 73 of Title
40. Other enabling laws pertaining to the Administrative Chapter in
N.J.S.A. 40:47-1 et seq., Police and Fire Departments; N.J.S.A. 2A:8-1
et seq. and N.J.S.A. 40:49-5, Municipal Court.]
[See Chapter 4, § 4-14, for fees for services.]
[See Chapter 25, § 25-1, for the establishment of the Hazardous
Chemical Control Board.]
§ 2-1. OFFICIAL TITLE. [New]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative Code
of the Township of Lyndhurst" and is sometimes referred to in this chapter
as the "code."
§ 2-2. BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.
§ 2-2.1. Organization. [New]
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Lyndhurst shall consist
of five Commissioners who shall be elected at large by the voters of the
Township at a regular municipal election and who shall serve for a term of
four years beginning on the first Tuesday following their election.
§ 2-2.2. Powers of Board of Commissioners. [New]
All of the executive, administrative, judicial and legislative powers of the
town shall be vested in the Board of Commissioners, including the powers
of a local board of health.
§ 2-2.3. Meetings and Procedures. [New; Ord. #2697, § 1]
§ 1-4 GENERAL § 2-2.3
1:3
§ 2-2.4. Rules of Decorum for Conduct of Public Meetings. [Ord.
#2448 § I]
a. Regular meetings. The Board of Commissioners shall organize on the
first Tuesday following the regular quadrennial municipal election. At
that meeting, or as soon thereafter as practical, the Board of
Commissioners shall create all subordinate boards and appoint any
officers that it deems necessary for the proper and official conduct of
the affairs of the Township. After the organization meeting, the Board of
Commissioners shall meet regularly at least once a month on dates to
be determined by resolution of the board. When the time for any
regular meeting of the board falls on a legal holiday as prescribed by
law, the meeting shall be held on another day which is not a legal
holiday, to be scheduled as near as practical to the regular meeting day.
b. Special meetings. Special meetings of the Board of Commissioners may
be held on call of the Mayor or any two Commissioners and as required
by state statutes.
a. General provisions. Members of the Board of Commissioners shall
observe order and decorum during Board of Commissioners meetings.
A member of the Board of Commissioners shall neither, by conversation
or otherwise, delay or interrupt the progress of the Board of
Commissioners nor disturb any member while speaking nor refuse to
obey the orders of the Mayor. Members of the Board of Commissioners
not attending the Commissioners meeting should notify the Township
Clerk prior to the meeting. In the event that a Commissioner is absent
from the meeting, the report of that Commissioner shall be presented to
the public by another Commissioner as follows:
Absent Commissioner Covering Commissioner
Public Works Parks Department
Revenue and Finance Public Affairs
Public Affairs Public Safety
Public Safety Revenue and Finance
Parks Public Works
b. Township staff. Members of the Township staff shall observe the same
rules of order and decorum applicable to the Board of Commissioners in
paragraph a above.
c. Defamatory and threatening language prohibited. Any person(s)
making personal, defamatory or profane remarks or who willfully utters
loud, threatening or abusive language or engages in any disorderly
conduct which disturbs or disrupts the orderly progress of any meeting
shall be called to order by the Mayor. If such conduct continues, the
Mayor at his discretion, may order such person removed from that
meeting by the sergeant at arms.
§ 2-2.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-2.4
1:4
d. Length of presentation. Persons addressing the Board of
Commissioners shall be allowed five minutes for their presentations.
e. Repeated disturbance; removal from meeting. All persons shall, at the
request of the Mayor, be silent. If, after receiving a warning from the
Mayor, a person persists in the disruption of the meeting, the Mayor
may order that person to leave the meeting. If he or she does not
remove himself or herself, the Mayor may order the sergeant at arms to
remove him or her.
f. Sergeant at Arms. A member of the Department of Police as the Mayor
may designate, shall be sergeant at arms at the Board of
Commissioners meetings. The sergeant at arms shall carry out all
orders given by the Mayor for the purpose of maintaining order and
decorum at the Board of Commissioners meeting. On instruction of the
Mayor, the sergeant at arms shall remove from the meeting any person
who disturbs the proceedings of the meeting.
g. Resisting removal. Any person who resists removal by the sergeant at
arms shall be charged with violating N.J.S.A. 2C:33-8, Disrupting
meetings and processions.
h. Video recording of Township Board of Commissioners meetings by the
Township and members of the general public. [Added 9-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 2970-17]
1. Definitions. As used in this chapter, terms shall have the meanings
as indicated and defined within the Open Public Meetings Act,
N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.
2. Video recording of Township Board of Commissioners by Township.
To further the transparency of the governance of the Township, the
Board of Commissioners shall cause a professional videographer to
be retained by the Township for the purpose of recording the public
meetings of the Board of Commissioners of the Township. The
Township shall then cause the recordings of the public meetings of
the Board of Commissioners of the Township to be available for
viewing by the public on the Township's official website.
3. Video recording of Township Board of Commissioners meetings by
members of the general public.
(a) Members of the general public have the right to video record
portions or all of an open public meeting of the governing body,
excluding closed or executive session discussions. To minimize
the possibility of disrupting the public meeting of the
governing body, any member of the public (a "citizen") who
wishes to video record portions or all of the public meeting
must do so in accordance with the following guidelines:
§ 2-2.4 GENERAL § 2-2.4
1:5
(1) The citizen must provide the Clerk of the municipality with
no less than one hour's notice prior to the public meeting
of his request to exercise his right to video record.
(2) The citizen must have completed setup of his video
recorder and any related equipment by no less than 10
minutes prior to the official start time of the public
meeting. As to the location of the video recorder and
equipment, the same may only be set up by the citizen in
the rear of the meeting room, as such location will be
specifically identified to the citizen by the Clerk. Any
citizen may record the meeting from any location in the
meeting room utilizing a hand-held cellular phone,
"smartphone" or other similar device so long as same does
not produce any beeping sounds or other noises and does
not block or obstruct the view of other members of the
public of the governing body proceedings.
(3) The video recorder and any associated equipment utilized
by the citizen must be compact, quiet, and generally
unobtrusive. No added lighting may be used by any citizen.
The video recorder and all associated equipment may not
take up more than 20 square feet of space. No citizen is
permitted to use any video recorder or associated
equipment that makes any beeping sounds or other noises.
Should beeping sounds or any other noise emanate from
the video recorder or associated equipment at any time
during the public meeting, the citizen shall be required to
cease video recording immediately.
(4) If the video recorder or associated equipment requires
connection to electricity, the connection to electricity may
be made only by a standard plug which can easily and
properly connect to the nearest electricity socket. If at any
time the video recorder or associated equipment "blows a
fuse" or causes a loss of power in the meeting room, the
citizen must immediately cease video recording and shall
not be allowed to continue video recording with any
recorder or equipment that requires connection to
electricity.
(5) The citizen may not disrupt the public meeting with his
recording equipment. The citizen may not set up or use the
video recorder or equipment in such a way as to block or
obstruct the view of other members of the public of the
governing body proceedings. The video recording by the
citizen may only be done in a manner that does not violate
the disorderly conduct ordinance and must be generally
orderly and unobtrusive. The citizen may not continually
exit and re-enter the meeting room, or continuously move
around within the meeting room, during the public
§ 2-2.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-2.4
1:6
§ 2-3. MAYOR.
§ 2-3.1. Selection of Mayor. [New]
At the first meeting after their election, the Commissioners shall choose one
of their number to preside at all meetings of the board, and he shall be
designated Mayor.
§ 2-3.2. Powers of the Mayor. [New]
The Mayor shall be president of the Board of Commissioners and shall
preside at all meetings. He shall supervise all departments and report to the
board, for its action, all matters requiring the attention of the board or of
any department.
§ 2-4. ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION.
meeting. The citizen must remain with the video recorder
and equipment at all times, except for any period of time
during which the citizen is making a comment in his turn
during any public comment portion of the public meeting.
The citizen video recording the public meeting shall not
move about the meeting room while the public meeting is
being held. The citizen may not "narrate" the proceeding
or speak into any video recorder or microphone. The
citizen may not engage in any verbal conversation,
discourse or comment whatsoever, unless the citizen is
making a formal comment in his turn during any public
comment portion of the public meeting.
(6) If the citizen chooses to cease video recording at any time
during the public meeting, he may do so, provided that the
citizen may not commence removal or begin to
disassemble any video recorder or associated equipment
until the public meeting has concluded.
(7) Meetings or portions of meetings which are permitted by
law to be closed to the public shall not be video recorded
or audio recorded.
(8) No recordings, whether audio or video, may be used in any
court proceeding, nor may same be used to contest the
accuracy of the official record of the Township Board of
Commissioners. The recording(s) may not be represented
as an official transcript in any manner and/or for any
purpose.
(b) These guidelines are intended to ensure that the right of the
public to video record official public meetings of the governing
body does not interfere with the business of the governing
body or other citizens' right of access to the proceedings.
§ 2-2.4 GENERAL § 2-4.1
1:7
§ 2-4.1. Departments Generally. [New]
The administrative functions, powers and duties of the Board of
Commissioners shall be allocated among the following departments:
§ 2-4.2. Commissioners Assigned to Departments. [New; Ord. No.
2709, § 1]
At the first regular meeting after the election of its members, the Board
of Commissioners shall designate by majority vote one Commissioner to be
director of each department.
§ 2-4.3. Jurisdiction of Board of Commissioners Over Departments.
[New; Ord. #2709, § 1]
The Board of Commissioners shall determine the powers and duties to
be performed by each department and shall assign each department the
powers and duties which it deems appropriate. The board shall prescribe
the powers and duties of all officers and employees and may assign
particular officers and employees to one or more departments and may
require any officer or employee to perform duties in two or more
departments if the work required in each department is similar in character.
The Board of Commissioners may make such rules and regulations as
are necessary and proper for the efficient and economical conduct of the
business of the Township.
The board may, by resolution, as it deems necessary or appropriate, assign,
designate, allocate or reallocate any administrative office, division,
commission or agency from the department within which it had been
assigned, designated or allocated to a different department,
notwithstanding any provision of this code.
§ 2-5. ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES.
§ 2-5.1. Coordinator of General Services. [Ord. #2548, § 1; Ord.
#2737, § 1; Ord. #2764, § 1; Ord. #2783]
a. Department of Revenue and Finance.
b. Department of Public Affairs.
c. Department of Public Safety.
d. Department of Parks and Public Property.
e. Department of Public Works.
a. Creation and Purpose. There is hereby created the office of coordinator
of general services (hereinafter "the coordinator") in the department in
which the Mayor serves as director in order to centralize, coordinate,
and deliver services in a more efficient and effective manner to the
residents, property owners, and businesses of the Township.
§ 2-4.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-5.1
1:8
b. Appointment; Term; Evaluation; Removal.
1. Appointment. The coordinator shall be appointed by the Mayor on
the basis of executive and administrative abilities, with special
regard to education, training, and experience related to the
functions assigned to that office. The coordinator shall be a
graduate of an accredited college or university, with a minimum of
five years of professional experience in private industry.
2. Term. The coordinator shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
3. Evaluation. On or before January 1st of each year, the Mayor shall
conduct an evaluation of the coordinator's performance during the
previous twelve-month period. Included among the criteria for such
evaluation shall be whether or not the coordinator has substantially
accomplished his or her established goals and objectives. However,
this shall not be considered to be the only reason for such
evaluation. At the time of such evaluation, the Mayor shall establish
goals and objectives to be accomplished by the coordinator during
the next twelve-month period.
4. Removal. The coordinator's employment shall be at the will of the
Mayor, and his or her removal by the Mayor may be with or without
cause. Nothing in this subsection shall be intended to constitute a
contract of employment.
c. Powers and Duties. The coordinator, pursuant to the direction and
supervision of the Mayor, shall serve in conjunction with all Township
departments to assist with and coordinate the efficient and effective
delivery of general services to the Township's residents, property
owners, and businesses. Subject to the supervision of the Mayor, the
coordinator shall be responsible for undertaking or delegating the
following services to the extent not prohibited by law:
1. Purchasing:
(a) Establishing a central purchasing system, and monitoring all
Township purchasing activities to assure that purchases are
made in accordance with statutory requirements; a current
record of all budgeting accounts is maintained; and funds for
purchases are available in accordance with the budget.
(b) Providing a report of purchasing activities and new legal
requirements with regard to purchasing when directed by the
Mayor.
(c) Recommending to the Mayor rules and regulations governing
the requisition and purchase of all municipal supplies and
equipment as deemed necessary.
(d) Making, negotiating, or awarding any purchases, contracts, or
agreements for the purchase of such municipal supplies and
§ 2-5.1 GENERAL § 2-5.1
1:9
equipment which are not subject to public advertising for bids
pursuant to the Local Public Contacts Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et
seq.
(e) Supervising the performance and services of a purchasing
associate and any and all staff relating to purchasing activities.
2. Execution and Enforcement of Laws. The coordinator shall enforce
the Laws of the State of New Jersey and ordinances and resolutions
of the Township as the Board of Commissioners or the Mayor may
prescribe.
3. Meetings. The coordinator shall attend all meetings of the Board of
Commissioners and other committees as directed, and shall have
the authority to participate in the discussions and to receive notice
of all regular and special meetings of the Board of Commissioners
and all advisory committees.
4. Township Affairs. The coordinator shall inform the Board of
Commissioners as to the conduct of Township works, submitting
whatever report the Board of Commissioners or the Mayor shall
request, and making such recommendations to the Board of
Commissioners or the Mayor as he or she deems necessary and
advisable for the welfare of the Township. In accordance with the
Tax Collector/Treasurer/Chief Financial Officer, the coordinator
shall ensure that the Board of Commissioners is regularly informed
about the condition of Township finances. The coordinator shall
anticipate problems that may develop and advise the Board of
Commissioners accordingly, outlining possible solutions or
preventive measures.
5. Annual Report. The coordinator shall submit to the Mayor, as soon
as possible after the close of the calendar year, a complete report of
the administrative activities of the Township for the preceding year.
6. Experts. The coordinator shall recommend the employment of
experts and consultants to perform work and render advice in
connection with the operation of dedicated utilities or work
projects in the Township, subject to the approval by the Mayor.
7. Contracts. The coordinator shall attend to the letting of contracts,
in proper form according to law, and supervise the performance
and faithful execution of these contracts, except insofar as such
duties are expressly imposed upon some other officer or official by
statute or by action of the Board of Commissioners. The
coordinator shall ensure compliance with the provisions of all
franchises, leases, permits, and privileges granted by the
Township.
8. Grants and Aid Projects. The coordinator shall study and keep the
Board of Commissioners informed as to federal, state and/or county
aid projects and any other services or possible grants for which the
§ 2-5.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-5.1
1:10
Township may qualify. The coordinator shall coordinate the
application procedures and shall provide liaison for such aid,
grants, or services which the Township may acquire, subject to the
direction of the Mayor.
9. Liaison With Professional Consultants Providing Services to the
Township. The coordinator shall provide liaison with the Township
Attorney, Township Engineer, Township Auditor, and any other legal
counsel or professional staff engaged by the Township, as the
Mayor may direct.
10. Conflict of Interest. The coordinator shall inform the Mayor of any
matter or transaction, or any contemplated matter or transaction,
for which he or she is, or would be, responsible, but in which he or
she may have a conflict of interest as described in Section 5-29 of
the Code. In that event, the Mayor shall assume direct
responsibility for such matter or transaction, or delegate the
responsibility for such matter or transaction to another
administrative officer of the Township who has, or would have, no
such interest therein.
11. Clerical Staff. The coordinator shall direct clerical staff, provide
training when necessary, and take action to ensure that clerical
work is completed timely, efficiently, and in accordance with proper
procedure.
12. Evaluations. The coordinator shall implement and coordinate the
design, manner, and form of evaluation instruments to analyze the
effectiveness of Township programs and personnel.
13. Publications. The coordinator shall coordinate the production and
distribution of official department publications, new releases,
reports, and media presentations to the appropriate Township
departments.
14. Programs. The coordinator shall coordinate the review,
establishment, and assist the Board of Commissioners in
determining the appropriate priorities and utilization for Township
government service initiatives and programs.
15. Liaison With Website Consultant. The coordinator shall provide
liaison with the Township's website consultant to assist with the
maintenance and effectiveness of a current and relevant website.
16. Representation of the Board of Commissioners With the Media. At
the direction of the Mayor, any other Commissioner, or their
designees, the coordinator may serve as spokesperson for the
Township with regard to the news media and communication with
the general public.
17. Personnel. Subject to the supervision and direction of the Board of
Commissioners or the Mayor, the coordinator shall assist the
§ 2-5.1 GENERAL § 2-5.1
1:11
§ 2-5.2. Purchasing Associate. [Ord. #2548, § 1; Ord. #2737, § 1;
Ord. #2764, § 1; Ord. #2793-11]
personnel administrator with the establishment and maintenance
of sound personnel practices and procedures, and maintenance of
appropriate records of all Township employees.
18. Planning and Development. Subject to the supervision and
direction of the Board of Commissioners or the Mayor, the
coordinator shall be responsible for initiatives relating to planning
and development, and supervise a planning and development
associate.
19. Information Technology Initiatives. Subject to the supervision and
direction of the Board of Commissioners or the Mayor, the
coordinator shall be responsible for information technology
initiatives, and supervise an information technology associate.
20. Initiatives Related to the Facilitation of the Cost Efficiency and
Timely Completion of Special Projects Within the Township.
Subject to the supervision and direction of the Board of
Commissioners or the Mayor, the coordinator shall be responsible
for initiatives related to the facilitation of cost efficiency and timely
completion of special projects within the Township, and supervise a
special projects associate.
d. Compensation. The coordinator shall receive such compensation as
shall be fixed, from time to time, by the Board of Commissioners in a
salary ordinance.
e. Other Responsibilities. The coordinator shall perform such other
responsibilities as may be assigned by the Board of Commissioners or
the Mayor for the proper and efficient administration of municipal
services and business affairs of the Township.
a. Creation. There is hereby created in the department in which the Mayor
serves as director of the office of purchasing associate for the Township
of Lyndhurst. The purchasing associate shall serve under the
supervision of the coordinator, and perform all technical functions
relating to purchasing, and supervision of clerical staff in support of
purchasing operations. Such technical functions shall include, but not
be limited to, preparation of public bidding documents, specifications
and requests for proposals; location and investigation of reputable
sources of supply of goods, equipment and services; review and analysis
of public bids and proposals, and recommendations for acceptance or
rejection of bids and proposals; communication with vendors;
maintenance of bidder lists; communication with Township
departments regarding the standardization of supplies used and the
need for special equipment and services; management of a central
storeroom for purchasing files and documents, and maintenance of
§ 2-5.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-5.2
1:12
§ 2-5.3. Planning and Development Associate. [Ord. #2548, § 1; Ord.
#2737, § 1; Ord. #2764. § 1]
purchasing-related records; and preparation of purchase orders and
contracts.
b. Appointment to be Based on Ability. The purchasing associate shall be
appointed by the Mayor on the basis of executive and administrative
abilities, with special regard to education, training, and experience
related to the functions assigned to that office. The purchasing
associate shall have a minimum of five years of responsible technical
and/or clerical experience in assisting professional staff in the
purchasing of equipment and supplies, or maintaining purchasing
records. A certification as a qualified purchasing agent (QPA), as issued
by the State of New Jersey is desirable for the purchasing associate to
obtain and be in the possession of prior to appointment to the position.
c. Term. The purchasing associate shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor.
d. Evaluation. On or before January 1st of each year, the Mayor, in
consultation with the coordinator, shall conduct an evaluation of the
purchasing associate's performance during the previous twelve-month
period. Included among the criteria for such evaluation shall be
whether or not the purchasing associate has substantially accomplished
his or her goals and objectives. However, this should not be considered
to be the only reason for such evaluation. At the time of such evaluation,
the coordinator shall establish goals and objectives to be accomplished
by the purchasing associate during the next twelve-month period.
e. Removal. The purchasing associate's employment shall be at the will of
the Mayor and his or her removal may be with or without cause.
Nothing in this subsection shall be intended to constitute a contract of
employment.
f. Compensation. The purchasing associate shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed, from time to time, by the Board of
Commissioners in a salary ordinance.
a. Creation. There is hereby created in the department to which the
coordinator is assigned the office of planning and development
associate for the Township of Lyndhurst. The planning and development
associate shall serve under the supervision of the coordinator and assist
with the development of Township government services relating to
programs, surveys, assessment of needs, and related research,
including the coordination establishment maintenance and evaluation
of programs and fiscal data related to general government services to
residents, property owners, and business of the Township.
b. Appointment to be Based on Ability. The planning and development
associate shall be appointed by the Mayor on the basis of executive and
§ 2-5.2 GENERAL § 2-5.3
1:13
§ 2-5.4. Information Technology Associate. [Ord. #2548, § 1; Ord.
#2737, § 1; Ord. #2764, § 1]
administrative abilities, with special regard to education, training, and
experience related to the functions assigned to that office. The planning
and development associate shall be a graduate of an accredited college
or university, with a minimum of five years of professional experience
in the dissemination of information to the public, with an emphasis on
electronic or print media.
c. Term. The planning and development associate shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor.
d. Evaluation. On or before January 1st of each year, the coordinator shall
conduct an evaluation of the planning and development associate's
performance during the previous twelve-month period. Included among
the criteria for such evaluation shall be whether or not the planning and
development associate has substantially accomplished his or her
established goals and objectives. However, this should not be
considered the only reason for such evaluation. At the time of such
evaluation, the coordinator shall establish goals and objectives to be
accomplished by planning and development associate during the next
twelve-month period.
e. Removal. The planning and development associate's employment shall
be at the will of the Mayor and his or her removal may be with or
without cause. Nothing in this subsection shall be intended to
constitute a contract of employment.
f. Compensation. The planning and development associate shall receive
such compensation as shall be fixed, from time to time, by the Board of
Commissioners in a salary ordinance.
a. Creation. There is hereby created in the department to which the
coordinator is assigned the office of information and technology
associate for the Township of Lyndhurst. The information and
technology associate shall serve under the supervision of the
coordinator, to assist with the development of computer and
information technology, including the supervision, establishment,
maintenance, and evaluation of electronic and/or manual recording and
computerized information systems related to general government
services provided to residents, property owners, and businesses of the
Township.
b. Appointment to be Based on Ability. The information and technology
associate shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be appointed on the
basis of executive and administrative abilities, with special regard to
education, training, and experience related to the functions assigned to
that office. The information and technology associate shall be a
graduate of an accredited college or university, with a minimum of five
years of experience in the computer technology field.
§ 2-5.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-5.4
1:14
§ 2-5.5. Special Projects Associate. [Ord. #2548, § 1; Ord. #2764,
§ 1]
c. Term. The information and technology associate shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor.
d. Evaluation. On or before January 1st of each year, the coordinator shall
conduct an evaluation of the information and technology associate's
performance during the previous twelve-month period. Included among
the criteria for such evaluation shall be whether or not the information
and technology associate has substantially accomplished his or her
established goals and objectives. However, this should not be
considered the only reason for such evaluation. At the time of such
evaluation, the coordinator shall establish goals and objectives to be
accomplished by the information and technology associate during the
next twelve-month period.
e. Removal. The information and technology associate's employment shall
be at the will of the Mayor and his or her removal may be with or
without cause. Nothing in this subsection shall be intended to
constitute a contract of employment.
f. Compensation. The information and technology associate shall receive
such compensation as shall be fixed, from time to time, by the Board of
Commissioners in a salary ordinance.
a. Creation. There is hereby created in the department to which the
coordinator is assigned the office of special projects associate for the
Township of Lyndhurst. The special projects associate shall serve under
the supervision of the coordinator, and shall assist with the costefficient
and timely completion of short-term special projects within the
Township, including the supervision, establishment, maintenance, and
evaluation of construction projects funded by public monies; projects
involving the acquisition of, or development of, lands within the
Township wherein the expenditure of public funds is contemplated; and
to coordinate the efforts of all Township officers and departments for
the purpose of improving the cost efficiency of the municipal
government.
b. Appointment of Special Projects Associate. The special projects
associate shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall be appointed on the
basis of executive and administrative abilities, with special regard to
education, training, and experience related to the functions assigned to
that office. The special projects associate shall be a graduate of an
accredited college or university, with a minimum of five years
experience with private or public construction projects.
c. Term. The term of office of the special projects associate shall be at the
pleasure of the Mayor.
§ 2-5.4 GENERAL § 2-5.5
1:15
§ 2-5.6. Deputy Township Clerk. [Ord. #1456; Ord. #2548, § 2]
d. Evaluation. On or before July 1st of each year, the coordinator shall
conduct an evaluation of the special projects associate's performance
during the previous 12 month period. Included among the criteria for
such evaluation shall be whether or not the special projects associate
has substantially accomplished his or her established goals and
objectives. However, this should not be considered the only reason for
such evaluation. At the time of such evaluation, the coordinator shall
establish goals and objectives to be accomplished by the special
projects associate during the next twelve-month period.
e. Removal. The special projects associate's employment shall be at the
will of the Mayor and his or her removal may be with or without cause.
Nothing in this subsection shall be intended to constitute a contract of
employment.
f. Compensation. The special projects associate shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed, from time to time, by the Board of
Commissioners in a salary ordinance.
a. Created. There is hereby created the office of Deputy Township Clerk
for the Township. The Deputy Township Clerk shall be appointed by the
director of the department wherein the office of the Township Clerk is
assigned.
b. Powers and Duties. The Deputy Township Clerk shall have the power
and duty to execute all documents required by any law or ordinance to
be executed by the Township Clerk and affix the seal of the Township
thereto whenever required. The Deputy Township Clerk in executing
any documents shall sign the name of the Township Clerk followed by
the word "by" and the Deputy Clerk's own name and the words "Deputy
Clerk."
The powers and duties herein described shall be exercised by such
Deputy Township Clerk only in the absence of the Township Clerk from
his office in the town hall, and only when either written direction has
been given by the Township Clerk to exercise such power or the Board
of Commissioners has determined by resolution that the Township
Clerk is temporarily or permanently incapacitated to perform such
function.
The Deputy Township Clerk shall have the power and authority herein
described and such further power and authority as may be provided by
law.
c. Term of Office. The Deputy Township Clerk shall hold office for a term
of four years which term of office shall be coextensive with the term of
the Board of Commissioners provided, however, that the term of the
Deputy Township Clerk appointed after March 24, 1970 and during the
term of the present Board of Commissioners shall expire at the
§ 2-5.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-5.6
1:16
§ 2-5.7. Office of Tax Assessors. [Ord. #1667; Ord. #2548, § 2]
§ 2-5.8. Deputy Tax Collector. [Ord. #1489; Ord. #2090; Ord. #2548,
§ 2]
termination of the term of the present Board of Commissioners, and
further provided that the Deputy Township Clerk shall be entitled to all
rights and privileges to tenure of office for officers and employees of
the Township.
d. Compensation. The Deputy Township Clerk shall upon appointment and
performance of the duties of office of Deputy Township Clerk be entitled
to a salary as designated annually in the salary ordinance.
a. Office Created. There is hereby created and established for the
Township the office of Tax Assessors. There shall be a Chief Assessor
and a Tax Assessor and such other personnel as may be deemed to be
necessary by the director of the department. The appointment of the
Chief Assessor and Tax Assessor shall be by the director of the
department to which the office has been assigned by the Board of
Commissioners.
b. Duties. The Chief Assessor shall be the person in charge of the office
and shall be responsible for the performance and discharge of all
functions and duties prescribed by law for municipal assessor and shall
be responsible for the administrative duties in the office of Tax
Assessors and such other duties as shall be assigned by the director of
the department.
c. Term of Office. The Chief Assessor shall hold his office for a term of four
years from the first day of July next following his appointment. The Tax
Assessor shall hold office for the term of his appointment and until the
expiration of the term.
a. Created. There is hereby created the office of Deputy Township Tax
Collector. The Deputy Township Tax Collector shall be appointed by the
Director of the Department of revenue and Finance.
b. Powers and Duties. The Deputy Township Tax Collector shall have the
power and duty to collect and receive the monies due to the Township
for taxes, special assessments and other miscellaneous revenues
received by the Tax Collector/Treasurer/Chief Financial Officer of the
Township. The Deputy Township Tax Collector shall have the power to
execute all documents required by any law or ordinance to be executed
by the Township Tax Collector/Treasurer/Chief Financial Officer. The
Deputy Township Tax Collector in executing any documents or
instruments authorized to be executed by the Township Tax Collector/
Treasurer/Chief Financial Officer, shall sign the name of the Township
Tax Collector/Treasurer/Chief Financial Officer followed by the word
"by" and the Deputy Township Tax Collector's own name and the words
"Deputy Tax Collector."
§ 2-5.6 GENERAL § 2-5.8
1:17
§ 2-5.9. Environmental Coordinator. [Ord. #1577; Ord. #2548, § 2]
The powers and duties herein described shall be exercised by such
Deputy Township Tax Collector only in the absence of the Township
Tax Collector/Treasurer/Chief Financial Officer from his office in the
town hall, and only when either written direction has been given by the
Township Tax Collector/Treasurer/Chief Financial Officer to exercise
such power or the Board of Commissioners has determined by
resolution that the Township Tax Collector/Treasurer/Chief Financial
Officer is temporarily or permanently incapacitated or absent to
perform such function.
The Deputy Township Tax Collector shall have the power and authority
herein described and such further power and authority as may be
provided by law.
c. Term of Office. The Deputy Township Tax Collector shall hold office for a
term as prescribed by statute and shall be entitled to all rights and
privileges to tenure of office for officers and employees of the Township
and the office of Deputy Township Tax Collector as provided by statute
and ordinance of the Township.
d. Salary. The Deputy Township Tax Collector shall upon appointment and
performance of the duties of the office of Deputy Township Tax
Collector be entitled to a salary as set forth in the salary ordinance
adopted by the Township.
a. Creation. There is hereby created the office of environmental
coordinator for the Township. The environmental coordinator shall be
appointed by the director of the department wherein the office is
assigned.
b. Powers and Duties. The environmental coordinator shall have the
power to:
1. Formulate comprehensive policies for the conservation of the
natural resources of the Township, the promotion of environmental
protection and the prevention of pollution of the environment of the
Township.
2. Conduct and supervise programs of education, including the
preparation and distribution of information relating to
conservation, environmental protection and ecology.
3. Coordinate the efforts of all Township officers and departments in
working to improve the environment of the Township.
4. Such other powers of authority as may be provided by law.
c. Term of Office. The environmental coordinator shall hold office for a
term of four years, which term of office shall be coextensive with the
term of the Board of Commissioners provided, however, that the term of
§ 2-5.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-5.9
1:18
§ 2-5.10. Confidential Aide to Director of the Department of Public
Safety. [Ord. #2548, § 3]
§ 2-5.11. Emergency Telecommunications Services Coordinator.
[Ord. #2558, § 1]
the environmental coordinator appointed after the adoption of this
section and during the term of the present Board of Commissioners
shall expire at the termination of the term of the present Board of
Commissioners, and provided, further, that the environmental
coordinator shall be entitled to all rights and privileges to tenure of
office for officers and employees of the Township.
d. Compensation. The environmental coordinator shall, upon appointment
and performance of the duties of his office, be entitled to a salary as
established annually in the salary ordinance.
a. Creation. There is hereby created the office of confidential aide to the
Director of the Department of Public Safety. The confidential aide shall
be appointed by the Director of the Department of Public Safety, and
shall serve at the pleasure of the Director of the Department of Public
Safety.
b. Powers and Duties. The confidential aide shall serve as advisor to the
Director of the Department of Public Safety, represent the Director of
the Department of Public Safety in matters relating to that Department
at the Director's request, attend meetings relating to that Department
at the Director's request, and perform such other duties as may be
assigned by the Director of the Department of Public Safety. The
confidential aid shall not have the power to make decisions on behalf of
the Director of Public Safety without the express written consent of the
Director, and such decisions shall be limited in nature.
c. Compensation. The confidential aide shall serve without compensation
and shall not be entitled to any of the rights and benefits of other
Township employees.
d. Removal. The confidential aide's employment shall be at the will of the
Director of the Department of Public Safety and his or her removal may
be with or without cause. Nothing in this subsection shall be intended
to constitute a contract of employment.
a. Creation. There is hereby created the office of emergency
telecommunications services coordinator (hereinafter referred to as
E.T.S.C.) in the Department of Public Safety to administer and submit
all frequency coordination forms and Federal Communications
Commission applications; coordinate all frequency licensing and
assignments for Township departments and agencies; establish,
administer, maintain, and prepare Township telecommunications
equipment and frequencies, rules and regulations for operation of radio
communications equipment by Township employees and emergencies
§ 2-5.9 GENERAL § 2-5.11
1:19
§ 2-5.12. Director of New Media and Social Communication. [Ord.
#2709, § 2]
services, communications equipment records, severe weather watches
and warnings, testing of radio alert and warning systems; and generally
to assist and consult the Township regarding its telecommunications
services and operations. The E.T.S.C. shall be appointed by the Director
of the Department of Public Safety, and shall serve at the pleasure of
the Director of the Department of Public Safety.
b. Appointment to be Based on Ability. The E.T.S.C. shall be appointed on
the basis of ability, with special regard to education, training, and
experience related to the functions assigned to that office. The E.T.S.C.
shall have knowledge of the following: telecommunications equipment,
including installation, operation, power requirements, frequency
programming, and field trouble shooting; and amateur radio
operations, land mobile radio, and telephone and satellite systems. The
E.T.S.C. shall also have the following certifications, licenses,
memberships, and training, as follows: amateur radio license,
technician plus or above; certification as New Jersey R.A.C.E.S.
operator; certification by the National Weather Service of the New
Jersey State Police training section on all hazardous weather that has a
probability of affecting the Township, and New Jersey and National
Incident Management Systems; membership in the Association of
Public Safety Officers Communications Officers, Inc. (APCO); and
attendance in WMD training, pursuant to the guidelines of the Office of
the New Jersey Attorney General.
c. Term. The E.T.S.C. shall serve at the pleasure of the Director of the
Department of Public Safety.
d. Compensation. The E.T.S.C. shall serve without compensation and shall
not be entitled to any of the rights or benefits of other Township
employees.
e. Removal. The E.T.S.C.'s employment shall be at the will of the Director
of the Department of Public Safety and his or her removal may be with
or without cause. Nothing in this subsection shall be intended to
constitute a contract of employment.
a. Creation. There is hereby created the office of Director of New Media
and Social Communication. The Director of New Media and Social
Communication shall be appointed by the Director of the Department of
Public Affairs, and shall serve at the pleasure of the Director of the
Department of Public Affairs.
b. Appointment. In the event the Township has augmented its existing
workforce with competent private sector information technology (IT)
professional consultants, this office may be filled by one of the
Township's existing IT vendors. Appointment to this position shall not
affect in any way such vendor as existing or, future contract with the
§ 2-5.11 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-5.12
1:20
§ 2-5.13. Attendance Secretary.
Township. In the event this ordinance is in conflict with any existing
ordinance, this ordinance shall control.
c. Powers and Duties. The Director of New Media and Social
Communication shall serve as advisor to the Director of the Department
of Public Affairs, represent the Director of the Department of Public
Affairs in matters relating to technology as a communication tool,
public image, community communication and public relations.
Additionally, the Director of New Media and Social Communication may
attend meetings relating to that Department at the Director's request,
and perform such other duties as may be assigned by the Director of the
Department of Public Affairs. The Director of New Media and Social
Communication shall not have the power to make decisions on behalf of
the Director of Public Affairs without the express written consent of the
Director and such decisions shall be limited in nature.
d. Compensation. The Director of New Media and Social Communication
shall serve without compensation and shall not be entitled to any of the
rights and benefits of other Township employees.
e. Removal. The Director of New Media and Social Communication's
employment shall be at the will of the Director of the Department of
Public Affairs and his or her removal may be with or without cause.
Nothing in this subsection shall be intended to constitute a contract of
employment.
a. Creation. There is hereby created the office of attendance secretary in
the Department of Public Safety. The attendance secretary shall be
appointed by the Director of the Department of Public Safety, and shall
serve at the pleasure of the Director of the Department of Public Safety.
b. Powers and Duties. The attendance secretary shall serve as advisor to
the Director of the Department of Public Safety, and be responsible for
the input, updating and control of all attendance records of the Fire
Department. The attendance secretary shall respond to all requests for
attendance reports from the Director of the Department of Public
Safety, the Chief Financial Officer and the municipal auditor, and shall
perform such other related duties as may be assigned by the Director of
the Department of Public Safety.
c. Compensation. The attendance secretary shall serve without
compensation and shall not be entitled to any of the rights and benefits
of other Township employees.
d. Removal. The attendance secretary's employment shall be at the will of
the Director of the Department of Public Safety and his or her removal
may be with or without cause. Nothing in this subsection shall be
intended to constitute a contract of employment.
§ 2-5.12 GENERAL § 2-5.14
1:21
§ 2-5.14. Office of Township Attorney. [Ord. #2888, §§ 1, 2; amended
8-8-2017 by Ord. No. 2968-17]
a. The Office of Township Attorney is created within the Department of
Public Safety. The following are the specifications of the Office of
Township Attorney:
1. The position of Township Attorney may be considered and
designated by the Board of Commissioners as a full-time employee.
When so designated, the Township Attorney shall work a minimum
of 32.5 hours per week, which is the number of hours in a standard
workweek for Township administrative employees, pursuant to
§ 5-10 of the Township Code.
2. The number of hours worked by the Township Attorney shall
include all hours during which the Township Attorney is in
attendance at Board of Commissioners meetings.
3. In the alternative, the Township Attorney may be appointed by the
Board of Commissioners (BOC) pursuant to a professional services
contract. In either case, the term of appointment shall not exceed
12 months.
4. The Township Attorney shall be licensed to practice law in the State
of New Jersey and shall provide evidence of thorough knowledge of
N.J.S.A. 40A:1 et seq. This is the Municipalities and Counties Title
of New Jersey law. (Knowledge of Title 40 and Title 54 is also
required.)
5. The Township Attorney shall attend all meetings of the Board of
Commissioners, except where there may be a reasonable
scheduling conflict. In the event that such a reasonable scheduling
conflict exists, then a substitute attorney shall be arranged for by
the Township Attorney. Should no adequate substitute attorney be
available, the Board of Commissioners may meet only if there are
no litigation issues on the BOC agenda.
6. The Township Attorney shall keep an hourly record of all time
worked on Lyndhurst matters.
7. All files maintained by the Township Attorney shall be the property
of the Township; however, custody of all files may be with the
Township Attorney.
8. The Township Attorney shall report to the Commissioner of Public
Safety as to all daily activities and duties performed.
9. The Township Attorney shall render all legal advice and review all
legal matters pertaining to, or involving, the Township of
Lyndhurst, except where a specialized area of law may require
another attorney to render a specific service.
§ 2-5.14 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-5.14
1:22
10. The Township of Lyndhurst shall provide an office for the exclusive
use of the Township Attorney. The Township Attorney shall use said
office exclusively for Township-related business. Said business
must be legal, financial or personnel related. This may include
coordinating department activities; said coordination may be
conducted with other officers and officials of the Township of
Lyndhurst.
11. In the event the Township Attorney is considered a full-time
employee, he must exclusively dedicate his time while at the
Lyndhurst law office to Township business and affairs so as to be
qualified to be placed on the Township's payroll. Should the
Commissioner of Public Safety determine that the Attorney is not
working exclusively on Township business, the Attorney may be
disqualified from being on the Township payroll; in effect, the
Attorney shall not be considered a full-time employee if a pattern of
not working exclusively on Township business is apparent.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Township Attorney may take
occasional phone calls on matters other than those involving
Lyndhurst.
12. The Township Attorney may receive employment benefits that are
provided other employees, with the exception of all health benefits,
which may be purchased from the Township of Lyndhurst by the
Attorney at 105% of the Township cost of the insurance premium.
The Township Attorney may not accrue sick or vacation time, and
he/she may not be paid for any unused leave balances, because he/
she is not entitled to any leave. However, the Township Attorney
shall work 1,560 hours annually to be considered full-time. [This
represents the standard workweek (32.5 hours) less 20 days off,
such as sick, vacation and other time.] The Township Attorney,
when considered a Township employee, shall only receive
additional compensation (such as overtime) if he:
(a) Appears in federal court on a matter of litigation; or
(b) Works in excess of 1,690 hours in any twelve-month period.
13. The Township Attorney shall be paid $175 per hour, or $156,000
annually, if considered a full-time employee.
14. The annual salary of the Township Attorney may be modified by
resolution of the BOC. In the event the Township Attorney is
engaged under a professional services agreement, the
compensation shall be fixed in said agreement.
15. Within the Office of Township Attorney, there is hereby created the
position of Assistant Township Attorney. The Assistant Township
Attorney shall report to, and coordinate all activities with, the
Township Attorney.
§ 2-5.14 GENERAL § 2-5.14
1:23
§ 2-6. MUNICIPAL COURT.
§ 2-6.1. Established. [Ord. #1424, § 13]
A municipal court for the Township is established pursuant to the provisions
of Chapter 264 of the Laws of 1948, as amended and supplemented.
§ 2-6.2. Name of Court. [Ord. #1424, § 13]
The name of the Municipal Court shall be the "Municipal Court of the
Township of Lyndhurst."
16. The Assistant Township Attorney shall not be considered a
Township employee and may be a member of a law firm or be a solo
practitioner. The Assistant Township Attorney shall be appointed by
resolution, and his/her compensation shall not exceed $125 per
hour worked, except to handle, defend and prosecute all tax
appeals, as set forth in Subsection a17 hereof, and unless otherwise
specified in a resolution of the BOC.
17. The Assistant Township Attorney may handle all tax appeal matters
at an annual retainer not to exceed $85,000 and as more
particularly itemized on a monthly billing statement setting forth
the matters worked on. The Assistant Township Attorney shall
serve at will of the Township Attorney and may be terminated by
the Township Attorney upon 30 days' written notice.
18. The Assistant Township Attorney shall assist the Township Attorney
on all personnel and labor matters and may be the lead attorney on
any and all such matters.
19. The Township Attorney and Assistant Township Attorney shall
maintain legal malpractice insurance, or the equivalent, which
includes the Joint Insurance Fund (or other insurance company
covering the Municipal Attorney).
b. It is the policy of the Lyndhurst Board of Commissioners to encourage
shared service agreements with other municipalities located in New
Jersey, the Lyndhurst Board of Education, and other government
entities. This includes finance, legal, information technology and other
shared service agreements. Should a shared service agreement be
entered into with any such entity involving the Office of Township
Attorney, then the first $40,000 shall be retained by the Township to
offset the cost of the Office of Township Attorney. Any sum received
over $40,000 shall be paid to the Township Attorney as additional
compensation, up to a maximum of $20,000. After receiving $60,000 in
total, the Township and Attorney shall split the additional amount in
equal shares (50%-50%).
§ 2-5.14 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-6.3
1:24
§ 2-6.3. Seal. [Ord. #1424, § 13]
The Municipal Court shall have a seal which shall bear the impress of the
name of the court.
§ 2-6.4. Jurisdiction; Powers; Duties. [Ord. #1424, § 13]
The Municipal Court and the Municipal Magistrate thereof shall have,
possess and exercise all the functions, powers, duties and jurisdictions
conferred by the provisions of Chapter 264 of the Laws of 1948, as amended
and supplemented, or by any other law.
§ 2-6.5. Judge of the Municipal Court. [Ord. #1424, § 13]
There shall be a Judge of the Municipal Court, who shall be appointed by
the Board of Commissioners and who shall serve for a term of three years
from the date of his appointment and until his successor is appointed and
qualified; except that, the now presiding Judge of the Municipal Court shall
serve for the balance of the term for which he was appointed. He shall have
the qualifications required by law.
The Judge shall receive an annual salary as fixed by ordinance or resolution
to be paid in the same manner as the salaries of other municipal officers are
paid, and which shall be in lieu of all fees, costs and any other allowances
whatsoever.
§ 2-6.6. Clerk, Deputy Clerk, Violations Bureau, Violations Clerk.
[Ord. #1544]
There shall be a Clerk and Deputy Clerk of the Municipal Court who shall be
appointed by the Board of Commissioners. The Clerk and Deputy Clerk shall
be appointed for a term of three years from the date of their appointment
and until their successor is appointed and qualified, except that the Clerk
and Deputy Clerk shall be entitled to tenure rights as provided by the
personnel policy, practices and regulations of the Township, Chapter 5,
Personnel Policy, Practices and Regulations, of this code.
The Clerk and Deputy Clerk shall receive an annual salary: to be fixed by
the salary ordinance adopted by the Board of Commissioners annually and
shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of the salary ordinance.
The Municipal Judge shall establish a violations bureau within the Municipal
Court. The Municipal Judge shall designate either the Clerk or Deputy Clerk
as the violations clerk but the designated violations clerk shall not receive
any additional compensation.
§ 2-6.7. Place and Sessions. [Ord. #1424, § 13]
The Municipal Court shall be held in the Municipal Building, Valley Brook
Avenue, Lyndhurst, New Jersey. The Municipal Judge shall designate the
days when sessions of the court will be held and the hour at which the court
will be held, in accordance with the rules of the court.
§ 2-6.3 GENERAL § 2-7
1:25
§ 2-7. MUNICIPAL COURT PROSECUTOR.
§ 2-7.1. Creation of Office of Municipal Court Prosecutor. [Ord.
#1424, § 13]
The position of Municipal Court Prosecutor in the Township is hereby
created.
§ 2-7.2. Qualifications. [Ord. #1424, § 13]
The Municipal Court Prosecutor should be an attorney at law of New Jersey.
§ 2-7.3. Appointment and Term. [Ord. #1424, § 13]
The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall be appointed for a term of four years
by the Board of Commissioners of the Township as provided by law.
§ 2-7.4. Duties. [Ord. #1424, § 13]
The duties of the Municipal Court Prosecutor shall be to appear in the
municipal court of the Township and to conduct the prosecution of matters
pending therein when so requested by the Judge or by any authorized
officer of the Board of Commissioners or any of the Township's duly
constituted bodies, boards or agencies.
§ 2-7.5. Compensation. [Ord. #1424, § 13]
The Municipal Court Prosecutor shall receive an annual salary as fixed by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners, to be paid in the same manner as
the salaries of other municipal officers are paid, and which shall be in lieu
of all fees, costs and any other allowances whatsoever.
§ 2-8. MUNICIPAL COURT PUBLIC DEFENDER.
§ 2-8.1. Office Created. [Ord. #1678, § 1]
There shall be a Municipal Court Public Defender for the Township.
§ 2-8.2. Qualifications. [Ord. #1678, § 2]
The Municipal Court Public Defender shall be an attorney at law of the State
of New Jersey.
§ 2-8.3. Appointment and Term. [Ord. #1678, § 3]
The Municipal Court Public Defender shall be appointed for a term of four
years by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 2-8.4. Duties. [Ord. #1678, § 4]
The Municipal Court Public Defender shall be responsible for representing
indigent persons in court actions before the municipal court of the Township
§ 2-7 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-8.4
1:26
and shall conduct the defense of criminal actions pending therein when
requested by the Judge of the Municipal Court.
§ 2-8.5. Compensation. [Ord. #1678, § 5]
The Municipal Court Public Defender shall receive compensation as fixed by
ordinance of the Board of Commissioners and shall be paid in the manner
as set forth in that ordinance.
§ 2-8.6. Application Fee for Representation. [Ord. #2232, § 1; Ord.
#2341]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:12-28, Defense of Indigents, an applicant for the
Municipal Public Defender shall pay an application fee of $200. The
Municipal Court Judge may waive the fee in whole or in part if the Judge
determines in his or her discretion that the application fee represents an
unreasonable burden on the person seeking representation.
§ 2-9. POLICE DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-9.1. Police Department Established. [Ord. #1504, § 1; Ord.
#1561; Ord. #1587; Ord. #1633; Ord. #1767; Ord. #1802; Ord.
#1832; Ord. #2043, § 1; Ord. #2116; Ord. #2166, § I; Ord. #2231,
§ I; Ord. #2272; Ord. #2289, § I; Ord. #2314, §§ I, II; Ord. #2335,
§ I; Ord. #2372, §§ I, II; Ord. #2386, § I; Ord. #2399, § I; Ord.
#2450, § I; Ord. #2490, § I; Ord. #2559, § I; Ord. #2614, § 1; Ord.
No. 2934-16]
a. The heretofore established Police Department of the Township of
Lyndhurst shall be continued without interruption; the members of
which, including the Chief of Police, are appointed by the Commissioner
of the Department of Public Safety, and the head of which shall be the
Chief of Police.
b. Uniformed officers. [Amended 4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 3017-19]
1. The Township of Lyndhurst police force shall consist of no more
than 56 uniformed officers who shall occupy the following ranks:
(a) Chief of Police.
(b) Deputy Chief of Police.
(c) Captains of Police - three.
(d) Lieutenants of Police - seven.
(e) Sergeants of Police - nine.
(f) Patrol officers - as many as required to fill a total Police
Department complement of 56.
§ 2-8.4 GENERAL § 2-9.1
1:27
§ 2-9.2. through § 2-9.3. (Reserved)
§ 2-9.4. Appointments, Qualifications and Right of Appointment.1
[Ord. No. 1504 § 1; Ord. No. 2937-16; Ord. No. 2947-16]
c. The number of officers in each rank may be changed from time to time
as recommended by the appropriate authority and confirmed by
ordinance by the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Lyndhurst;
provided, however, that the appropriate authority is authorized to make
such changes that are not inconsistent with the Salary Ordinance or
require any additional appropriations.
a. Appointments. Appointments to the Department, the filling of vacancies
therein, and promotions shall be made by the Commissioner of the
Department of Public Safety. All persons desiring to be appointed shall
be required to submit to any testing procedures and examinations as
the Commissioner of the Department of Public Safety may direct.
b. Qualifications for Membership in the Police Department.
1. No personnel shall be appointed as a member of the Police
Department unless he/she submits satisfactory evidence that he/
she:
(a) Is a citizen of the United States;
(b) Is sound in body and of good health sufficient to satisfy the
Board of Trustees of the Police and Firemen's Retirement
System of New Jersey as to his/her eligibility for membership
in the retirement system;
(c) Is able to read, write and speak the English language well and
intelligently;
(d) Is of good moral character, and has not been convicted of any
criminal offense involving moral turpitude;
(e) Is able to pass such written, oral, physical and psychological
examinations, and drug screenings as shall be selected by the
Commissioner of Public Safety and meet essential job
functions;
(f) Is a holder of a valid New Jersey driver's license;
(g) Is between the age of 21 and 35 years of age, except as
otherwise provided by law;
(h) Otherwise meets all requirements of N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122 to
N.J.S.A. 40A:14-127.
1. Editor's Note: See also Subsection 5-7d, which prohibits retiring police officers from
returning to active duty.
§ 2-9.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-9.4
1:28
2. All persons applying for appointment to the Police Department
shall satisfy one of the following criteria prior to sitting for any
examination with the Township of Lyndhurst:
(a) Shall possess a Bachelor's degree from a college accredited by
the Middle States Association of Schools and Colleges, the
North Central Association of Schools and Colleges, the
Northwest Association of Colleges and Schools or the Western
Association of Schools and Colleges ("hereinafter, "accredited
college").
(b) Shall have served three years in the United States Military
Service and have an honorable discharge except Reservists
who shall have served during a war or served for more than
180 consecutive days, other than for training any part of which
occurred during the period beginning September 11, 2001,
and ending on the date prescribed by Presidential
proclamation or by law as the last day of Operation Iraqi
Freedom or who shall have served a minimum of three years of
their six year commitment and have not yet received their
honorable discharge. In addition to the above, Reservists must
possess, at minimum, 60 credits from an accredited college.
(c) Shall have two years' experience as a law enforcement officer
in the State of New Jersey, including service as a Special Law
Enforcement Officer Class II (SLEO II), and possess 60 credits
from an accredited college.
3. No applicant shall be appointed to any position with the Police
Department until after the applicant shall have been fingerprinted
and said fingerprints filed with the New Jersey State Police and
Federal Bureau of Investigation, and no applicant shall be
appointed until after there has been a thorough background and
character investigation of the candidate that will also determine
the candidate's fitness for the position.
c. Probationary Period. All patrol officers are initially appointed subject to
a one-year probationary period whereby they may be terminated
without cause. No member shall be given or accept permanent
appointment as a police officer in the Township of Lyndhurst unless he/
she has successfully completed a police training course at a school
approved and authorized by the Police Training Commission in the
Department of Law and Public Safety of the State of New Jersey and has
successfully completed a one-year probationary period with the
Township of Lyndhurst.
1. The probationary period is one year from the date of completion of
the police training course, or if already holding a valid New Jersey
Police Training Commission certification, one year from date of
appointment, in accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:17B-66 et seq.
§ 2-9.4 GENERAL § 2-9.4
1:29
§ 2-9.5. Salaries. [Ord. #1504, § 1; Ord. #1712; Ord. #1730; Ord.
#1737]
2. During such probationary period such applicants shall be known as
"probationary officer," and they may be discharged prior to or at
the termination of said probationary period at the pleasure of the
Commissioner of Public Safety and/or upon the recommendation of
the Chief of Police and approval of the Commissioner of Public
Safety.
3. No person shall be permitted to take a police training course,
unless he holds a probationary appointment as a police officer in
the Township of Lyndhurst, and such appointee shall be entitled to
a leave of absence, with pay, during the period of the police training
course titled "Basic Course for Police Officers."
4. Upon the permanent appointment to the Department, all time
served by any member during such probationary period shall be
considered as service within the Department and shall be applied
toward any required tenure and promotion period.
5. This section shall not prohibit the hiring of a police officer from
another community who has served as a probationary officer and
completed the required police training course. Such officer shall be
required to submit to the same probationary period as established
above.
d. Oath of office. Every member of the Police Department, before entering
upon the performance of his/her duties, shall take and subscribe an
oath or affirmation to bear true faith and allegiance to the government
established in this state, under the authority of the people, to support
the Constitution of the United States, and the Constitution of the State
of New Jersey, and to faithfully, impartially and justly discharge and
perform all the duties of his/her office, which oath or affirmation shall
be filed with the Township Clerk.
a. The annual salaries of the members of the Police Department are
established in the annual salary ordinance.
b. In addition to the salaries set forth herein, there shall be paid to all
superior officers who are full time employees of the Detective Bureau
the annual sum of $375 over and above their regular. This sum shall be
paid at the regular pay periods.
c. In addition to the salaries set forth herein, all members of the
Department shall be entitled to receive an additional compensation of
$10 per annum for each credit of police science college courses;
provided, however, that in any course, before additional credit is
claimed, a grade of "C" or better must be attained. No member of the
Department shall be entitled to receive additional compensation for
§ 2-9.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-9.5
1:30
§ 2-9.6. Allowances, Sick Leave and Vacations. [Ord. #1504, § 1;
Ord. #1712; Ord. #1730; Ord. #1737]
credits of police science college courses until the member has
completed three years of service as a member of the Department.
d. In addition to the salaries and other compensation set forth herein,
there shall be paid to each regular, full-time member of the Police
Department an additional sum based upon his annual salary as follows:
1% after four years of service.
1/4 for every year of service thereafter to a maximum of 6%.
This sum shall be added to the salary heretofore set forth and shall be
paid at the regular pay period.
a. The members of the Police Department shall be entitled to a clothing
allowance for the calendar year of 1979 in the amount of $400 for the
care, maintenance and replacement of uniforms payable in the
following manner: $200 June 1, 1979 and $200 on December 1, 1979.
b. The members of the Police Department shall be entitled to sick leave in
accordance with the provisions of § 5-13 of Chapter 5, Personnel Policy,
Practices and Regulations, and shall be further entitled to annual
vacation based on the provisions of § 5-12 as set forth in Chapter 5.
Vacation benefits shall accrue and be determined as of the anniversary
date of employment of each member. No member shall be entitled to
five days vacation for six months service unless hired prior to April 1,
1977.
c. The members of the Police Department shall be entitled to 13 paid
holidays per year, which shall include the following:
New Year's Day
Lincoln's Birthday
Washington's Birthday
Good Friday
Easter Sunday
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Columbus Day
General Election Day
Veterans Day
§ 2-9.5 GENERAL § 2-9.6
1:31
§ 2-9.7. Leave of Absence as a Result of Injuries in the Line of Duty.
[Ord. #1504, § 1]
Any member of the Township Police Department who shall become
temporarily unable, by reason of injury sustained in the discharge of his
duties, to perform his duties shall be entitled to the same right and privilege
and subject to the same obligations as set forth in accordance with Chapter
5, Personnel Policy, Practices and Regulations.
§ 2-9.8. Hours of Employment. [Ord. #1504, § 1]
§ 2-9.9. Disciplinary Action. [Ord. #1504, § 1]
The members of the Police Department shall be subject to the provisions
set forth in Chapter 5, Personnel Policy, Practices and Regulations, § 5-20,
paragraph b., Causes, pertaining to the Police Department and shall also
include the following:
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day
In addition to the regular paid holidays hereto set forth, the employees
shall be entitled to such further paid holidays as may be declared by the
Board of Commissioners.
Payment of holidays shall be in lieu of compensatory time off for any
holiday worked. All holiday pay shall be included in the base salary for
all men for pension and retirement purposes.
Due to the nature of the employment of the members of the Police
Department, they shall adhere to the work schedule as promulgated by
the Chief of Police and shall receive in lieu of said holiday, if required to
work, compensation in the amount equivalent to one day's salary to the
regular salary paid for this employment.
a. Hours. The hours of employment of uniformed members of the
Township Police Department shall not exceed eight consecutive hours
in any one day, nor 40 hours in any one week, provided that in case of
emergency the Board of Commissioners or the Chief of Police, or
anyone acting for the Board of Commissioners or the Chief of Police,
shall have full authority to summon and keep on duty any and all such
members during the period of emergency.
b. Prohibition of employment. The members of the Police Department are
prohibited from performing any remunerative employment on the days
which they are designated to perform their duties as police officers as
set forth in the schedule promulgated by the Chief of Police. Any
member violating this provision shall be subject to disciplinary action as
set forth in this section.
§ 2-9.6 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-9.9
1:32
§ 2-9.10. Procedural Rights. [Ord. #1504, § 1]
The members of the Police Department shall be entitled to the same
procedural rights as set forth in § 5-20, paragraph c, Procedure, of Chapter
5, Personnel Policy, Practices and Regulations.
a. Causes. The causes sufficient for disciplinary action shall include the
following:
1. Neglect of duty.
2. Absence without leave or failure to report after authorized leave
has expired or after such leave has been disapproved or revoked.
3. Insubordination or serious breach of discipline.
4. Intoxication while on duty.
5. Conviction of a criminal act.
6. Disobedience of the departmental rules, regulations and directives.
7. Immorality, indecency or lewdness.
8. Willful maltreatment of a prisoner or citizen.
9. For conduct unbecoming an officer and gentleman.
10. Using indecent or profane language.
11. For refusing to do police duty of any kind whenever the necessity
requires, whether on patrol or elsewhere and whether in uniform
or not.
12. For conduct subversive of good order and discipline of the Police
Department.
13. Accepting a bribe, gift or favor as consideration for the
performance or nonperformance of his duty.
14. Commenting publicly on the official action of a superior officer.
15. Soliciting or requesting any person or persons to intercede with the
Director of Public Safety, or with the Chief of Police, in relation to
the promotion of any police officer or police officers or in relation to
the determination of the beats or hours of service of any police
officer or police officers, or in relation to the disposition of any
charge or charges pending against the Chief of Police or any police
officer or police officers or in relation to the trial, findings or
judgment in connection with such charge or charges.
16. Any violation of subsection 2-9.8, paragraph b, Prohibition of
Employment.
§ 2-9.9 GENERAL § 2-9.11
1:33
§ 2-9.11. Chief of Police to Prefer Disciplinary Charges. [Ord.
#1504, § 1]
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to prefer all disciplinary charges
against members of the Police Department in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 5, Personnel Policy, Practices and Regulations, insofar
as the provisions do not conflict with the rights, duties and responsibilities
of the members of the Police Department as set forth by the laws of the
State of New Jersey and the provisions of this section and the rules and
regulations governing the Police Department as promulgated by the Board
of Commissioners of the Township.
§ 2-9.12. Duties. [Ord. #1504, § 1]
The duties of the members of the Police Department shall be that they are
held responsible for the proper enforcement of all the ordinances of the
Township and the laws of the State of New Jersey and of the United States.
§ 2-9.13. Monthly Report by Chief. [Ord. #1504, § 1]
The Chief of Police shall report, in writing, to the Director of Public Safety
at the first regular meeting in each month on all matters pertaining to
the Department, giving a complete record of all matters pertaining to
the Department, giving a complete record of all arrests and complaints,
together with the dispositions of the same, and such recommendations as in
his opinion will increase the efficiency of the Department.
§ 2-9.14. Adoption of Police Manual. [Ord. No. 2945-16; 2-9:14: Ord.
#1504, § 1; Ord. #2526; Ord. #2555, §§ 1 — 12; Ord. #2613, §§ 1 —
4; Ord. #2784, §§ 1 — 5; Ord. No. 2939-16; Ord. No. 2945-16 ]
a. The Director of Public Safety shall cause to be prepared and shall
submit to the Board of Commissioners a manual or set of rules for the
administration, control and discipline of the Police Department and all
the members thereof. The Board of Commissioners shall approve a
manual or set of rules for the administration, control and discipline of
the Police Department and all the members thereof. Upon approval by
the Board of Commissioners, the manual shall be in full force and effect
as though it were incorporated as part of this section and a copy thereof
shall be furnished to every member of the Department.
b. Rules and Regulations Adopted. The revised Rules and Regulations
dated July 1, 2016 shall be in full force and effect as though they were
incorporated as part of subsection 2-9.14 of the Lyndhurst Revised
General Ordinances, and a copy thereof shall be furnished to every
member of the Police Department. (Police Rules and Regulations: Ord.
No. 2954-16)2
2. Editor's Note: See Code Appendix A for the Rules and Regulations for the Administration
and Operation of the Lyndhurst Police Department. The promotions policy is now codified
as subsection 2-9.16.
§ 2-9.11 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-9.15
1:34
§ 2-9.15. Personnel Files. [Ord. #1504, § 1]
The Chief of Police shall confer with the Municipal Administrator to arrange
for the keeping of personnel files for every member of the Police
Department in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 5, Personnel
Policy, Practices and Regulations. The Municipal Administrator shall
maintain the personnel files on the members of the Police Department in the
same manner as required for all other municipal employees.
§ 2-9.16. Promotions.3 [Ord. No. 2946-16]
a. Objective. The Township of Lyndhurst desires to promote the most
qualified candidates to the positions of higher rank. This subsection
establishes the eligibility requirements and the process for promotion
to all higher ranks. The promotional process will strive to be allinclusive
and include consideration of the candidates' qualities as a
leader as well as their performance and accomplishments as a police
officer. The promotional process shall be on the basis of merit,
experience, education, demonstrated ability, and competitive
examinations. The qualities that this agency considers important for
promotion to the next highest rank include, but are not limited to, the
following (this list does not necessarily indicate rank order of
importance):
1. Leadership ability;
2. Supervisory ability;
3. Initiative;
4. Decisionmaking capabilities;
5. Productivity;
6. Emotional stability;
7. Management and objective capabilities;
8. Report writing ability;
9. Written and verbal communication skills;
10. Problem solving skills;
11. Self-confidence;
12. Knowledge of departmental written directives;
13. Appearance in uniform;
14. Ability to gain respect from others;
3. Editor's Note: Ord. Nos. 2526, 2555, 2613, 2784 were repealed by Ord. Nos. 2938-16 and
2946-16.
§ 2-9.15 GENERAL § 2-9.16
1:35
15. Attitude towards peers, supervising officers and the public;
16. Motivation and morale;
17. Attendance history;
18. Loyalty to the department police administration and the citizens of
the community;
19. Knowledge of current and future work assignments;
20. Experience and seniority;
21. Educational achievement;
22. Career development and training;
23. Commendations; and
24. Special assignment.
b. Promotion authority. The Commissioner of Public Safety is the
appointing authority for the Township of Lyndhurst and is responsible
for the promotion of employees of the Township of Lyndhurst Police
Department. The authority to promote any member in the Lyndhurst
Police Department shall remain exclusively with the Commissioner of
Public Safety. All members desiring to be promoted shall be required to
submit to any testing procedures and examinations as the
Commissioner of Public Safety may direct.
c. Definition. "Promotion" denotes vertical movement in the
organizational hierarchy from one rank classification to another,
accompanied by increases in salary. In accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-129, promotions shall be made from the membership of the
Lyndhurst Police Department.
d. Eligibility. [Amended 4-9-2019 by Ord. No. 3017-19]
1. Detective: All employees with three years or more holding the
position of patrol officer are eligible for promotion to the rank of
Detective.
2. Sergeant: All employees with five years or more holding the
position of patrol officer and/or Detective are eligible for promotion
to the rank of Sergeant.
3. Lieutenant: All employees holding the rank of Sergeant are eligible
for promotion to the rank of Lieutenant if they have served more
than one year of experience in the rank of Sergeant.
4. Captain: All employees holding the rank of Lieutenant are eligible
for promotion to the rank of Captain if they have served more than
one year of experience in the rank of Lieutenant.
§ 2-9.16 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-9.16
1:36
5. Deputy Chief: All employees holding the rank of Lieutenant are
eligible for promotion to the rank of Deputy Chief if they have
served more than one year of experience in the rank of Lieutenant.
All employees holding the rank of Captain are eligible for
promotion to the rank of Deputy Chief.
6. Chief: All employees holding the rank of Captain are eligible for
promotion to the rank of Chief if they have served more than one
year of experience in the rank of Captain All employees holding the
rank of Deputy Chief are eligible for promotion to the rank of Chief.
7. The Commissioner of Public Safety may deviate from the above
requirements only if:
(a) It is found that: no member of the Department meets the above
requirements; and
(b) It is determined that a promotion to a higher rank is necessary
to fulfill an organizational need.
e. Announcement. Upon receiving instructions from the Commissioner of
Public Safety to do so, the Chief of Police shall announce the
promotional process to members of the Department at least 14 days
prior to when a letter of intent is to be submitted. The announcement
shall be made via electronic notifications utilized by the Police
Department. The announcement shall contain the rank to be filled and a
copy of this subsection.
f. Letter of intent. Each eligible officer who intends to be a candidate for
promotion shall submit to the Chief a "letter of intent" stating his or her
intention to take part in the promotional process. This letter must
include, at a minimum, his or her qualifications for the position, as well
as his or her accomplishments as a police officer and/or his/her
accomplishments in his or her current position. This should be
completed in resume form and include date of hire, assignment,
experience, education (formal, informal, law enforcement in-service
training and other job related education) accomplishments,
qualifications and anything else deemed important by the applicant.
Failure to submit a letter of intent within the prescribed time period
shall render the officer ineligible to participate in the promotional
process.
g. Promotional list. After receipt of all the letters of intent, the Chief of
Police will compile a promotional list and submit the list to the
Commissioner of Public Safety.
h. Examinations. All eligible officers will be required to submit to any
written and/or oral testing procedures and examinations as the
Commissioner of the Department of Public Safety may direct.
i. Recommendation. The Chief of Police will submit to the Commissioner
of Public Safety his recommendation(s) for promotion(s).
§ 2-9.16 GENERAL § 2-9.16
1:37
§ 2-9A. (RESERVED)4 [Ord. No. 2310; repealed by Ord. No. 2366]
§ 2-10. POLICE RESERVE OFFICERS.
§ 2-10.1. Authorization. [Ord. #1448, § 1]
There shall be authorized such number of police reserve officers available
for assignment to active police duty in the Township as shall be appointed
by the Director of Public Safety and who shall accept their appointments
and to qualify physically. Each police reserve officer shall be appointed for
an indeterminate period and shall serve at the sole discretion of the Director
j. Probationary period. After promotion, candidate(s) who were promoted
shall be subject to a one year probationary period during which their
performance shall be evaluated.
1. Evaluation of recently promoted candidate(s) for advancement
shall be done by the next higher level supervisor. Recently
promoted candidates for advancement who exhibit deficient areas
of performance will be counseled and receive on-the-job training in
such deficient areas. Should the officer be unable or unwilling to
perform the duties of his/her position satisfactorily or is of such
reputation, habits and dependability as to not merit continuance in
his/her promoted rank, said officer will be demoted to his/her
former rank. Demotion will only take place upon the
recommendation of the Chief of Police and approval of the
Commissioner of Public Safety. The Commissioner of Public Safety
must consult with the Township Attorney prior to rendering his
decision to demote an officer.
(a) Any officer who is demoted will also return to his former salary.
2. Upon the permanent appointment to advancement rank, all time
served by any member during such probationary period shall be
considered as service within said rank and shall be applied toward
any required tenure and promotion period.
k. Appeal of process. Within 10 calendar days of the announcement of the
candidate(s) for promotion, an unsuccessful candidate(s) (who pursued
the promotion process) may file a written letter of appeal. Said letter
must contain all the reason(s) or justification(s) for an appeal, set forth
with as much specificity as possible, and must be submitted to the
Commissioner of Public Safety, through the appropriate chain of
command. Failure to submit said letter shall serve as a waiver of an
appeal. The Commissioner of Public Safety will assess the request and
make a determination of how the request will be addressed on a case by
case basis. The determination of the Commissioner of Public Safety as
to any such appeal shall be final and binding.
4. Editor's Note: Former Section 2-9A, Director of Police, was repealed.
§ 2-9.16 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-10.1
1:38
of Public Safety. Every police reserve officer, so appointed, shall be officially
designated and have the title police reserve officer of the Township.
§ 2-10.2. Qualifications. [Ord. #1448, § 2]
No person shall be eligible or qualified to be appointed a police reserve
officer, unless at the time of such appointment:
§ 2-10.3. Compensation. [Ord. #1448, § 3]
Each police reserve officer may receive compensation as shall be
designated by the Director of Public Safety.
§ 2-10.4. Prohibition for Member of Police Department. [Ord.
#1448, § 4]
No police reserve officer, while serving in such capacity, shall be a member
of the Township Police Department.
§ 2-10.5. Night Stick Permitted. [Ord. #1448, § 5]
No police reserve officer on duty shall be armed, except with a night stick,
unless specifically ordered otherwise by the Director of Public Safety.
§ 2-10.6. Uniform and Equipment. [Ord. #1448, § 6]
No police reserve officer shall wear the police uniform except while actually
performing assigned duties, nor shall any police reserve officer carry any
police equipment in any private vehicle unless reporting, performing or
returning from assigned duties.
§ 2-10.7. Use of Private Vehicle. [Ord. #1448, § 7]
No police reserve officer shall use his private motor vehicle for official
police duty, except to and from place of duty, unless ordered to do so by the
Director of Public Safety.
a. He shall be a citizen of the United States of America.
b. He shall not be less than 21 years of age.
c. He shall be physically qualified to perform the duties of the office.
d. He shall be of good moral character.
e. He shall not have been convicted of any indictable crime.
f. He shall have completed the Lyndhurst CDDC Police Reserve required
auxiliary training course or any other training course approved by the
Director of Public Safety.
§ 2-10.1 GENERAL § 2-10.8
1:39
§ 2-10.8. Regulations. [Ord. #1448, § 8]
Every police reserve officer, while on duty, shall abide by the provisions
of the Rules and Regulations of the Lyndhurst Police Department. Any
violation of the Rules and Regulations, where the penalty for a police officer
is a suspension or dismissal, may result in the dismissal of a police reserve
officer.
§ 2-10.9. Insurance. [Ord. #1448, § 9]
Every police reserve officer shall be provided with insurance policy
coverage providing for payments incident to injuries or death sustained
while performing prescribed duties. The insurance shall be in face amounts
designated by the Director of Public Safety, and at no cost to the police
reserve officer.
§ 2-10.10. Additional Requirements. [Ord. #1448, § 10]
Anything not covered by this section shall be determined and provided for
by resolution.
§ 2-10.11. Petition to Be Inactive Member. [Ord. #2038, § I]
Any member having completed 20 years or more of active service in the
Department may petition the Commissioner of Public Safety for approval
to be placed in the category of inactive member of the Department. Active
members having reached their 65th birthday and members who become
disabled as a result of injuries received while responding to an emergency
shall be permitted to become inactive members of the Department.
Inactive members shall enjoy all of the privileges and benefits of the
Department, except that they shall not engage in handling emergency
activities and shall receive 50% of the expenses allowed to active members
of the Department.
§ 2-11. POLICE EMERGENCY SQUAD. [Ord. #1649; amended by
Ord. #1992; Ord. #2898-14; 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 3018-19]
§ 2-11.1. Established.
There is established the Police Emergency Squad of the Township, to consist
of such of members as shall be set by resolution of the Board of
Commissioners of the Township.
§ 2-11.2. Compensation and appointment.
The members of the corps and squad shall serve without compensation
and shall be appointed by the Director of the Department of Public Safety
of the Township and shall be at least 18 years of age. The squad reports
to the Director of the Department of Public Safety through the Deputy
Commissioner of Emergency Medical Services.
§ 2-10.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-11.3
1:40
§ 2-11.3. Term of office.
The term of office of the members of the squad shall be one year, which term
shall commence on the date of their initial appointment and be renewed on
January 1 of each subsequent year.
§ 2-11.4. Duties.
The Township Police Emergency Squad shall perform all the duties
appertaining to the rendering of emergency medical treatment during their
assigned tours. They shall have supervision of emergency equipment and
shall obey any and all rules and regulations as promulgated by the Township
and the Director of Public Safety.
§ 2-11.5. Officers of the Squad.
The officers of the Police Emergency Squad shall be a Captain, two
Lieutenants, up to three Sergeants, a Secretary and a Treasurer, all of
whom shall be selected from and by the members of the squad and shall
serve without salary.
§ 2-11.6. Petition to be inactive member.
Any member having completed 20 years or more of active service in the
Department may petition the Director of Public Safety for approval to
be placed in the category of inactive member of the Department. Active
members having reached their 65th birthday and members who become
disabled as a result of injuries received while responding to an emergency
shall be permitted to become inactive members of the Department. Inactive
members shall enjoy all the privileges and benefits of the Department,
except they shall receive 50% of the expenses allowed to active members of
the Department.
§ 2-11.7. Police Emergency Squad fees.
The Township of Lyndhurst bills for EMS services. Current EMS fees are
established at $600 per transport and $12 per mile. Any portion of the
transport fee herein established (or the entire fee) may be waived for any
part deemed necessary and appropriate by the Township. Any changes of
fees billed can be set by resolution of the Board of Commissioners of the
Township.
§ 2-12. SERVICE FEE FOR POLICE ESCORTS.
§ 2-12.1. Fee Established. [Ord. #1539, § 1; Ord. #1771, § 1]
The Police Department of the Township upon written request may, in the
discretion of the Chief, provide a police escort for any person requesting
the same, providing, however, that the person shall accompany the written
request with payment of a fee for such service according to the following
schedule:
§ 2-11.3 GENERAL § 2-12.1
1:41
For police escorts within the Township of Lyndhurst: $10.
§ 2-12.2. Exceptions. [Ord. #1539, § 2]
There shall be no service fee for police escorts accompanying funeral
corteges, duly permitted parades or municipally-sponsored events.
§ 2-12.3. Request Forms. [Ord. #1539, § 3]
The Police Department shall have prepared the necessary forms requesting
police escorts and make the forms available to the public.
§ 2-12.4. Collection of Fees; Monthly Report. [Ord. #1539, § 4]
The Chief of Police shall designate the superior officer in charge of each
tour of duty as the person to collect the service fee set forth in this section.
The Chief of Police shall maintain an accurate account of all service fees
collected from police escorts and shall be responsible for depositing the
funds with the Tax Collector of the Township together with the monthly
report of escort service provided during the month. A copy of the report
shall be filed with the Tax Collector and the Township Clerk.
§ 2-13. FIRE DEPARTMENT.
§ 2-13.1. Fire Companies Established. [Ord. #1610, § 1; Ord. #1844,
§ I; Ord. #1873, § I; Ord. #2005, § I; Ord. #2087, § I; Ord. #2570,
§ 1]
The volunteer Fire Department of the Township shall consist of three
companies to be known as and designated as Lyndhurst Engine Company
No. 1 and Fire Rescue Company No. 4; Lyndhurst Truck Company No. 1 and
Hose Company No. 2; and Lyndhurst Engine Company No. 3; and as many
additional companies as the Director of Public Safety may establish, with an
authorized total force of 80 members; and two chaplains.
§ 2-13.2. Deputy Fire Commissioner. [Ord. #1610, § 2]
The Director of Public Safety shall appoint a member of the Lyndhurst
Volunteer Fire Department as Deputy Fire Commissioner, provided he has
served seven years of active duty, who shall hold this office at the pleasure
of the Director of Public Safety. It shall be the duties of the Deputy Fire
Commissioner to represent the Director of Public Safety at all Fire
Department activities, to supervise the maintenance of the fire alarm
system and all apparatus and equipment, and to make recommendations to
the Director of Public Safety pertinent to the purchase or acquisition of such
equipment and material as he may deem necessary to adequately outfit the
Fire Department to effect the maximum means of fire protection and fire
extinguishment. The Deputy Fire Commissioner shall be compensated for
such duties as per the annual salary ordinance.
§ 2-12.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-13.3
1:42
§ 2-13.3. Assistant Deputy Fire Commissioner. [Ord. #2549, § 1]
The Director of Public Safety shall appoint a member of the Lyndhurst
Volunteer Fire Department as assistant Deputy Fire Commissioner,
provided he has served seven years of active duty, who shall hold this office
at the pleasure of the Director of the Department of Public Safety.
In the absence of the Deputy Fire Commissioner it shall be the duties
of the assistant Deputy Fire Commissioner to represent the Director of
the Department of Public Safety and Deputy Fire Commissioner at all
Fire Department activities, to supervise the maintenance of the fire alarm
system and all apparatus and equipment, and to make recommendations to
the Director of the Department of Public Safety pertinent to the purchase
or acquisition of such equipment or material as he may deem necessary
to adequately outfit the Fire Department to effect the maximum means
of fire protection and fire extinguishment. The assistant Deputy Fire
Commissioner shall be compensated for such duties as per the annual salary
ordinance.
§ 2-13.4. Chaplains Appointed. [Ord. #1610, § 3; Ord. #2549, § 2]
The Director of Public Safety shall appoint two persons who shall be
members of the clergy to serve as chaplains of the volunteer Fire
Department, and who shall hold office at the pleasure of the Director
of Public Safety. The chaplains shall administer spiritual aid and service
to members of the volunteer Fire Department and their families, upon
the notification by the Chief. For such duties, the chaplains shall be
compensated in the amount of $200, per annum, each payable on December
1 of each year.
§ 2-13.5. Election of Officers. [Ord. #1610, § 4; Ord. #2549, § 2]
The Chief of the Volunteer Fire Department, the First Assistant Chief, the
Second Assistant Chief, the secretary and treasurer shall be elected by a
majority vote of the members of the volunteer Fire Department present and
voting, at an election which shall take place on the second Friday in the
month of May at fire headquarters. The term of office shall be for one year
commencing the third Saturday in the month of May.
§ 2-13.6. Qualifications for Chief and Assistant Chief. [Ord. #1610,
§ 5; Ord. #2549, § 2]
No members of the volunteer Fire Department shall be eligible for election
to the office of Chief or one of the Assistant Chiefs who has not been an
active member of the Fire Department for a period of not less than five
years and who has not served at least one year as Lieutenant or Captain
of his respective company; and for the office of Chief, he must have served
one year as Second Assistant Chief or one year as First Assistant Chief.
In the event of a vacancy in the office of the volunteer Fire Department,
a special meeting of the Fire Department will be called by the Director of
Public Safety and he shall conduct a special election for the purpose of
§ 2-13.3 GENERAL § 2-13.6
1:43
filling the vacancy, complying with the qualifications previously set forth in
this section.
§ 2-13.7. Duties of Chief. [Ord. #1610, § 6; Ord. #2549, § 2]
The Chief shall at all times have command over the members, apparatus
and equipment of the volunteer Fire Department at fires. In the answering
of fire alarms, the Chief shall direct all other Chiefs and other officers
and members of the Fire Department in the performance of their duties,
to determine the placement of the apparatus and equipment of the Fire
Department in the most advantageous location for the extinguishment of
fires; and it shall be his duty to examine, at least once a month, the condition
of all apparatus and equipment and fire headquarters and report the same
to the Deputy Fire Commissioner for forwarding to the Director of Public
Safety. In the absence of the Chief and Assistant Chiefs at fires, the first
Captain, and in his absence, the first Lieutenant of any of the companies
arriving at the scene of a fire shall act as commanding officer until the
arrival of the Chief or an Assistant Chief or Captain. It shall be the duty of
the Chief and Assistant Chiefs of the Fire Department to keep a complete
and detailed inventory of all apparatus, equipment and supplies of his
respective company, placed in the company's charge by the Township, which
inventory shall be made as of December 31 of each year, and the same shall
be reported to the Deputy Fire Commissioner for forwarding to the Director
of Public Safety.
§ 2-13.8. Election of Captain and Lieutenant. [Ord. #1610, § 7; Ord.
#2549, § 2]
It shall be the duty of each company herein provided for to elect, from their
members, at a regularly scheduled company meeting to be held annually
on compliance with each company's constitution, rules and bylaws, one
Captain and one Lieutenant, each to hold office for a period of one year.
§ 2-13.9. Government of Individual Companies. [Ord. #1610, § 8;
Ord. #2549, § 2]
The government and management of the individual companies herein
provided for shall be according to such constitution, rules and bylaws as
shall have been adopted by each company's members; providing, however,
that the same shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of this section.
§ 2-13.10. Qualifications for Members. [Ord. #1610, § 9; Ord.
#1733, § 1; Ord. No. 2381, § I; Ord. #2415, § I; Ord. #2549, § 2; Ord.
#2556, § 1; Ord. #2570, § 2; Ord. #2586, § 1; Ord. #2718, § 1;
amended 5-8-2018 by Ord. No. 2994-18]
a. No person shall become a member of the Lyndhurst Volunteer Fire
Department or any of the companies thereof unless, at the time of his or
her application for membership, that person:
§ 2-13.6 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-13.10
1:44
§ 2-13.11. Disqualification from Active Membership. [Ord. #1610,
§ 10; Ord. #2549, § 2]
No person shall remain an active member of the Department past his 65th
birthday or within five years of the time he has received medical advice
or treatment for cerebral hemorrhage, coronary thrombosis, myocardial
infarction, angina pectorior or any disease or malfunction of the heart or
respiratory system. Nor shall any person remain an active member of the
Department during such period of time that he is disqualified from accident
or disability insurance coverage under such policies as may be in effect for
the volunteer Fire Department.
1. Shall have been a resident of the Township of Lyndhurst for at least
one year prior to the date of application, unless he or she is an
active career or volunteer firefighter who has purchased a
residence within the Township, and possesses a minimum
Firefighter I certification or its equivalent recognized by the
Bergen County Fire Academy.
2. Shall be at least 18 years old.
3. Shall be a citizen of the United States of America.
4. Shall be certified by a physician as being physically qualified for
active duty in the Fire Department.
5. Shall be of good moral character.
6. Shall not have been convicted of any crime and shall have
consented to a criminal history search and finger-printing to be
conducted by the Lyndhurst Police Department.
7. Shall hold a valid New Jersey driver's license.
8. Shall submit to a drug screening test.
9. Shall hold a minimum education requirement of a high school
diploma, GED, or its equivalent, or shall have successfully
completed the 12th grade school year, in anticipation of obtaining a
diploma, GED or its equivalent from a high school or vocational
school. Failure to obtain such diploma, GED or its equivalent shall
result in disqualification and removal from the Fire Department.
10. Must submit a drug test and physical which must be completed
with 72 hours authorization.
b. Any applicant who is either denied by a fire company and/or withdraws
their application for membership will need to wait one full calendar
year before resubmission.
§ 2-13.10 GENERAL § 2-13.12
1:45
§ 2-13.12. Petition to be Inactive Member. [Ord. #1610, § 11; Ord.
#2549, § 2]
Any member having completed 20 years or more of active service in the
Department may petition the Commissioner of Public Safety for approval
to be placed in the category of inactive member of the Department. Active
members having reached their 65th birthday and members who become
disabled as a result of injuries received in fighting a fire or other emergency
shall be permitted to become inactive members of the Department.
Inactive members shall enjoy all of the privileges and benefits of the
Department, except that they shall not engage in fire fighting or emergency
handling activities and shall receive 50% of the expenses allowed to active
members of the Department.
§ 2-13.13. Annual Physical Required. [Ord. #1610, § 12; Ord.
#2549, § 2]
Each apparatus driver of the Township Fire Department shall annually
undergo a physical, to be paid for by the Township of Lyndhurst. The
examination shall be completed before the third Saturday of May and the
findings of same are to be submitted by the Deputy Fire Commissioner to
the Director of Public Safety. No apparatus driver of the Township Fire
Department shall be eligible to undertake the duties of an apparatus driver
until he has completed the physical examination and been certified as
medically fit by the examining physician.
§ 2-13.14. Membership Requirements. [Ord. #1610, § 13; Ord.
#2549, § 2]
Membership in the Fire Department shall be in accordance with the
constitution, rules and bylaws of the company to which application is to be
made, and also in accordance with the provisions of this section.
§ 2-13.15. Approval of New Members by the Director of Public
Safety. [Ord. #1610, § 14; Ord. #2549, § 2]
Upon election of members by the companies, the secretary of each company
shall immediately submit, in writing, the names of such newly elected
members to the Director of Public Safety for his approval or rejection.
Upon receipt of such report, the Director of Public Safety shall proceed to
consider the same. If the report is in favor of admission to membership in
the Fire Department of such applicant, the Director of Public Safety may
approve or disapprove the same. If the Director of Public Safety approves
the report, the names of newly elected members shall be properly recorded.
All members of the volunteer Fire Department shall have issued to them
a certificate signed by the Director of Public Safety and attested by the
Township Clerk, that the person therein named is a duly qualified member
of the Fire Department of the Township and a member of the company
therein named.
§ 2-13.12 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-13.16
1:46
§ 2-13.16. Transferal to Another Company. [Ord. #1610, § 15; Ord.
#2549, § 2]
An active fireman may be transferred from membership in one company
to membership in another company in the volunteer Fire Department. He
shall apply to his own company for such transfer. Upon approval by his
own company, the application shall be submitted to the company to which
he desires to be transferred, and upon its approval, the application shall
be submitted to the Director of Public Safety for his approval. The record
of duty performed by the member so transferred shall be continued and
his annual record of duty for each year shall be based on his record in
both companies for the year. The secretary of the company from which he
is transferred shall endorse on his application, if approved, a transcript
of his record from the beginning of the company year to the date of his
transfer. His membership in one company shall not terminate until he has
been notified of his admission to the new company.
§ 2-13.17. Reimbursement to Qualified Firemen; Payment to
General Uniform Fund. [Ord. #1610, § 16; Ord. #2549, § 2]
On December 1 of each year the Township shall reimburse each active
member of the volunteer Fire Department, the sum of $225 who shall have
answered not less than 60% of all fire alarms during the company year
next preceding the date of such payment. The sum to each member shall
be paid to reimburse him for those expenses incurred in the answering of
fire alarms and to replace and clean personal clothing that may become
damaged or soiled in the course of the performance of fire duty. In addition,
the Township shall pay to a general uniform fund, created by the volunteer
Fire Department, the sum of $10 for each active member of the Fire
Department; and payment representing allowance for the acquisition of and
proper maintenance of a regulation fireman's uniform.
§ 2-13.18. Appointment of Drivers. [Ord. #1610, § 17; Ord. 1717,
§ 1; Ord. #2549, § 2]
The Director of Public Safety shall annually appoint before the third
Saturday of May, 12 men from Lyndhurst Truck Company No. 1 and Hose
Company No. 2, eight men from Lyndhurst Engine Company No. 3, and
eight men from Valley Brook Engine Company No. 1 who are active
members of the Lyndhurst Volunteer Fire Department to duty as apparatus
drivers, who shall be qualified therefor pursuant to this section. It shall
be the duties of the drivers of fire apparatus to drive their respective
company's apparatus and to drive any apparatus upon orders of the Deputy
Fire Commissioner, and in his absence upon orders of the Chief or Assistant
Chiefs or officers, in order of their rank, to the scene of all fires and
to tend to and operate all auxiliary equipment in compliance with the
orders of the Deputy Fire Commissioner, the Chiefs or officers. Drivers shall
be responsible for the safe keeping and careful usage of the apparatus
and equipment provided for the use of each respective company by the
Township of Lyndhurst and shall promptly report in writing to the Chief
§ 2-13.16 GENERAL § 2-13.18
1:47
of the Fire Department the loss or damage of any of the apparatus and
equipment, and he, in turn, will report said loss to the Deputy Fire
Commissioner for forwarding to the Director of Public Safety. Drivers will
be compensated for such duties in the amount of $125, per annum, payable
semi-annually on the first day of June and the first day of December.
§ 2-13.19. Leave of Absence. [Ord. #1610, § 18; Ord. #2549, § 2]
Any active member of the volunteer Fire Department may obtain leaves of
absence. The Director of Public Safety may grant permission for a leave of
absence for a period of no more than six months to any active member of the
Fire Department; provided, however, that any member so desiring a leave
must first make written application to his company and receive the approval
of the members of his company. The secretary of the company shall notify
the Director of Public Safety of the company's action on all applications for
such leaves of absence.
§ 2-13.20. Removal of Equipment from Fire Headquarters. [Ord.
#1610, § 19; Ord. #2549, § 1]
Apparatus and equipment shall not be removed or caused to be removed
from fire headquarters for any other purpose than answering a fire alarm
without the consent of the Deputy Fire Commissioner. In the absence of
the Deputy Fire Commissioner, the consent of the assistant Deputy Fire
Commissioner shall be required. In the absence of the assistant Deputy Fire
Commissioner, the consent of the Chiefs or Assistant Chief, in order of their
rank shall be required, except in cases of extreme emergencies.
§ 2-13.21. Removal of Apparatus from Township. [Ord. #1610, § 20;
Ord. #2549, § 1]
Apparatus and equipment shall not be moved or caused to be moved from
the Township except in case of conflagration or call for assistance from
a neighboring municipality, and then only with the consent of the Deputy
Fire Commissioner. In the absence of the Deputy Fire Commissioner, the
consent of the assistant Deputy Fire Commissioner shall be required. In
the absence of the assistant Deputy Fire Commissioner, the consent of the
Chief or Assistant Chiefs, in order of their rank shall be required, who shall
be responsible to the Director of the Department of Public Safety for such
act. Fire apparatus shall not be used for parades and convention purposes
except by permission of the Director of the Department of Public Safety.
§ 2-13.22. Bylaws. [Ord. #1610, § 21; Ord. #2004, §§ I, II; Ord.
#2549, § 2]
a. Charges Against Members; Hearings; Suspension.
1. Suspensions; Authority.
§ 2-13.18 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-13.22
1:48
(a) The Chief, First Assistant Chief and Second Assistant Chief
shall, at any time, have the authority to suspend any firefighter
("accused") for good cause including, but not limited to:
(1) Conviction of a criminal offense;
(2) Disobedience of a firematic order;
(3) Unauthorized use of a Department vehicle;
(4) Acting under the influence of drugs or alcohol at a fire
scene;
(5) Conduct unbecoming a firefighter;
(6) Refusal to obey an order given for the purpose of
promoting the maintenance, health, safety and welfare of
the Department, its personnel and/or equipment and
facilities.
(b) An officer in charge of a fire shall have the same authority for
offenses committed at the fire scene.
(c) Any officer may file charges against any fire fighter or officer at
any time or place.
(d) Any suspension shall remain in effect until a hearing before the
board of officers.
2. The board of officers shall be comprised of the three Chiefs, three
Captains and three Lieutenants of the Department. The board of
officers shall have the authority to enforce or vacate a paragraph
a1 suspension, remove a firefighter or impose other disciplinary
sanctions. The board of officers may decline to hear a matter and
may refer the same to the accused's company for disposition.
3. A quorum of the board of officers shall consist of a minimum of five
officers including a Chief. The majority of officers must come from
companies different from that of the accused.
4. The complaining officer shall within seven days present the
accused and the board of officers with a written statement of the
pending charges, and the accused shall within seven days present
the board of officers with a written answer.
5. The board of officers consisting of at least a quorum shall meet
within 14 days of the receipt of the answer. At the hearing, an
officer will be selected to keep written minutes of the hearing. The
board shall review the statement of pending charges and answer.
The complaining officer and accused may testify and offer
testimony of other witnesses in their behalf. At the close of
testimony, the board of officers, by a majority closed ballot vote
§ 2-13.22 GENERAL § 2-13.22
1:49
§ 2-13.23. Firemen Moving from the Township. [Ord. #1610, § 22;
Ord. #2549, § 2]
Any member of the volunteer Fire Department who shall move from the
Township and shall remain outside the limits of the Township without the
consent of the Director of Public Safety, shall, at the end of 90 days after
such removal, cease to be a member of the Fire Department and shall forfeit
any and all rights and privileges accruing from such membership.
§ 2-13.24. Requests for Equipment and Supplies. [Ord. #1610, § 23;
Ord. #2549, § 2]
The request for equipment and supplies shall be made by requisition by the
Captain of each company, upon the approval of the Chief of his respective
company, on a form provided for such purpose. The requisitions shall be
delivered to the Deputy Fire Commissioners who shall approve or
disapprove the requisition, and forward the same to the Director of Public
Safety for final action.
§ 2-13.25. Annual Inspection. [Ord. #1610, § 24; Ord. #2549, § 2;
Ord. #2570, § 3]
There shall be an annual inspection of the entire Fire Department and its
equipment by the Director of Public Safety. The inspection shall be held on
the third Saturday of May of each year at 5:00 p.m., prevailing time at fire
headquarters. All members of the Fire Department are required to attend
such inspection dressed in regulation uniform.
§ 2-13.26. Officers Presently Holding Office. [Ord. #1610, § 25; Ord.
#2549, § 2]
All officers of the Fire Department heretofore elected and holding office
prior to the passage of this section are hereby continued in office, subject to
the terms of this section; and all the rights, privileges and terms of services
of the members of the Fire Department heretofore acquired prior to the
shall decide guilt or innocence. Any punishment shall be decided
by a majority vote after open discussion.
6. The Commissioner of Public Safety shall within 21 days review the
decision of the board of officers and affirm, reverse or modify the
decision of the board of officers; or hold a new hearing. The
accused shall have the right to be heard by the Commissioners
before a decision is made.
b. Charges Pursuant to Company Bylaws. In addition to charges brought
under the Department bylaws set forth in paragraph a above, charges
may be brought against any members of the Fire Department by the
company to which the accused fire fighter belongs pursuant to that
company's constitution and/or bylaws. The appeal process of the
accused shall be the same as in paragraph a above.
§ 2-13.22 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-13.26
1:50
passage of this section are hereby continued, subject to the terms of this
section.
§ 2-13.27. Special Duty Firefighter. [Ord. #2552, § 1]
The position of special duty firefighter is hereby established in the Fire
Department. A special duty firefighter is a person who is employed in the
Township of Lyndhurst and resides outside the Township, and is a member
of the Fire Department in the municipality in which he or she resides.
The special duty firefighter shall assist the Fire Department and serve in a
similar capacity as a regular member of the Fire Department, but shall not
be entitled to any of the benefits of a regular member, except as provided
herein.
a. The requirements for service as a special duty firefighter are as follows:
1. Meeting all of the qualifications for regular members as provided in
subsection 2-13.10 of this section, with the exception of subsection
2-13.10a.
2. Employment in the Township of Lyndhurst.
3. Submission of an application in writing to the Lyndhurst Fire
Department requesting special duty firefighter status, which
request will be reviewed by the Fire Department board of officers
and presented to the Fire Department and Director of Public Safety
for final approval.
4. Submission with the application of a letter from the Fire
Department in the municipality in which he or she resides which
states that he or she is a member in good standing with that Fire
Department.
5. Submission of all proper training certificates in connection with the
application.
6. Satisfactory participation in, and completion of, any training
program required by the Lyndhurst Fire Department, and
compliance with all Department standard operating procedure
requirements and bylaws.
b. A special duty firefighter shall be provided with the proper fire fighting
gear and necessary equipment.
c. A special duty firefighter shall not be eligible for the following:
1. The LOSAP Program or receipt of a clothing allowance.
2. Election to the positions of Chief, First Assistant Chief, Second
Assistant Chief, Captain, Lieutenant, secretary, and treasurer.
d. A special duty firefighter shall serve the entire Fire Department, and
shall not be attached to any of the Township's three fire companies.
§ 2-13.26 GENERAL § 2-14
1:51
§ 2-14. PURCHASING.
§ 2-14.1. Purpose. [Ord. #1528, § 1]
It is hereby declared to be the intention of this section to provide for
uniform purchasing of all materials and equipment necessary for the
operation of the municipal affairs of the Township.
§ 2-14.2. Purchase Order Form and Distribution. [Ord. #1528, § 2]
The Department of Revenue and Finance shall cause to be prepared a
standard purchase order form providing for distribution in quadruplicate of
the purchase order, in the following form and manner:
§ 2-14.3. Payment of Purchases and Reports. [Ord. #1528, § 3]
The Department of Revenue and Finance shall not make payment of any
purchases made on behalf of the Township, until the delivery of the
material, equipment or supplies has been approved and accepted by the
director of the department. The Department of Revenue and Finance shall
furnish the departmental directors with reports pertaining to purchase of
material, equipment or supplies by the department on a monthly basis.
§ 2-14.3A. Internal Financial Controls. [Ord. #2889-13, § 1]
The following are the specifications of the internal financial controls:
a. Original copy to be forwarded to vendor.
b. One copy to be retained by the department requiring purchase.
c. One copy to be filed with the Department of Revenue and Finance.
The Department of Revenue and Finance shall further provide that
the original purchase order be attached to the voucher authorizing
payment prior to the making of payment on the purchase.
a. The 2012-2013 Internal Controls Memo, dated June 24, 2013 is hereby
codified as though it was recited herein in full. Said internal controls
memo shall be annually updated by the Chief Financial Officer (CFO)
and be permanently posted on the Lyndhurst web site.5
b. The Township of Lyndhurst Internal Controls shall be of such a nature
so as to ensure the safeguarding of all assets of the Township of
Lyndhurst.
c. The Township of Lyndhurst Internal Controls has been designed to
ensure compliance with the New Jersey Local Fiscal Affairs Law
(N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1 et seq.) and the New Jersey Local Public Contracts
Law (N.J.S.A. 40A:11-1 et seq.) and related regulations, for example
5. Editor's Note: A copy of the Internal Financial Controls as adopted by Ordinance No.
2889-13 may be found on file in the Township offices.
§ 2-14 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-14.3A
1:52
§ 2-14.4. Annual Inventory. [Ord. #1528, § 4]
The director of each department of the Township shall cause to be made an
annual inventory of all municipal property in the custody or control of the
department. The director shall file with the Township Clerk a copy of the
annual inventory.
§ 2-14.5. County Purchasing Agreement. [Ord. #1451]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:23-6.26 to 40:23-6.29, and
40:23-6.34 to 40:23-6.37 the Township is hereby authorized to enter into
contracts with the County of Bergen for the joint use by the Township
of Lyndhurst and other municipalities in the County of Bergen of
administrative services and facilities of the office of purchasing agent of
the County of Bergen appropriate to the procurement of certain materials,
supplies and equipment which may be determined to be required from
time to time by the Township and which the Township may otherwise
lawfully purchase for itself. The services and facilities of the office of county
purchasing agent shall be provided without cost to the Township.
The proper municipal officials of the Township are hereby authorized and
empowered to execute, on behalf of the Township, all such contracts with
the County of Bergen as may be authorized and approved by resolution of
the Mayor and Commissioners of the Township.
§ 2-15. APPROVAL OF CLAIMS.6
§ 2-15.1. Present Bill of Demand. [Ord. #1485, § 1]
Any person claiming payment from the Township shall present a detailed
bill of demand to the collector of taxes of the Township duly certified.
§ 2-15.2. Signature of Designated Person Required. [Ord. #1485,
§ 2]
It shall be the duty of the collector of taxes to request that the signature
of the officer or employee who has been duly designated by the director
of the department to which the claim is made to certify that the materials
have been received by, or the services rendered to, the Township appears
on every claim.
N.J.A.C. 5:34. Furthermore, the implementation of procedures
regarding contract approval and compliance as well as appropriation
(budget) monitoring is necessary to avoid misappropriation and
inappropriate (unauthorized) use of taxpayer funds.
d. The Township Attorney, when appointed as an employee of the
Township, and the CFO may approve and sign all vouchers and checks.
6. Editor's Note: See Section 2-18 for the establishment of the position of Tax Collector/
Treasurer/Chief Financial Officer.
§ 2-14.3A GENERAL § 2-15.3
1:53
§ 2-15.3. Approval of Director of the Department. [Ord. #1485, § 3]
All claims duly certified and approved by the officer or employee designated
by a director of the department shall be presented to the director of the
department that the claim has been made to, and if the director is satisfied
that the claim is proper, the director shall approve the claim for payment.
The collector of taxes shall then forward the claim to the Township Clerk
who shall then present the approved claim to the Board of Commissioners
for formal approval at a regular meeting.
§ 2-15.4. Approval or Rejection of Board of Commissioners. [Ord.
#1485, § 4]
All claims against the Township shall be considered by the Board of
Commissioners at a regular meeting and shall be approved by the Board
of Commissioners, or the alternative, the Board of Commissioners may
reject any claims presented to it and return the same to the director of the
department against which the claim is made for further investigation and
report to the Board of Commissioners.
§ 2-15.5. Clerk to Record Claims in Official Minutes. [Ord. #1485,
§ 5]
The Township Clerk shall record all claims in the official minutes of the
meetings of the Board of Commissioners, and the Township Clerk shall
indicate that the Board of Commissioners has, by formal action, approved
the claims with appropriate record as to any claims disapproved or rejected
by the Board of Commissioners.
§ 2-15.6. List of Claims Available Prior to Meeting; Record to be
Kept. [Ord. #1485, § 6]
A list of all claims shall be presented for approval at the next regular
meeting. The schedule or list is to be made available to every member of
the Board of Commissioners prior to the regular meeting wherein the claim
is subject to formal action by the Board of Commissioners. After approval,
all claims shall be listed in a book or record to be designated as "Claims
Approved by the Board of Commissioners of Lyndhurst, N.J." This listing
shall be amplified by appropriate detail in the minutes to permit ready
identification.
§ 2-15.7. Collector of Taxes to Indicate Approval on Claims. [Ord.
#1485, § 7]
It shall be the duty of the collector of taxes to indicate on any claims that
the same has been approved for payment by the Board of Commissioners
indicating on the claims the date of approval by the Board of
Commissioners.
§ 2-15.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-15.8
1:54
§ 2-15.8. Preparation and Signature of Checks. [Ord. #1525;
#2889-13 ]
The collector of taxes shall, upon approval of the payment of the claims
by the Board of Commissioners forthwith prepare the necessary checks
for payment thereof, which checks shall be signed by the Mayor and the
Director of the Department of Revenue and Finance and countersigned by
the Township Clerk. The collector of taxes shall record the approved checks
in proper books of account and thereafter shall mail or otherwise distribute
the checks to the claimants.
Pursuant to Ordinance No. 2889-13, the Township Attorney, when appointed
as an employee of the Township, and the CFO may approve and sign all
vouchers and checks.
§ 2-15.9. Payroll Account Established. [Ord. #1525]
There is hereby established by this section a payroll account in the
Township. The director of each department of the Township shall designate
an officer or an employee by letter to the collector of taxes of the Township
and the officer or employee shall be responsible for preparing the necessary
payrolls for all employees, which payrolls shall be duly certified by the
person authorized to certify that the services have been rendered and the
amount specified is in fact due and owing to the employee or employees.
The payroll shall then be approved by the director of the department
responsible therefor and presented to the Board of Commissioners for
approval at a regular meeting and shall be paid in due course, and shall
be paid in a manner as set forth for the payment of claims against the
Township. The Board of Commissioners may designate by resolution
providing for the payment of salaries, wages and compensation.
§ 2-15.10. Form of Voucher. [Ord. #1485, § 10]
The Board of Commissioners may, by resolution, prescribe the form and
requirements of the voucher to be submitted to the Township for the
payment of all claims for services or materials.
§ 2-15.11. Electronic Disbursement Controls for Payroll Services.
[Ord. #2634, §§ 1 — 3]
a. Approval of the Use of Disbursing Organization for Payment of Claims.
The use of a servicer for payment of payroll agency claims is hereby
authorized: The servicer shall be permitted to perform the following
tasks:
1. Data collection.
2. Servicer report preparation.
3. Calculation of withholding.
4. Direct deposit of payroll disbursements.
§ 2-15.8 GENERAL § 2-15.11
1:55
§ 2-16. AGREEMENT WITH INTER-COUNTY COUNCIL ON DRUG
AND ALCOHOL ABUSE. [Ord. #1615]
The Township enters into a contract with the Town of Kearny, the Town
of Harrison and the Boroughs of North Arlington and East Newark, in the
State of New Jersey, to provide for comprehensive alcohol control services
by the Inter-County Council on Drug and Alcohol Abuse pursuant to the
Interlocal Services Act, N.J.S.A. 40:8A et seq.
The Mayor of the Township is authorized to execute the contract on behalf
of the Township and that the Township Clerk affix the seal thereto and that
a copy of the contract authorized by this section be filed with the Township
Clerk and be available for public inspection in the municipal building during
normal business hours.
§ 2-17. ASSESSMENT MAPS.
§ 2-17.1. Assessment Maps Established. [Ord. #1424, § 2]
There is hereby established as the assessment maps of the Township the
map entitled "Assessment Maps of the Township of Lyndhurst, Bergen
County, N. J. 1959," prepared by Michael Neglia, Township Engineer,
approved by the Department of the Treasury of the State of New Jersey
on November 23, 1960 as Serial No. 298, and which map has been and is
now on file in the office of the Tax Collector7 of the Township. The map is
made a part hereof as fully as if a replica thereof was printed herewith and
5. Municipal transfer of funds to the disbursing organization account
for subsequent payment.
b. Approval Officer.
1. The Chief Financial Officer of the Township of Lyndhurst is hereby
designated as the approval officer who shall be responsible for
authorizing and supervising the activities of the disbursing
organization. This authorization is made pursuant to the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40A:5-17(a)(I).
2. The duties of the approval officer shall be implemented to include
the reconciliation and analysis of all general ledger accounts
affected by the activities of the disbursing organization.
3. The approval officer shall also be authorized to enter into an
agreement with the disbursing organization which will allow
holding of funds pending transmittal of those funds to a payee. The
disbursing organization shall be authorized to hold the funds
pending transmittal.
c. Compliance with Laws and Regulations. The Township of Lyndhurst
specifically adopts all requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:30-17.1 et seq. if set
forth herein at length and verbatim.
§ 2-15.11 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-17.1
1:56
from February 20, 1961, the map shall be controlling in all matters relating
therein.
§ 2-17.2. General Welfare. [Ord. #1424, § 2]
The establishment of the assessment maps is hereby declared to be for the
purpose of conserving and promoting the public health, safety, morals and
general welfare of this Township.
§ 2-18. TAX COLLECTOR/TREASURER/CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER.
[Ord. #2090]
In the Township of Lyndhurst in accordance with state statute, N.J.S.A.
48:0-140.1 et seq., a position of Chief Financial Officer shall be established.
In the Department of Revenue and Finance the position of Tax Collector/
Treasurer shall be amended to read Tax Collector/Treasurer/Chief Financial
Officer in order to comply with said statute.
The Township of Lyndhurst Salary Ordinance shall be amended to include
said position of Tax Collector/Treasurer/Chief Financial Officer.
§ 2-19. COOPERATIVE PRICING AGREEMENT.
§ 2-19.1. Title. [Ord. #2188]
This section shall be known and may be cited as the Regionalized Services
and Cooperating Pricing Ordinance of the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 2-19.2. Authorization. [Ord. #2188]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1, et seq. and N.J.S.A.
40A:11-15(5), the Mayor of the Township of Lyndhurst is hereby authorized
to enter into a Regionalized Services and Cooperative Pricing Agreement
with the lead agency.
§ 2-19.3. Contracting Unit. [Ord. #2188]
The lead agency entering into contracts on behalf of the Township of
Lyndhurst shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of the
Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-20. E911 INTERLOCAL SERVICES.
§ 2-20.1. Title. [Ord. #2219, § I]
This section shall be known and may be cited as the E911 Interlocal
Services Ordinance.
7. Editor's Note: See Section 2-18 for the establishment of the position of Tax Collector/
Treasurer/Chief Financial Officer.
§ 2-17.1 GENERAL § 2-20.2
1:57
§ 2-20.2. Authorization to Enter Agreement. [Ord. #2219, § II]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:8A et seq., as hereinafter may be
amended and currently known as the Interlocal Services Act Chapter 208
Laws of 1979, Mayor and Board of Commissioners are hereby authorized to
enter into the E911 Interlocal Services Agreement with the Borough of Lodi
for the purpose of providing E911 services within its jurisdiction.
§ 2-20.3. Compliance Required. [Ord. #2219, § III]
Each participating municipality entering into this Interlocal Services
Agreement shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of the
Interlocal Services Act (N.J.S.A. 40:8A et seq.) and all other provisions of the
revised statutes of the State of New Jersey.
§ 2-21. PART TIME ZONING OFFICER.
§ 2-21.1. Position Established. [Ord. #2316, § I]
There is hereby newly established in the Department of Public Affairs the
position of part time Zoning Officer. The term of office shall be for one year.
The Zoning Officer shall devote at least 10 hours per week but no more than
20 hours per week to the duties of the office as set forth herein.
§ 2-21.2. Qualifications. [Ord. #2316, § II]
The person appointed to the position of Zoning Officer shall meet the
following minimum qualifications:
§ 2-21.3. Enforcement and Penalties. [Ord. #2316, § III]
The Township of Lyndhurst's local zoning ordinance shall be enforced by
the Zoning Officer who is empowered to cause any building, structure,
plans or premises to be inspected and examined and to order in writing the
remedying of any condition found to exist therein or thereat in violation of
any provision of the Township's zoning regulations. The owner or agent of
a building or premises where a violation of any provision of the Township's
zoning regulations shall have been committed or shall exist, or the owner,
agent, architect, builder, contractor, lessee, tenant or any other person who
shall commit, take part or assist in any such violation of the Township's
zoning ordinance, shall be subject to the penalty provided in Section 6-8 of
the revised General Ordinances of the Township of Lyndhurst, 1975.
a. The applicant must be a resident of the Township of Lyndhurst for at
least one year next preceding his date of appointment; and
b. The applicant must have been a member of either the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or the Planning Board of the Township of Lyndhurst for at
least three years.
§ 2-20.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-21.4
1:58
§ 2-21.4. Duties. [Ord. #2316, § IV]
It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to enforce the provisions of the
Township's zoning ordinance as follows:
a. Enforcement Duties.
1. Discover and ascertain the existence of any zoning violations of the
Township's zoning ordinance.
2. Investigate and inspect any alleged violation of the Township's
zoning ordinance within his knowledge or coming to his attention.
3. Prevent further or continued violations of the Township's zoning
ordinance which are known by him to exist, and by every lawful
means cause the violators to cease and desist from committing
such further violations.
4. To prosecute violations of the Township's zoning ordinance in the
manner provided by law.
5. Whenever any building or structure is erected, constructed,
altered, repaired, converted, used or maintained within the
Township of Lyndhurst, it shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to
ascertain that the same is done in accordance with the provisions of
the Township's zoning ordinance and not in violation thereof; and
whenever any building or structure is so erected, constructed,
altered, repaired, converted, used or maintained contrary to or any
land is used in violation of any provision of the Township's zoning
ordinance, it shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to proceed with
the enforcement of the Township's zoning ordinance in the manner
herein provided and as otherwise provided by law; and he is hereby
further authorized and empowered to institute and maintain any
further statutory legal actions and proceedings for the enforcement
hereof, now existing or heretofore or hereafter provided, which
may be available to him.
b. Administrative Duties.
1. In conjunction with the construction code official, make an
inspection of every parcel of land, building or structure for which
an occupancy or land use permit is required prior to the issuance of
such permit, in order to ascertain that said occupancy of use will
comply with every standard, regulation and requirement of this
section for such occupation and use.
2. Issue zoning permits certifying that all applications for
development or land use are in conformity with the zoning
ordinance of the Township of Lyndhurst.
3. Report to the Board of Adjustment with respect to matters which
are properly before the board, and otherwise conduct
investigations, report to and be responsible to the Mayor and
§ 2-21.4 GENERAL § 2-21.4
1:59
§ 2-21.5. Enforcement Procedure. [Ord. #2316, § V]
Whenever the Zoning Officer shall ascertain that any of the provisions of the
Township's zoning ordinance are being violated, he shall:
§ 2-21.6. Warrants. [Ord. #2316, § VI]
Where permitted by law and in the enforcement of the Township's zoning
ordinance, the Zoning Officer may apply to the Judge of the Municipal
Court of the Township of Lyndhurst for a warrant or warrants to search and
inspect the properties and premises upon which he has reason to believe
any violation of the Township's zoning ordinance has taken or is taking
place, and, upon probable cause shown, the Judge may issue such a warrant
or warrants in the manner authorized by law; and the information obtained
pursuant thereto shall be admissible as evidence in any court of competent
jurisdiction for the purposes of proving any case brought for violation of the
Township's zoning ordinance.
§ 2-21.7. Salary or Compensation. [Ord. #2316, § VII]
The salary or compensation of the Zoning Officer shall be as set forth in the
Salary Ordinance.
§ 2-21.8. Construction Code Official Duties Not Affected. [Ord.
#2316, § VIII]
Nothing herein contained shall affect the duties and responsibilities of the
Construction Code Official.
council with respect to matters pertaining to the zone plan and the
Township's zoning ordinance and otherwise within his jurisdiction.
4. Start and maintain an accurate and complete file with respect to
every alleged violation of the Township's zoning ordinance or other
matter investigated and processed by him.
5. File a monthly report of his activities, including the complaints and
cases processed by him and disposition thereof, with the Mayor and
Council of the Township of Lyndhurst.
a. Promptly notify the person committing such violation to cease and
desist from continuing such violation.
b. Sign and file a complaint alleging the violation in the Municipal Court of
the Township of Lyndhurst, in the manner prescribed by law and the
rules governing the practice in such court. He shall also institute
further proceedings in the Superior Court when, in his opinion, the
same are warranted, to enjoin said violation and to effect the
discontinuance thereof. Nothing herein shall prevent any person other
than the Zoning Officer from instituting a complaint for any violation of
the Township's zoning ordinance in the manner prescribed by law.
§ 2-21.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-21.9
1:60
§ 2-21.9. Zoning Permit Fee. [Ord. #2316, § IX; Ord. #2861-12, § 1]
There shall be established a fee for the issuance of a zoning permit which
shall be paid to the Township of Lyndhurst by the person seeking the permit.
The zoning permit fee shall be as follows:
§ 2-22. HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
§ 2-22.1. Creation and Purpose of Commission. [Ord. #2358, § 1]
There is hereby created in the Township of Lyndhurst a Historic
Preservation Commission for the protection, enhancement and preservation
of districts, sites, buildings and structures of historic, cultural or
architectural value or interests within the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 2-22.2. Members and Class Qualifications. [Ord. #2358, § 2; Ord.
#2449, § I]
§ 2-22.3. Terms and Vacancies. [Ord. #2358, § 3]
a. For one- and two-family dwellings: $25.
b. For commercial uses and for all other land development: $100.
a. The Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of seven regular
members and may have not more than two alternate members. There
shall be one member each of Class A and B, and five members of Class
C. Class qualifications shall be as follows:
1. Class A: A person who is knowledgeable in building design and
construction or architectural history and who may reside outside
the municipality.
2. Class B: A person who is knowledgeable or with a demonstrated
interest in local history and who may reside outside the
municipality.
3. Class C: Citizens of the municipality who shall hold no other
municipal office, position or employment, except for membership
on the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment.
b. Alternate members shall meet the qualifications of Class C members.
a. The Mayor shall appoint all members of the Commission and shall
designate at the time of appointment the regular members by class and
the alternate members, if any, as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No.
2."
b. All terms shall run from January 1, of the year in which the appointment
was made. The terms of the members first appointment shall be so
determined that to the greatest practicable extent, the expiration of the
terms shall be distributed, in the case of regular members, evenly over
the first four years after their appointment, provided that the initial
§ 2-21.9 GENERAL § 2-22.3
1:61
§ 2-22.4. Officers. [Ord. #2358, § 4]
The Historic Preservation Commission shall annually elect a chairman, vice
chairman and select a secretary from its members.
§ 2-22.5. Meetings. [Ord. #2358, § 5]
The Commission shall create rules and procedures for transaction of its
business subject to the following regulations:
term of no regular member shall exceed four years, and that the initial
term of no alternate member shall exceed two years. Thereafter, the
term of a regular member shall be four years and the term of an
alternate member shall be two years.
c. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of a term shall be
filled for an unexpired term only. Notwithstanding any other provision
therein, the term of any member common to the Historic Preservation
Commission and the Planning Board shall be for the term of
membership on the Planning Board and the term of any member
common to the Historic Preservation Commission and the Board of
Adjustment shall be for the term of membership on the Board of
Adjustment.
a. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of three of the
Commission's members, including the chairman or, in his absence, the
vice chairman.
b. The secretary shall keep minutes and records of all meetings and
proceedings, including voting records, attendance, resolutions,
findings, determinations and decisions. All such material shall be public
records.
c. All meetings shall comply with the Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A.
10:47 et seq.).
d. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote, except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, alternate No. 1
shall vote.
e. No member of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be permitted
to act on any matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any
personal or financial interest.
f. A member of the Historic Preservation Commission may (after public
hearing if he requests it) be removed by the governing body for cause.
§ 2-22.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-22.6
1:62
§ 2-22.6. Expenses. [Ord. #2358, § 6]
The Commission members shall serve without compensation, but shall be
reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of official business.
§ 2-22.7. Contracting for Experts and Other Services. [Ord. #2358,
§ 7]
Expenditures pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed, exclusive of
gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body for the
Commission's use. The Historic Preservation Commission may recommend
to the governing body contracting of experts and other staff and services
as it shall deem necessary. The Commission shall obtain its legal counsel
from the Township Attorney at the rate of compensation determined by the
governing body.
§ 2-22.8. Responsibilities. [Ord. #2358, § 8]
The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the responsibility to:
§ 2-22.9. Referral from the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment. [Ord. #2358, § 9]
The Planning Board and the Board of Adjustment shall submit to the
Historic Preservation Commission a copy of every application submitted to
either board for development in historic zoning districts or on historic sites
designated on the zoning or official map or in any component element of the
Master Plan. The Historic Preservation Commission shall provide its advice
a. Prepare a list of historic sites and appropriate maps of the Township,
pursuant to criteria identified in the 1980 Bergen County Historic Sites
Survey Report. Copies to be distributed to members and alternates of
this commission, Commissioners, members of Planning Board,
members of zoning board, construction official and Township Attorney.
This list and the maps shall be reviewed every five years.
b. Make recommendations to the Planning Board on the historic
preservation plan element of the Master Plan and on the implications
for preservation of historic sites of any other Master Plan elements.
c. Advise the Planning Board on the inclusion of historic sites in the
recommended capital improvement program.
d. Advise the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment on applications for
development, pursuant to subsection 2-22.9 of this section.
e. Provide written reports, pursuant to subsection 2-22.10 of the section,
on the application of the Zoning Ordinance provisions concerning
historic preservation.
f. Carry out such other advisory, educational and informational functions
as will promote historic preservation in the Township.
§ 2-22.6 GENERAL § 2-22.9
1:63
which shall be conveyed through one of its designated members or staff to
testify orally at the hearing on the application, and to explain any written
reports which may have been submitted.
§ 2-22.10. Other Reports. [Ord. #2358, § 10]
All applications for issuance of permits pertaining to historic sites or
property in historic districts shall be referred to the Historic Preservation
Commission for a written report on the application of the Zoning Ordinance
provisions concerning historic preservation, to any of those aspects of
the proposed change which aspects were not determined by approval of
an application for development by a municipal agency pursuant to the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. The Historic
Preservation Commission shall report to the construction official within
45 days of the referral of an application to the Historic Preservation
Commission. If, within the forty-five day period, the Historic Preservation
Commission recommends to the construction official against the issuance
of a permit to be issued, the Construction Official shall deny issuance of a
permit, or include the conditions in the permit as the case may be. Failure
to report within the forty-five-day period shall be deemed to constitute a
report in favor of issuance of the permit and without the recommendation
of conditions to the permit.
§ 2-23. SCHOOL CROSSING GUARDS.
§ 2-23.1. Appointment and Term. [Ord. #2389, § I]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:9-154.1 crossing guards shall be appointed selected,
and terminated by the Director of the Department of Public Safety. The
terms of appointment shall not exceed one year and may be revoked for
cause after a hearing before the Chief of Police.
§ 2-23.2. Qualifications. [Ord. #2389, § I; Ord. #2837-12; amended
10-16-2018 by Ord. No. 3000-18]
a. Crossing guards must be citizens of New Jersey, be sound in body and of
good health, be of good moral character, and must not have been
convicted of any criminal offense involving moral turpitude. In
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.4, all school crossing guards will be
required to undergo a criminal history record background check. As a
condition of employment, all prospective school crossing guards shall
be required to submit to being fingerprinted and shall authorize the
Township, in writing, to exchange fingerprint data with and receive
criminal history information from relevant state and/or federal
agencies. Failure to submit a fully signed and witnessed written
authorization and consent form shall be grounds to rescind a
conditional offer of employment. Current crossing guards shall sign the
requisite consent form and submit to a criminal history record
background check as a condition of reappointment. As a condition of
employment, all school crossing guards will be required to undergo a
§ 2-22.9 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-23.2
1:64
mental health history record background check. All prospective school
crossing guards shall authorize the Township, in writing, to submit and
receive mental health history information from relevant state, county
and/or federal agencies. Failure to submit a fully signed and witnessed
written authorization and consent form shall be grounds to rescind
a conditional offer of employment. Furthermore, all crossing guard
candidates shall pass a physical examination, including a drug
screening test, conducted in a clinical setting by a physician of the
Township's choice with experience examining job applicants. The
examining physician should be provided a job description listing the
physical requirements for the position, including:
1. The ability to stand for one and two hours at a time.
2. The ability to lift and hold in position a "STOP" paddle weighing
approximately one pound while holding the opposite hand in an
upright, raised position.
3. The ability to walk, unassisted, across a street numerous times.
4. The ability to raise both feet to step over a curb.
5. The ability to work in adverse weather conditions.
6. The ability to meet the vision and hearing standards set by the New
Jersey Municipal Excess Liability Joint Insurance Fund.
b. An individual shall be disqualified from serving as a school crossing
guard if that prospective employee's criminal history record
background check reveals a record of conviction of any of the following
crimes and/or offenses:
1. In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense or petty
disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, including, but not limited to,
those crimes, disorderly persons offenses and petty disorderly
offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.; N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et
seq.; N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq.; N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et seq.; and/or
N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq.;
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, including, but not
limited to, those crimes and disorderly persons offenses set
forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:24-1 et seq.;
(c) Involving arson, burglary or theft as set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:17-1 et seq.; N.J.S.A. 2C:18-1 et seq., and/or N.J.S.A.
2C:20-1 et seq.;
(d) Involving offenses against public administration, perjury and
other falsification in official matters, obstructing governmental
operations, misconduct in office and/or abuse of office as set
§ 2-23.2 GENERAL § 2-23.2
1:65
§ 2-23.3. Supervision. [Ord. #2389, § I]
Crossing guards shall be under the supervision and direction of the Chief
of Police or another law enforcement officer who the Chief of Police may
designate in his stead.
§ 2-23.4. Report to Director. [Ord. #2389, § I]
Before any crossing guard is appointed, the Chief of Police or his designee
shall ascertain the eligibility of the applicant and make a report to the
Director.
§ 2-23.5. Rules and Regulations; Firearms. [Ord. #2389, § I]
Crossing guards shall comply with the rules and regulations applicable
to the conduct and decorum of the Township's regular police officers.
However, crossing guards shall not have the right to bear firearms nor have
the power of arrest.
§ 2-23.6. Training. [Ord. #2389, § I]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.2 every crossing guard shall be trained for
the proper performance of his/her duties. Such training shall consist of a
minimum of two hours of traffic control and the duties and responsibilities
of adult crossing guards and a minimum of 20 hours of field training in
which the trainee shall be supervised by an experienced crossing guard or
a regular police officer.
§ 2-23.7. Uniforms. [Ord. #2389, § I; Ord. #2440, § I; Ord.
#2837-12]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.3, and before being assigned to any post,
crossing guards shall be provided with a uniform which shall identify his/
her function and which shall be distinct from the uniform of a member of
the regular Police Department or force. Such uniform shall include, but not
forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:27-1 et seq.; N.J.S.A. 2C:28-1 et seq.;
N.J.S.A. 2C:29-1 et seq.; or N.J.S.A. 2C:30-1 et seq.;
(e) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes; or
(f) Involving operation of a motor vehicle while intoxicated in
violation of Chapter 4 of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes.
2. In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes, disorderly persons
offenses or petty disorderly persons offenses described above.
c. Furthermore, a crossing guard shall not be a member of the Township's
Police Department.
§ 2-23.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-23.7
1:66
be limited to, a safety vest, a hat, and stop paddle. All crossing guards,
including permanently appointed crossing guards and alternate crossing
guards, shall adhere to this dress code.
§ 2-23.8. Assignment of Crossing Guards. [Ord. #2389, § I]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-154.4 the Chief of Police or his designee shall
have the right to position crossing guards on any street or highway within
the municipality.
§ 2-23.9. Request by School for Crossing Guards. [Ord. #2389, § I]
§ 2-23.10. Days and Times of Duty. [Ord. #2389, § I]
Crossing guards shall be on duty three periods a day, morning, noon,
and dismissal times. Sometimes the number of work periods may vary,
depending upon a school's particular needs.
§ 2-23.11. Alternate Crossing Guards. [Ord. #2389, § I]
The Chief of Police or his designee shall maintain a list of alternate crossing
guards who shall be called in to work at a post whenever additional
personnel are deemed necessary by the Chief of Police or his designee.
§ 2-23.12. Benefits and Pay. [Ord. #2389, § I; Ord. #2440, § I; Ord.
No. 2666, § 1; Ord. #2837-12; Ord. #2891-13]
a. Procedure. Any school principal of an elementary school, through his or
her designated authority, may request that the Chief of Police assign a
crossing guard to a specific location. Upon receiving such a request, the
Chief of Police shall conduct an investigation to determine whether
such an assignment is necessary and there is available personnel. It
shall be within the Chief's discretion as to whether to assign a crossing
guard to the requested location.
b. Appeal of Rejection. If the Chief of Police does not make the suggested
assignment, the applicant may appeal to the Board of Commissioners.
Subsequently, the Board of Commissioners may adopt a resolution by a
two-thirds vote of the board which may direct the Chief of Police to
make the requested assignment. However, if the Commissioners adopt
such a resolution, they shall provide the necessary additional
personnel.
a. Salary Ordinance. [Amended 12-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2981-17;
10-16-2018 by Ord. No. 3000-18]
1. Computation and payment.
(a) Retroactive to September 1, 2017, all permanent crossing
guards, those not considered alternates, whenever hired by the
Township, shall be paid an annual salary computed by taking
he number of hours worked per week multiplied by the number
§ 2-23.7 GENERAL § 2-23.12
1:67
of weeks worked in the year, or portions thereof, to determine
the number of hours worked in the year.
(b) The number of hours to be worked in a workweek shall be
those hours that each crossing guard is required to be at their
regular post, or position of work, which shall be determined by
the Chief of Police not inconsistent with this chapter of the
General Ordinances of the Township of Lyndhurst.
(c) The work year applicable to all permanent school crossing
guards is hereby defined as the full ten-month period of
September 1 through June 30 of any given year. The number of
hours worked to be used in the calculation made pursuant to
Subsection a1(a) hereof shall include all hours which would
have otherwise been worked by school crossing guards during
all official school breaks (school days off).
(d) The number of hours worked in any given year shall be
multiplied by the hourly rate paid to school crossing guards as
included in the salary ordinance of the Township. This
calculation will determine and be the annual salary of each
permanent school crossing guard.
(e) The annual salary computed pursuant to Subsection a1(d)
hereof shall be paid in equal payroll installments beginning in
September and ending in June of any given year. However, the
Township may process the payroll covering the first part of
September with the second paycheck in September and may
process pay for the hours worked during the end of June in the
month of July.
(f) The annual salary determined in Subsection a1(a) hereinbefore
set forth shall be determined on or about September 1 of any
given year, consistent with the provisions of this section. This
annual salary paid to permanent crossing guards may not
change due to a reduction or increase in the number of hours
that may be required to be worked in any given work year as
herein defined. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no permeant
crossing guard receiving an annual salary shall be required to
work more than an additional 20% of the hours determined by
the Chief of Police in any given year, pursuant to Subsection
a1(b), without receiving additional compensation.
2. All alternate crossing guards shall be paid for hours worked on an
hour-for-hour basis. These crossing guards shall not be paid for any
days where school is not in session, unless approved by resolution
of the Board of Commissioners.
3. Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection a2 above, the finance
office may estimate the number of hours worked, or to be worked,
in any given payroll period for any alternate crossing guard, so as
to process the crossing guard payroll in an efficient manner as may
§ 2-23.12 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-23.12
1:68
be solely determined by the Township's financial analyst
responsible for processing the payroll or the Township's personnel
officer in the absence of the financial analyst.
4. This Subsection a is effective 20 days after adoption and
publication according to law. This Subsection a is retroactive to
September 1, 2017. To the extent any retroactive pay is due to any
of the permanent crossing guards under this payment procedure,
payment will be made paid with the second paycheck in January
2018.
b. Prerequisites. There shall be no vacation pay or compensation time, no
personal days. Overtime will be at the hourly rate.
c. Holidays. Crossing guards must work the day before and after a holiday
to get paid.
d. Bereavement leave. Crossing guards and alternates shall be entitled to
the following bereavement leave:
1. Seven days - children or spouse;
2. Three days - parent, brother, sister, of the employee or spouse;
3. One day - grandparent, member of household not mentioned above.
e. Uniform allotment. Permanently appointed crossing guards shall
receive $200 for the purchase of uniforms. Alternate crossing guards
will be issued a hat, stop paddle and safety vest. Alternate crossing
guards are not entitled to the $200 allowance for uniforms. Upon
permanent appointment, alternate crossing guards will be entitled to
receive the $200 uniform allotment. All crossing guards (both
permanently appointed and alternate crossing guards) will adhere to
the dress code as provided by the Chief of Police or his designee.
f. Health and life insurance. Crossing guards are not eligible for the
medical and life insurance packages which the Township provides to
full-time employees.
g. Sick days. Crossing guards are entitled to ten sick days, which they may
accumulate at the rate of one day per month. Any unused sick days shall
not be carried over into the following school year. Any unused sick days
at the end of the school year shall be forfeited. Crossing guards shall
NOT be paid for any unused sick days.
h. Docking of pay. If any crossing guard misses any one of his/her three
shifts during the day, he/she shall be docked 1/2 day. If he/she misses
two shifts, he/she shall be docked accordingly for those hours.
i. Excessive sick time. The Township reserves the right to review the
employment of any crossing guard that misses more than 10
accumulated days of work beyond his/her 10 sick days. Crossing guards
shall provide a note as to the reason why he/she is taking off beyond his/
§ 2-23.12 GENERAL § 2-23.12
1:69
her 10 sick days. Crossing guards under review shall be entitled to a
hearing before the Chief of Police. The Township reserves the right to
review any employee who is tardy for a post. The crossing guard will be
given written notice and upon the third tardy placed under review for
possible suspension without pay from the post.
j. Workers' compensation benefits. All crossing guards including
alternates are entitled to be covered by workers' compensation.
k. Summer employment. The Township of Lyndhurst reserves the right to
have the crossing guards work in the summer months.
l. Annual physical examination. The Township reserves the right to
require all crossing guards to submit to a yearly physical/drug
screening test, at its discretion, by a physician of the Township's choice.
[Amended 10-16-2018 by Ord. No. 3000-18]
m. Conventions and seminars. In addition to the rights of veterans granted
by N.J.S.A. 38:23-2 and any rights granted public employees by any
other statute, the crossing guards will be paid a maximum of five days
per year for time off taken to attend conventions and seminars which
directly relate to their crossing guard service.
n. Rules of conduct. In addition to the rules of conduct and procedures set
forth in the Township Personnel Ordinance, crossing guards shall be
subject to the following rules regarding course of conduct: [Amended
10-16-2018 by Ord. No. 3000-18]
1. Smoking, eating and/or drinking while on duty will not be
permitted.
2. Crossing guards while on duty will not be permitted to sit in their
vehicles.
3. Courtesy towards the public is demanded; any conduct to the
contrary shall not be tolerated.
4. Indulgence in lengthy conversations with other persons, thus
diverting attention from the performance of duties, is not
permitted.
5. Assistance shall be rendered and police headquarters notified
when situations occur that are in need of attention.
6. School crossing guards shall not use obscene, profane, indecent or
improper language and shall conduct themselves in such a manner
as not to cast any criticism or adverse reflection on themselves or
the Department.
7. Guards shall serve at all times in the best interest of the school
guards division, observing and reporting all matters pertaining to
and concerning its welfare.
§ 2-23.12 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-23.12
1:70
§ 2-24. PART-TIME EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIANS (EMTS).
[Ord. #2463; amended 5-14-2019 by Ord. No. 3019-19]
§ 2-24.1. Appointment and term.
The emergency medical technicians (EMTs) shall be appointed, selected and
terminated by the Director of the Department of Public Safety. The term
of employment shall not exceed one year and may be revoked at any time
with or without cause by the Director of the Department of Public Safety.
The EMTs shall be considered part-time, at-will employees, serving at the
pleasure and discretion of the Director of the Department of Public Safety.
§ 2-24.2. Supervision.
§ 2-24.3. Benefits and pay.
8. Use of a cellular phone and/or other electronic device while on duty
is prohibited unless in case of a emergency.
9. Sick days are only to be used when actually sick and not when
inclement weather is expected.
a. Emergency Medical Service (EMS) Deputy Commissioner.
1. The EMS Deputy Commissioner is hereby appointed by and serves
a renewable one-year term at the sole discretion of the Director of
the Department of Public Safety.
2. The EMS Deputy Commissioner oversees and manages all aspects
of the Township's EMS services and reports to the Director of the
Department of Public Safety.
3. The EMS Deputy Commissioner shall maintain a direct liaison with
the Lyndhurst Police Department through the office of the Chief or
the Chief's appointed representative.
4. The compensation, if any, for the EMS Deputy Commissioner is set
in the current Township salary ordinance.
5. The EMS Deputy Commissioner may delegate duties to the
Township EMS Manager or EMTs as needed.
b. This section permits the Director of the Department of Public Safety to
appoint a paid Lyndhurst Emergency Medical Service (LEMS)
Supervisor, whose compensation is per the current salary ordinance.
The LEMS Supervisor may delegate his managerial duties to an incharge
EMT in the supervisor's absence.
c. All paid EMS personnel shall be under the supervision and direction of
the EMS LEMS Supervisor, who reports to the EMS Deputy
Commissioner.
§ 2-23.12 GENERAL § 2-24.3
1:71
§ 2-25. EMERGENCY SERVICES VOLUNTEER LENGTH OF SERVICE
AWARDS PROGRAM (LOSAP).
§ 2-25.1. Program Created. [Ord. #2441, § I; Ord. #2876-12]
A Length of Service Awards Program (LOSAP) is hereby created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997, to reward members of
the Lyndhurst Volunteer Fire Department, the Lyndhurst Police Emergency
Squad (LPES), and the Auxiliary Police Department (APD) for their loyal,
diligent and devoted services to the residents of the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 2-25.2. Provisions and Administration of Program. [Ord. #2441,
§ II; Ord. #2876-12]
The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a deferred income
account for each volunteer member that meets or exceeds the criteria
set forth below (subsection 2-25.3); that such contributions shall be made
in accordance with a plan that shall be established by the Township of
a. EMTs will be paid as per the current salary ordinance for hours per
week.
b. EMTs may work up to 40 hours a week. The Supervisor must approve
any hours over 40. The employee is responsible for notifying the
Supervisor that he/she will be over the forty-hour limit.
c. Any employee working beyond the forty-hour limit will be entitled to be
paid overtime at 1 1/2 times the hourly rate.
d. Each employee working as a part-time EMT will be entitled to receive
$250 clothing allowance per fiscal year, providing the employee has
worked for the Township for at least six months.
e. All part-time employees working the per-diem hours are of full
understanding that they are not entitled to benefits of the full Township
employees, including health benefits, vacation days, sick time, etc.
f. All part-time EMTs shall submit in writing any and all vacation requests
to the Supervisor at least two weeks prior to said vacation so that the
shift can be covered.
g. All EMTs must punch in when coming on duty and out when leaving for
the day.
h. Nonpaid holidays for the EMTs are as follows: Christmas Day,
Thanksgiving Day, New Year's Day, Labor Day, Memorial Day and
Independence Day.
i. All part-time EMT personnel will be governed by the Drug and Alcohol
Policy as set forth in the Personnel Policy of the Township of Lyndhurst.
j. All part-time emergency medical technicians will be classified as parttime
employees of the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 2-24.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-25.2
1:72
Lyndhurst pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 388; and that such plan shall be
administered in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey, the
United States of America Internal Revenue Code, and this section.
§ 2-25.3. Eligibility Criteria. [Ord. #2441, § III; Ord. #2876-12]
The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions to each eligible member
that meets or exceeds the criteria as follows:
§ 2-25.4. Cost of Program. [Ord. #2441, § IV; Ord. #2876-12]
The estimated cost of the program has been calculated as follows:
For regular annual services: $69,000.
§ 2-25.5. Points System. [Ord. #2441, § V; Ord. #2876-12]
Each active volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services provided to the volunteer Fire Department, LPES or APD in
accordance with the "Township of Lyndhurst LOSAP Point System" schedule
attached hereto and made part hereof.8
§ 2-25.6. Approval of Voters Required. [Ord. #2441, § VI; Ord.
#2876-12]
This section shall take effect on July 1, 2002, provided that it is approved by
the voters as a public question in the next general election. The referendum
question attached hereto was submitted to the voters of the Township of
Lyndhurst at the November 6, 2001, general election and approved.
§ 2-26. BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION.
§ 2-26.1. Creation and Purpose of Commission. [Ord. #2543, § 1]
There is hereby established in the Township of Lyndhurst a Beautification
Commission for the protection, enhancement, and preservation of the
aesthetic appearance of the Township.
§ 2-26.2. Members. [Ord. #2543, § 1]
The Beautification Commission shall consist of seven regular members
and shall not have more than two alternate members. Members shall be
residents of the Township to be appointed by the Board of Commissioners.
a. 50 points are required for a member to be eligible for the maximum
annual contribution;
b. Five years of service are required for vesting;
c. The annual maximum contribution shall be $1,150 per member.
8. Editor's Note: The schedule is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 2-25.2 GENERAL § 2-26.2
1:73
The Director of Public Works and the Director of Parks and Recreation shall
oversee and serve as liaison between the Beautification Commission and the
Board of Commissioners.
§ 2-26.3. Terms and Vacancies. [Ord. #2543, § 1]
§ 2-26.4. Officers. [Ord. #2543, § 1]
The Commission shall annually elect a chairman, vice chairman and select
a secretary.
§ 2-26.5. Enforcement Commission. [Ord. #2543, § 1]
§ 2-26.6. Committees. [Ord. #2543, § 1]
§ 2-26.7. Responsibilities. [Ord. #2543, § 1]
The Beautification Commission shall have the responsibility to:
a. All members of the Commission shall be appointed for a three-year
term, effective from the date of appointment.
b. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration shall be filled by the
Board of Commissioners for an unexpired term only.
a. Creation and Purpose of Commission. There is hereby established an
Enforcement Commission which shall be comprised of three members
of the Beautification Commission. The members of the Enforcement
Commission shall be appointed by the Board of Commissioners. The
Enforcement Commission shall be charged with the enforcement of any
Township ordinances relating to the beauty and aesthetics of the
Township.
b. Term of Office. Members of the Enforcement Commission shall serve for
a period of two years, effective from the date of appointment.
a. Creation and Purpose of Committees. The Beautification Commission
shall have the authority to create, administer, or cause to be created
and administered, any number of committees necessary to accomplish
any projects with the approval of the Director of Public Works and the
Director of Parks and Recreation.
b. Officers. The chairman of the Beautification Commission shall appoint a
member of the Beautification Commission to serve as chairperson of
any committee so created, and shall oversee and report to the Director
of Public Works and Director of Parks and Recreation as to the
progress, needs, and development of any projects engaged by a
committee.
a. Seek out, initiate, and encourage civic beautification projects.
§ 2-26.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-26.7
1:74
§ 2-27. SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS.
§ 2-27.1. Creation and Purpose. [Ord. #2544, § 1]
There is hereby established sex offender residency restrictions for the
purpose of prohibiting convicted sex offenders from residing or living near
areas where children regularly meet and congregate. It is in the best
interests of residents of the Township to adopt regulations in addition to
those enacted by the State of New Jersey regarding convicted sex offenders,
so as to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the children of the
Township.
§ 2-27.2. Sex Offender Residency Restrictions: 2,500 Feet. [Ord.
#2544, § 1]
§ 2-27.3. Enforcement. [Ord. #2544, § 1]
This section may be enforced by a police officer of the Township of
Lyndhurst.
b. Obtain and disseminate, on a Township-wide basis, information
pertaining to civic beautification.
c. In general, institute, foster, and support such programs, undertakings,
and projects as shall cause, within the citizens of the Township of
Lyndhurst, a sense of pride in the aesthetic aspects of their community.
d. Raise funds to offset its operational costs. All expenditures shall first be
approved by the board of commissions and all money so raised turned
over to the Department of Revenue and Finance.
a. No person over the age of 18 who has been convicted of a violation of
any crime against a minor as listed in N.J.S.A. 2C:7-2, and who as a
result of said conviction is required to register with the proper
authorities pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:7-1 et seq., Registration and
Notification of Release of Certain Offenders, shall be permitted to
reside or live within 2,500 feet of any school, park, playground, day
care center or board of education approved bus stop in the Township of
Lyndhurst.
b. A person who resides or lives within 2,500 feet of any school, park,
playground, day care center or board of education approved bus stop in
the Township of Lyndhurst shall have 60 days from receipt of written
notice of the prohibition set forth herein to move. Failure to move to a
location which is in compliance with this section within that time period
shall constitute a violation of this section.
c. This section shall not apply to a person who has established a residence
prior to July 1, 2005.
§ 2-26.7 GENERAL § 2-27.4
1:75
§ 2-27.4. Violations, Penalty. [Ord. #2544, § 1]
Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding
$1,250; imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; and a period of
community service not exceeding 90 days.
§ 2-28. WATER COMMISSION.
§ 2-28.1. Creation and Purpose of Commission. [Ord. #2551, § 1]
There is hereby established in the Township of Lyndhurst a Water
Commission to provide advice and assistance to the Board of
Commissioners with respect to the facilities, operating procedures,
services, and billing practices of the Township's water utility company, and
payments for such services by the Township.
§ 2-28.2. Members. [Ord. #2551, § 1]
The Water Commission shall consist of five regular members and may not
have more than two alternate members. There shall be three members of
Class A and two members of Class B as follows:
§ 2-28.3. Terms and Vacancies. [Ord. #2551, § 1]
§ 2-28.4. Officers. [Ord. #2551, § 1]
The Commission shall annually elect a chairman, vice chairman and select
a secretary.
a. Class A: the Mayor, the Director of the Department of Public Works, and
the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works.
b. Class B: citizens of the municipality who shall hold no other municipal
office, position, or employment, except for membership on the Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment.
c. Alternate members shall meet the qualifications of Class B members.
a. The Mayor shall appoint all members of the Commission and shall
designate at the time of appointment the regular members by class and
the alternate members, if any, as "Alternate No. 1" and "Alternate No.
2".
b. All members of the Commission shall be appointed for three year terms,
effective from the date of appointment.
c. A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration shall be filled by the
Mayor for an unexpired term only.
§ 2-27.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-28.5
1:76
§ 2-28.5. Meetings. [Ord. #2551, § 1]
The Commission shall create rules and procedures for transaction of its
business subject to the following requirements:
§ 2-28.6. Expenses. [Ord. #2551, § 1]
The Water Commission members shall serve without compensation but shall
be reimbursed for expenses incurred in the performance of official business.
§ 2-28.7. Contracting for Experts and Other Services. [Ord. #2551,
§ 1]
Expenditures pursuant to this section shall not exceed, exclusive of gifts
or grants, the amount appropriated by the governing body for the
Commission's use. The Commission may recommend to the governing body
contracting of experts and other staff and services as it shall deem
necessary. The Commission shall obtain its legal counsel from the Township
Attorney at the rate of compensation determined by the governing body.
§ 2-28.8. Responsibilities. [Ord. #2551, § 1]
The Water Commission shall have the responsibility to:
a. A quorum for the transaction of business shall consist of three of the
Commission's members, including the chairman or, in his or her
absence, the vice chairman.
b. The secretary shall keep minutes and records of all meetings and
proceedings, including voting records, attendance, resolutions,
findings, determinations, and recommendations. All such material shall
be public records.
c. All meetings shall comply with the Open Public Meetings Act. (N.J.S.A.
10:4-6 et seq.)
d. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the proceedings
but may not vote, except in the absence or disqualification of a regular
member. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member
may vote instead of an alternate member. In the event that a choice
must be made as to which alternate member is to vote, Alternate No. 1
shall vote.
e. No member of the Water Commission shall be permitted to act on any
matter in which he has, either directly or indirectly, any personal or
financial interest.
f. A member of the Water Commission may (after public hearing if he or
she requests it) be removed by the governing body for cause.
a. Review any and all records relating to the delivery of water service by
the Township's water utility company and payment for such service.
§ 2-28.5 GENERAL § 2-28.8
1:77
§ 2-29. SEWER UTILITY.
§ 2-29.1. Establishment of Sewer Utility. [Ord. #2615, § 1]
There is hereby established a municipal utility for the purpose of operating,
maintaining and preserving the sanitary sewer facilities owned and
operated by the Township of Lyndhurst, as well as any additional systems
that may be acquired or constructed.
§ 2-29.2. Official Name. [Ord. #2615, § 2]
The name by which the utility shall be known is the "Township of Lyndhurst
Sewer Utility," hereinafter referred to as the "Sewer Utility."
§ 2-29.3. Purpose. [Ord. #2615, § 3]
The Sewer Utility shall (A) be responsible for the operation and
maintenance of the Township of Lyndhurst's sewerage system, (B) be
empowered to make such improvements as may be necessary thereto and
issue bonds in connection therewith, (C) have the authority to establish,
charge and collect fees for connections, usage and services for direct or
indirect use of the sewerage system and (D) have all such other powers and
duties as may be specified and prescribed in Title 40A, Chapters 4 and 26A
of the New Jersey Statutes Annotated, as amended, and other applicable
law.
b. Advise the governing body with regard to the following: installation,
use, operation, and maintenance of all facilities in connection with the
delivery of water service by Township's water utility company in the
Township; the manner in which such water service is delivered; and the
billing practices of the water utility company and payments in
connection therewith by the Township.
c. Consult with the Township Engineer, Tax Collector/Treasurer/Chief
Financial Officer and other Township officials and professional
consultants when appropriate and necessary.
d. Make recommendations to the governing body to improve the delivery
of water service to the Township; billing practices and procedures to
ensure that invoices received by the Township from the water utility
company are proper, and that payments made by the Township are
properly credited; and procedures relating to the maintenance of water
service facilities.
e. Provide written reports when requested by the governing body.
f. Provide such other advisory and informational functions so as to
enhance the delivery of water service to the Township, and the
Township's satisfaction of its financial obligations in connection
therewith.
§ 2-28.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-29.4
1:78
§ 2-29.4. Financial Affairs. [Ord. #2615, § 4]
For the purposes of financial operations and more specifically for the
purposes of accounting for revenues and expenditures of the sewer utility,
said financial operation shall be specifically in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:4-33, N.J.S.A. 40A:4-34 and N.J.S.A. 40A:4-35.
§ 2-30. COMMUNITY POOL UTILITY.
§ 2-30.1. Establishment of Community Pool Utility. [Ord. #2728,
§ 1]
There is hereby created and established a municipal utility for the purpose
of operating and maintaining the Lyndhurst Community Pool located at
Lyndhurst High School, and any additional pools or aquatic facilities that
may be acquired or constructed by the Township (hereinafter collectively
referred to as "the community pool").
§ 2-30.2. Official Name. [Ord. #2728, § 2]
The name by which the utility shall be known is the "Township of Lyndhurst
Community Pool Utility," (hereinafter referred to as the "utility").
§ 2-30.3. Powers and Authority. [Ord. #2728, § 3]
The utility shall have the following powers and authority to:
§ 2-30.4. Financial Affairs. [Ord. #2728, § 4]
The financial operations of the utility, including accounting for revenues and
expenditures, shall be in accordance with the Local Budget Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:4-1 et seq.
§ 2-31. REQUESTS FOR PUBLIC RECORDS.
§ 2-31.1. Custodian of Public Records. [Ord. #2664]
The Township Clerk shall be the custodian of the public government records
held or controlled by the Township of Lyndhurst. Access to such records
shall be in accordance with the New Jersey Open Public Record Act
("OPRA"), N.J.S.A. 47:1A-1 et seq.
a. Operate, manage, and maintain the community pool.
b. Make such improvements, renovations or repairs as may be necessary
and issue bonds in connection therewith.
c. The power and authority to establish charges and collect fees for the
use of the community pool and facilities in connection therewith.
d. All other such powers, authority and responsibilities as may be
specified and prescribed by law.
§ 2-29.4 GENERAL § 2-31.2
1:79
§ 2-31.2. Request Form for Public Records. [Ord. #2664]
The Township Clerk shall adopt a form for requests for public government
records held or controlled by the Township. The forms shall be in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5(f).
§ 2-31.3. Fees for Obtaining Public Records. [Ord. #2664]
A copy or copies of a public government record of the Township may be
purchased by any person upon payment of the fee prescribed by law or
regulation or if a fee is not prescribed by law or regulation, upon payment
of the actual costs of duplicating the record shall be in accordance with
the fees established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5(b). The Township Clerk
shall have the authority to charge fees in excess of the rates established
by N.J.S.A. 47:1A-5(b) if the actual costs of duplicating the record exceeds
those rates.
§ 2-32. DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION.
§ 2-32.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2845-12]
The following terms used in this section shall be defined as set forth in this
subsection. Any term that is not defined in this subsection shall be defined
in accordance with the provisions of the New Jersey Tort Claims Act, N.J.S.A.
59:1-1 et seq., and the cases decided thereunder.
CIVIL SUIT OR ACTION — Shall mean any civil or administrative action that
is pending in: (i) the New Jersey Supreme, Superior, or Tax Courts; (ii) the
Courts of the United States; (iii) any other court of competent jurisdiction;
and (iv) any state or federal administrative body or agency, and that is
arising out of and directly related to an official's lawful exercise of his or her
authority or duty in the furtherance of the official's authority or duty.
CLAIM — Shall mean any written or oral expression of the intent of any
person to prosecute a criminal offense, institute a criminal proceeding, or
file a civil suit or action against any Township official, either in the Township
official's official or individual capacity, for acts, omissions, or events arising
out of, or connected, directly or indirectly, with the performance of the
Township official's duties.
CRIMINAL OFFENSE — Shall mean any offense that is defined as a crime
in the United States or New Jersey Criminal Codes, as well as all quasicriminal
offenses whether defined by federal or state laws or regulations, or
any county or municipal ordinance.
CRIMINAL PROCEEDING — Shall mean any criminal, quasi-criminal, or
other law enforcement proceeding that is pending in any state or federal
court, regarding a criminal offense arising out of and directly related to
the Township official's lawful exercise of his or her authority or duty in the
furtherance of the official's authority or duty.
GOVERNING BODY — Shall mean the Board of Commissioners of the
Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 2-31.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-32.1
1:80
TOWNSHIP — Shall mean the Township of Lyndhurst.
TOWNSHIP ATTORNEY — Shall mean the Attorney for the Township of
Lyndhurst.
TOWNSHIP OFFICIAL or OFFICIAL — Shall mean all appointed or elected
officials, employees, agents, officers, and volunteers of the Township.
§ 2-32.2. Defense of Actions. [Ord. #2845-12]
The Township shall, upon timely notification and request as provided herein,
provide for the defense of any investigation, action, suit or proceeding,
commenced or threatened, (hereinafter collectively, "proceedings") whether
civil, administrative or investigative, including cross-claims, counterclaims
or cross-actions (hereafter, "defense"), against a Township official, on
account of any act or omission arising out of or within the scope of his or her
employment, office or elective or appointive position with, for or on behalf
of the Township (hereinafter collectively, his or her "employment"), except
as otherwise provided herein.
§ 2-32.3. Costs of Defense and Coverage. [Ord. #2845-12]
The defense of any such proceedings shall include all reasonable costs
associated therewith, including legal, expert and technical fees and
expenses, together with costs of appeal if an appeal is deemed necessary
and appropriate by the Township Attorney in his or her reasonable
discretion; and the Township shall indemnify, defend, save harmless and
protect its official from any financial loss resulting therefrom, except as
otherwise provided herein.
§ 2-32.4. Defense of Criminal Prosecutions. [Ord. #2845-12]
The Township will not provide a defense for Township officials who are
charged with criminal offenses. The governing body may, however,
authorize the Township to reimburse the Township official for the
reasonable cost of the defense of a criminal proceeding, including
investigation, costs, and reasonable legal fees, as further defined in this
section, provided that the criminal proceeding is dismissed or is finally
determined in favor of the Township official.
§ 2-32.5. Reasonable Costs of Defense. [Ord. #2845-12]
The governing body, with the advice of the Township Attorney, shall
determine what costs, expenses, and legal fees are reasonable under the
facts and circumstances of each case in which a Township official is a party.
For purposes of this indemnification policy, the Township only will pay or
indemnify the Township official for legal fees that are based on reasonable
hourly rates, and will not pay retainers to attorneys or investigators. The
governing body will determine, on a case-by-case basis, the reasonable
hourly rate to be paid to the legal counsel who is retained by a Township
official as authorized by this section.
§ 2-32.1 GENERAL § 2-32.6
1:81
§ 2-32.6. Indemnification and Save Harmless. [Ord. #2845-12]
The defense provided herein shall include the indemnification of the official
and shall save him or her harmless from financial loss resulting from any
proceeding described herein, including claims, losses, expenses, judgments,
damages, fines, attorney and any other expert and technical fees, court
costs, witness fees, transcript costs and any amount paid in settlement
thereof and actually and reasonably incurred in connection therewith, to the
extent provided by law, except as otherwise provided to the contrary herein.
Expenses thus incurred may be paid in advance of final deposition of the
action.
§ 2-32.7. Representation. [Ord. #2845-12]
Any defense to any proceeding covered by virtue of this section shall be
provided by attorneys and other personnel and service providers selected
by the Township or its insurance carriers.
§ 2-32.8. Insurance Policies and Limitations. [Ord. #2845-12]
To the extent that any defense in any covered proceeding is provided by or
pursuant to any policy of insurance contracted by the Township or available
to any other party, the official requesting and to whom the defense is to
be provided shall be subject to all the requirements and restrictions of
said policy of insurance to the same extent as is the Township. In the
event that any official incurs any costs, fees and expenses without the prior
written approval of the Township, such liability so incurred shall be the sole
responsibility of the official and additionally, the Township shall have no
obligation to indemnify and save harmless the said official in the applicable
proceeding.
§ 2-32.9. Notification. [Ord. #2845-12]
An official shall not be entitled to defense, indemnification and save
harmless hereunder unless, within 10 days of the time such official is served
with any subpoena, notice, demand, summons, complaint, order to show
cause or pleading, he or she delivers the same or an accurate and complete
copy thereof to the Township Clerk, whereupon it shall be the duty of the
Township Clerk to forthwith notify the governing body, and the Township
Attorney thereof, provided that such time period may be extended for good
cause by a duly adopted resolution of the governing body, and be it further
provided that this notification requirement shall not be operative against
any official in any currently pending proceeding of which the Township is on
actual notice.
§ 2-32.10. Cooperation. [Ord. #2845-12]
Any official requesting and to whom defense, indemnification and save
harmless is to be provided shall cooperate fully and in good faith with
the Township, its attorneys, insurers, adjusters, investigators, experts and
technical personnel engaged for this purpose, in the preparation and
§ 2-32.6 LYNDHURST CODE § 2-32.10
1:82
conduct of the defense or settlement or other disposition in any proceeding.
If such official shall neglect, fail or otherwise impede or refuse to cooperate
as aforesaid, which decision thereof shall be in the sole discretion of the
governing body, the governing body, on 10 days' written notice to the
official and opportunity to be heard, may for cause, declare all rights and
benefits created hereunder for the benefit of such official to be forfeited and
terminated by affirmative vote of the governing body.
§ 2-32.11. Exceptions to Coverage. [Ord. #2845-12]
An official shall not be entitled to defense, indemnification and save
harmless in any proceeding in the following events or circumstances:
a. In any tenure, disciplinary action, suspension, termination, licensure or
(de)certification affecting a proceeding brought by the Township
against the official;
b. In any tenure, disciplinary action, suspension, termination, licensure or
(de)certification affecting a proceeding brought by any other
governmental unit or agency against the official;
c. In the defense of any proceeding, including indemnification, save
harmless, judgments or settlements based upon what the governing
body has determined, upon 10 days' written notice to the official and
opportunity to be heard, that the proceeding is based upon a criminal
offense, actual fraud, malice, wrongful or gross misconduct, or an
intentional or wrongful act or omission, or did not arise out of or in the
scope of his or her duties, office or employment by or with the
Township.
d. In the payment of punitive or exemplary damages, unless the governing
body first determines, upon 10 days' notice to the official and
opportunity to be heard, that the official's acts or omissions did not
constitute actual fraud, actual malice, gross misconduct, and
intentional tort or that involves a substantial and material violation of
the Local Government Ethics Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:9-22.1 et seq., as same
may be, from time to time, amended;
e. In any defense of, indemnification for, and save harmless from
professional malpractice;
f. In the event that any defense in any proceeding is refused or
terminated by the governing body, as set forth in this section, for failure
of the official to abide thereby or act in compliance therewith; and
g. In the event that any insurance coverage is available for payment, in
whole or in part of the defense, indemnification and save harmless of
the official in any proceeding, to the extent of the said insurance
coverage.
h. If the action or proceeding has been brought by the Township itself
against the official.
§ 2-32.10 GENERAL § 2-32.11
1:83
Chapter 3
POLICE REGULATIONS
[Editor's Note: See Chapter 25, Hazardous Chemicals, for
regulations concerning hazardous chemicals and wastes.]
§ 3-1. PENALTY.
§ 3-1.1. Maximum Penalty. [N.J.S.A. 40:49-5]
For violation of any provision of this revision, or other ordinance of the
Township of Lyndhurst, unless a specific penalty is otherwise provided
in connection with the provision violated, the maximum penalty upon
conviction of the violation shall be one or more of the following: a fine not
exceeding $1,000 for each and every offense; or imprisonment in the county
jail for not more than 90 days; or to a period of community service not
exceeding 90 days, at the discretion of the municipal court judge.
§ 3-1.2. Separate Violations. [New]
Except as otherwise provided every day in which a violation of any provision
of this chapter or any other ordinance of the township exists shall constitute
a separate violation.
§ 3-1.3. Application. [New]
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for every violation. Any lesser penalty, including a
nominal penalty or no penalty at all may be appropriate for a particular case
or violation.
§ 3-1.4. Minimum Penalty. [New; N.J.S.A. 40:49-5]
The governing body may prescribe that, for the violation of any particular
code provision or ordinance, at least a minimum penalty shall be imposed
which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed at an amount not exceeding
$100.
§ 3-2. BARBER SHOPS.
§ 3-2.1. Definition. [Ord. #1424]
As used in this section:
BARBER SHOP — Shall mean any place wherein any person is engaged for
hire in the occupation or business of shaving, clipping, cutting, or trimming
of hair and/or the massaging of the faces or scalps of the patrons thereof.
i. If the official has failed to substantially cooperate with the Township
and its agents, servants, attorneys, and employees in connection with
the matter.
§ 2-32.11 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-2.2
1:84
§ 3-2.2. Closing Hours: Exceptions. [Ord. #1449]
A barber shop, as hereinabove defined, shall remain open as follows:
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday from 8:30 a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Barber shops shall be closed on New Year's Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day,
Presidential Election Day, and on all Sundays.
Barber shops will be closed on all Mondays except in any week wherein any
of the aforementioned holidays are observed; in which event, barber shops
shall be opened on Mondays from 8:30 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
§ 3-2.3. After Closing Hours. [Ord. #1424]
No patrons shall be permitted to enter any such shop after the closing
hours above mentioned. Patrons who have entered the shops before the
closing hours may be serviced, anything hereinabove to the contrary
notwithstanding.
§ 3-3. BICYCLES.
§ 3-3.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1512, § 1]
As used in this section.
§ 3-3.2. Rules for the Operation of Bicycles. [Ord. #1512, § 2]
The following rules for riding and operating bicycles shall be observed for
all riders thereof:
a. Bicycle shall mean and include a vehicle with two tandem wheels,
neither of which are less than 20 inches in diameter, with solid or
pneumatic tires, having a steering bar or wheel, a saddle seat, and
propelled by human power.
b. Operate or any form or tense thereof shall mean and refer to the use,
putting into action or causing to function of a bicycle by a person
mounted thereon.
In addition to the above definitions, any applicable definitions of the
traffic chapter shall be included herein.
a. Riding Abreast. When more than two persons in a group are operating
bicycles on a roadway, they shall ride single file.
b. Clinging to Vehicles. No person operating a bicycle shall cling or attach
himself, or the bicycle, to any other moving vehicle.
c. Extra Passenger. No person operating a bicycle shall carry another
person on the handlebars of the bicycle.
§ 3-2.2 GENERAL § 3-3.2
1:85
§ 3-3.3. Parking Bicycles. [Ord. #1512, § 3]
Bicycles, when parked in the business district, shall be parked in zones
or places designated and marked for that purpose. It shall be unlawful
to park any bicycle along buildings in such a manner as to interfere with
pedestrians, or along roadways where they may interfere with traffic, or
with persons getting into or out of motor vehicles. No person other than the
owner or operator shall move, or in any manner interfere with, any bicycle
properly parked, nor shall any person interfere or in any manner hinder any
person from properly parking a bicycle, except that members of the police
department and fire department may move, or, in proper cases, prevent the
parking of the bicycle, when, in the judgment of the policeman or fireman,
his action is necessary in order to properly safeguard persons or property.
§ 3-3.4. Operation of Bicycles in Roadway. [Ord. #1512, § 4]
All bicycles when operated on roadways shall be kept to the right and shall
be operated as near as practicable to the right-hand edge of the roadway.
d. Emerging from Alley, Driveways and Garages. The operator of a bicycle
emerging from an alley, driveway, garage or private sidewalk, shall stop
the bicycle immediately prior to driving onto or across a public sidewalk
line projected across an alley, and shall exercise extreme care in
making such movements.
e. Intoxicated, Drugs, or Physical Inability. No person shall operate a
bicycle while under the influence of liquor, or drugs, or while physically
or mentally unfit to safely operate the same.
f. Lights. No bicycle shall be operated within the period from sunset to
sunrise without having a properly lighted headlight attached to the
front of the bicycle, visible under normal atmospheric conditions from
the front thereof, for a distance of not less than 300 feet, nor without
having a red light or a reflector attached to the rear of the bicycle,
which is clearly visible in the headlight beam of a motor vehicle for a
distance of not less than 200 feet to the rear of the bicycle.
g. Operating on Sidewalks. Bicycles may be operated on sidewalks in
public parks and in residence districts, but in single file only. Under all
circumstances the rider shall yield the right of way to pedestrians using
the sidewalk, and due and proper care shall at all times be exercised by
the rider for the pedestrians. When approaching a pedestrian on the
sidewalk, the speed of a bicycle shall be reduced to a speed which is no
greater than necessary to continue the operation of the bicycle without
the rider dismounting, and shall not be increased until the pedestrian
has been passed. No bicycle shall be operated upon any sidewalk in the
business portion of the township.
§ 3-3.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-3.5
1:86
§ 3-3.5. Equipment Required. [Ord. #1512, § 5]
Each bicycle shall be equipped with a signaling device in good working
order and audible at a distance of 50 feet when sounded.
§ 3-3.6. Speed. [Ord. #1512, § 6]
No bicycle shall be operated at any time faster than is reasonable or proper,
and every bicycle shall be operated with reasonable regard to the safety of
the rider and of other persons and property.
§ 3-3.7. Observation of Traffic Regulations. [Ord. #1512, § 7]
Every person operating a bicycle shall strictly observe all traffic signs
and signals and all other traffic rules and regulations, applicable thereto,
and shall obey the orders and directions of every officer of the township
authorized to direct or regulate traffic.
§ 3-3.8. Tricks or Unsafe Riding Prohibited. [Ord. #1512, § 8]
No person shall, while operating a bicycle, indulge or engage in any kind of
trick or unsafe riding.
§ 3-3.9. Making Turns; Use of Signals. [Ord. #1512, § 9]
The operator of a bicycle on a roadway, when making a right turn, shall
follow the right-hand edge of the roadway, and the operator of a bicycle on
a roadway when making a left turn shall approach the point of turning in
the traffic lane nearest the center of the roadway. No operator of a bicycle
shall start, slow down, stop or attempt to turn without first indicating such
movement as provided by law.
§ 3-3.10. Inspection by Police Department. [Ord. #1512, § 10]
Any member of the police department is authorized to inspect any bicycle
for the purpose of determining the mechanical condition of the bicycle.
§ 3-3.11. Owner's Consent to Ride. [Ord. #1512, § 11]
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any bicycle within the
township without the consent of the owner.
§ 3-3.12. Enforcement. [Ord. #1512, § 12]
The chief of police shall enforce the provisions of this section.
§ 3-3.13. Violations and Penalty. [Ord. #1512, § 13]
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine
of not more than $50, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days in
the county jail, or both.
§ 3-3.5 GENERAL § 3-4
1:87
§ 3-4. BINGO ON SUNDAYS PERMITTED. [Ord. #1526]
Games of chance, commonly known as "Bingo" as provided by the laws
of the State of New Jersey, 1954, Chapter 6, may be conducted in the
township on the first day of the week, commonly known and designated
as Sunday, provided the applicant for the license to conduct such game
otherwise qualifies under the provisions of the aforementioned Statutes of
the State of New Jersey and the Rules and Regulations of the Legalized
Games of Chance Control Commission and, specifically, providing that the
organization conducting the games is a charitable, religious or other
organization specifically qualifying under the provisions of the
aforementioned statutes.
This section is being adopted in conformity with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
5:8-31 requiring local authorization for the conduct of such games of chance
under the provisions of the aforementioned statute.
§ 3-5. CLUBS PROHIBITED NEAR PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
§ 3-5.1. Restrictions. [Ord. #1424, § 12]
No person shall organize, place, maintain or operate any fraternal, social,
political or athletic club or organization in any location within 250 yards of
any public school or other duly accredited school.
§ 3-5.2. Continuation. [Ord. #1424, § 12]
Any club or organization mentioned in subsection 3-5.1 in existence on
February 25, 1959, may be continued upon the lot or in the building so
occupied, and any such structure may be restored or repaired in the event
of partial destruction thereof.
§ 3-6. CONDUCT IN TIME OF EMERGENCY.
§ 3-6.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1511, § 1]
As used in this section:
CIVIL EMERGENCY — Shall mean:
A riot or unlawful assembly characterized by the use of actual force or
violence or any threat to use force if accompanied by immediate power
to execute such force by three or more persons acting together without
authority of law.
a.
Any natural disaster or man-made calamity including flood,
conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake or explosion within the
corporate limits of the township resulting in the death or injury of
persons or the destruction of property to such an extent that
extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health,
safety and welfare
b.
§ 3-4 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-6.1
1:88
CURFEW — Shall mean a prohibition against any person walking, running,
loitering, standing or motoring upon any street, public property or vacant
premises within the corporate limits of the township during the hours in
which a curfew has been imposed, excepting persons officially designated
to duty with reference to the civil emergency.
§ 3-6.2. Proclamation of Emergency; Powers Described. [Ord.
#1511, § 2]
Whenever, in the judgment of the mayor, or in the event of his absence,
disability or other inability to act the director of revenue and finance, or in
the event of his absence, disability or other inability to act, then the chief
of police of the township determines that an emergency exists as a result
of mob action or other civil disobedience, including riot, rout or unlawful
assembly, or real and present danger thereof causing or likely to cause
danger of injury to or damages to persons or property, he shall have the
power to impose by proclamation any or all of the following regulations
deemed by him necessary to preserve the peace and order of the township:
§ 3-6.3. Issuance and Dissemination. [Ord. #1511, § 3]
The proclamation of emergency provided herein shall become effective
upon its issuance to news media or immediate dissemination to the public,
its posting on a bulletin board in the town hall and, where feasible, by public
address systems throughout the township.
a. To impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the township, thereby
requiring all persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith
remove themselves from the public streets, areas, parks or other public
places; provided that physicians, nurses and ambulance operators
performing medical services, utility personnel maintaining initial public
services, firemen and township authorized or requested law
enforcement officers and personnel shall be exempted from such
curfew.
b. To order the closing of any business establishments anywhere within
the township for the period of the emergency, such businesses to
include, but not be limited to those selling intoxicating liquors, cereal
malt beverages, gasoline or firearms or ammunition.
c. To designate any public street, thoroughfare or vehicle parking areas
closed to motor vehicles and pedestrian traffic.
d. To call upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and
organizations within or without the township to assist in preserving and
keeping the peace within the township.
e. Issue such other orders as are immediately necessary in his judgment
for the protection of life and property.
§ 3-6.1 GENERAL § 3-6.4
1:89
§ 3-6.4. Termination of Proclamation of Emergency; Extension.
[Ord. #1511, § 4]
Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this section
shall terminate after 48 hours from the issuance thereof, or upon the
issuance of a proclamation determining an emergency no longer exists,
whichever occurs first; provided, however, that such emergency may be
extended for such additional comparable periods of time as determined
necessary by the mayor.
§ 3-6.5. Actions Prohibited. [Ord. #1511, § 5]
§ 3-6.6. Violations. [New]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section or who
shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with the proclamation or shall willfully
fail or refuse to comply with the orders of duly authorized law enforcement
officers or personnel charged with the responsibility of enforcing the
proclamation of emergency shall upon conviction thereof, be liable to the
penalty contained in Section 3-1.
§ 3-7. CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES IN PUBLIC
PLACES.9
a. During the period of such emergency, no person shall make, carry,
possess or use any type of Molotov cocktail, gasoline or petroleum base
fire bomb or other incendiary missile.
b. No person shall consume any alcoholic beverages in a public street or
public place or in any motor vehicle driven or parked thereon.
c. No person shall carry or possess any rock, bottle, club, brick or weapon
or other object capable of being used as a weapon, unlawfully against
the persons or property of another, provided that anything herein
contained shall apply to any law enforcement officer or other person
engaged lawfully in enforcing the emergency restrictions or thereunto
authorized by the mayor.
d. No person shall carry or transport gasoline or other liquid flammable or
combustible products in any container other than a gasoline tank
properly affixed to a motor vehicle.
e. No person shall intercept or interfere with police and/or fire radio
broadcasts.
f. Nothing herein shall be deemed to authorize any of the proscribed
conduct at any other times when it is prohibited by law.
9. Editor’s Note: See Chapter 6 for additional alcoholic beverage regulations.
§ 3-6.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-7.1
1:90
§ 3-7.1. Prohibition. [Ord. #1601, § 1]
No person shall drink, imbibe or consume or possess any alcoholic beverage
in an opened or unsealed container in or upon:
§ 3-7.2. Discarding Alcoholic Beverage Containers. [Ord. #1601,
§ 1]
Any person who shall discard alcoholic beverage containers upon any public
street, sidewalk, public parking lot, public or quasi public place or upon any
private property not his own without the express permission of the owner is
a disorderly person.
§ 3-7.3. Exception for Special Events. [Ord. #1601, § 3]
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in subsection 3-7.1, the board of
commissioners may, by resolution, permit the possession or consumption of
alcoholic beverages in a designated park or other public place at a time in
connection with a special event, series of events or observance which has
been authorized by the board of commissioners of the township.
§ 3-8. DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS PROHIBITED. [Ord. #130; Ord.
#1739, § 1]
The discharge of firearms of every kind, name and description including
by way of example and not limitation, air guns and spring powered guns,
upon private property where the discharge of the firearm is done in such a
manner that the discharged pellet or projectile may cross a property line or
strike any person or living thing, or upon the public streets and places, is
strictly prohibited.
§ 3-9. DOCKING OF BARGES.
§ 3-9.1. Bond Required. [Ord. #1531, § 1]
The board of commissioners shall require, pursuant to Chapter 281 of the
Laws of 1971, that the owner of any barge docked in or on the banks of
any river within the township furnish a bond in the sum of $25,000 from
an insurance company authorized to do business within the State of New
Jersey.
a. A public street, sidewalk, public parking place, park, playground,
recreation area or any other public or quasi public place, or
b. A public conveyance, or
c. A private motor vehicle while the same is in motion or is parked in any
public street, lane, parking lot or public or quasi public place, or
d. Any private property not his or her own, without the express permission
of the owner or other person having authority to grant such permission.
§ 3-7.1 GENERAL § 3-9.2
1:91
§ 3-9.2. Posting of Bond. [Ord. #1531, § 2]
The owner of any barge docking in or on any river within the township for
more than 10 consecutive days, whether occupied or not, shall deliver the
bond to the township clerk.
§ 3-9.3. Forfeiture. [Ord. #1531, § 3]
The bond furnished to the Township of Lyndhurst shall be held by the
township clerk as security in the event that the township is required to
remove the barge from the banks of any river of the township due to
the barge sinking or otherwise becoming unable to navigate under its
own power. The township shall be authorized pursuant to Chapter 281 of
the Laws of 1971 to be reimbursed for the expenditure of any necessary
moneys for the removal of the barge from the river or river bank within the
jurisdiction of the township.
§ 3-9.4. Cancellation of Bond. [Ord. #1531, § 4]
The township shall deliver to the surety or the owner of the barge the bond
posted for the barge upon removal of the barge from the river or the river
banks within the jurisdiction of the township.
§ 3-9.5. Exception. [Ord. #1531, § 5]
This section shall not apply to barges, ships or boats owned or operated by
common carriers engaged in interstate or foreign commerce, nor shall it
apply to pleasure craft used on a seasonal basis.
§ 3-10. GAMES OF CHANCE PERMITTED ON SUNDAY.
§ 3-10.1. Raffles on Sunday Permitted. [Ord. #1547, § 1]
It is hereby determined by the board of commissioners that games of
chance, commonly known as "raffles" as provided by the laws of the State
of New Jersey, L. 1954, Chapter 5, may be conducted in the township on the
first day of the week, commonly known and designated as Sunday, provided
the applicant for the license to conduct such game otherwise qualifies under
the provisions of the aforementioned Statutes of the State of New Jersey
and the Rules and Regulations of the Legalized Games of Chance Control
Commission and specifically, providing that the organization conducting the
games is a charitable, religious or other organization specifically qualifying
under the provisions of the aforementioned statutes.
§ 3-10.2. Purpose. [Ord. #1547, § 2]
This section is being adopted in conformity with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
5:8-58 requiring local authorization for the conduct of such games of chance
under the provisions of the aforementioned statute.
§ 3-9.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-11
1:92
§ 3-11. HUNTING. [Ord. #145]
No person shall shoot or hunt with guns or other firearms within the
township.
§ 3-12. ITINERANT RESTAURANTS.
§ 3-12.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1586, § 1]
As used in this section:
ITINERANT RESTAURANT — Shall mean one operated from a vehicle,
wagon, truck or other conveyance.
§ 3-12.2. Regulations Concerning Protection of Food. [Ord. #1586,
§ 2]
No person shall prepare, sell, expose for sale, or dispense any ice cream,
ice cream products, water ices, frozen water products or any food cooked
or uncooked, or any drinks or beverages for immediate consumption, on any
street, sidewalk, road, alley, vacant lot, school yard, church yard, or outside
areas in public parks and recreational areas from an itinerant restaurant
unless such food or drink is protected from contamination by insects, dust
and all other foreign or injurious contamination, in tightly covered dust
proof containers, packages or wrappers.
§ 3-12.3. Sources of Foods; Compliance with State Regulations.
[Ord. #1586, § 3]
Food in the itinerant restaurant shall be from a source which is in
compliance with applicable state and local laws and regulations. Food from
such sources shall have been protected from contamination and spoilage
during subsequent handling, packaging, and storage, and while in transit.
§ 3-12.4. Licensing Required. [Ord. #2597, § 1]
No person shall be permitted to operate an itinerant restaurant without
obtaining a retail food establishment license from the Lyndhurst
Department of Health, as provided in Section 22-3 of the Township's
Revised Ordinances.
§ 3-12.5. Processing Requirements. [Ord. #2597, § 1; Ord.
#2872-12, § 1; Ord. #2880-13, § 1]
In addition to the licensing and fee requirements provided in Section 22-3
of the Township's Revised Ordinances, all operators, managers, employees
and persons serving food in connection with an itinerant restaurant shall
be required to submit to a background check by the Lyndhurst Police
Department, annually in January, which shall include fingerprinting, as
required by the police department, and submission of two passport
photographs to the police department. In the event that such background
§ 3-11 GENERAL § 3-12.5
1:93
check shall reveal that such operators, employees or servers have been
convicted of a crime of moral turpitude or which is sex-related, no license
shall be issued to such individuals.
§ 3-13. JUNKED VEHICLES.
§ 3-13.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
As used in this section:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean a motor vehicle designed for
operation on public streets and ways which is not, and has not been for a
period of 90 days or more, currently registered with a governmental agency
having jurisdiction to register the same.
ENCLOSED GARAGE — Shall mean a building or structure having no means
of vehicle ingress or egress other than through an operable door.
JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean a motor vehicle which is not,
and has not been for a period of 90 days or more, capable of operation on
public streets and ways under its own power; and further means a vehicle,
whether or not so operable, which is kept and maintained for the purpose
of stripping or removing parts therefrom.
§ 3-13.2. Keeping or Storing Prohibited; Exception Stated. [Ord.
#1424, § 10]
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, store or maintain an abandoned
or junked motor vehicle in the township except in an enclosed garage or
duly licensed premises.
§ 3-13.3. Presumption of Abandonment. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
A motor vehicle which conforms to the definitions in subsection 3-13.1 shall
be presumed abandoned or junked, as the case may be, subject to rebuttal
upon due proof of contrary intentions.
§ 3-13.4. Enforcement. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to see to the
enforcement of this section and to prosecute all violations thereunder.
§ 3-14. LITTERING.
§ 3-14.1. Title. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Anti-Litter Ordinance"
of the township.
§ 3-14.2. Definitions. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
As used in this section:
§ 3-12.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-14.2
1:94
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — For garbage and ashes shall mean
a suitable metal or plastic receptacle, cylindrical in shape, and not less than
two cubic feet and not more than 3 1/2 cubic feet capacity in which to place
the garbage or ashes so accumulating on the premises, which receptacle
shall be provided with a close fitting metal or plastic cover; and, if used for
the storage of garbage or other offensive refuse matter, it shall be water
tight.
AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE — For litter other than garbage or
ashes shall mean cardboard boxes or cartons or wood boxes.
GARBAGE — Shall mean putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Shall mean garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein and
all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited,
tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
PARK — Shall mean a park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation
center or any other public area in the township, owned or used by the
township and devoted to active or passive recreation.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Shall mean any dwelling, house, building, or other
structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential
purposes or for commercial uses, whether inhabited or temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds,
walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging to or
appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Shall mean any and all streets, sidewalks, parking lots
open to the public, parking areas open to the public, alleys or other public
ways, and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and public
buildings.
REFUSE — Shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes
(except body wastes), including ashes, street cleaning, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, other abandoned personal property and solid
market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as circulars, leaflets,
pamphlets, wrappers, handbills, newspapers, and all and any other printed
or nonprinted paper material, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, leaves, wood, glass and other similar materials.
§ 3-14.3. Littering and Depositing Snow in Public Places. [Ord.
#1424, § 10; Ord. #1868, § I]
a. Litter in Public Places. No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon
any street, sidewalk or other public place within the township, except in
public receptacles duly authorized and provided by the township,
authorized private receptacles for collection, or in areas officially
designated as township dumping areas, provided that all such
§ 3-14.2 GENERAL § 3-14.3
1:95
§ 3-14.4. Placement of Litter in Receptacles so as to Prevent
Scattering. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such manner and in such containers as will
prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon private property.
§ 3-14.5. Sweeping Litter Into Gutters Prohibited. [Ord. #1424,
§ 10]
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the township the accumulation of litter from any building or
lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall sweep the sidewalks, entrance walks, parking lots
and parking areas in front of or upon their premises free of litter. Nothing
herein recited shall prevent the sweeping of leaves into the street during
the periods officially designated or announced by the department of public
works as periods for the collection of such leaves.
§ 3-14.6. Merchants' Duty to Keep Sidewalks Free of Litter. [Ord.
#1424, § 10]
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the township the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep
the sidewalks, entrance walks, parking lots and parking areas in front or
upon their premises free of litter. Nothing herein recited shall prevent the
sweeping of leaves into the street during the periods officially designated or
announced by the department of public works as periods for the collection
of such leaves.
§ 3-14.7. Litter Thrown by Persons in Vehicles. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the township or upon
private property.
authorized deposits shall be made in the manner and to the extent
otherwise permitted by other ordinances or State law.
b. Depositing of Snow in Public Places. No person or his agent or
employee shall intentionally deposit snow or ice on the traveled portion
of any street, sidewalk, crosswalk, or other public place within the
township after the same has been cleared or plowed by any
governmental agency.
§ 3-14.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-14.8
1:96
§ 3-14.8. Truck Loads Causing Litter. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
township unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any
load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley
or other public place.
§ 3-14.9. Litter in Public Places. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any public places within the
township except to make deposits in public receptacles to the extent and
in the manner permitted by subsections 3-14.3 and 3-14.4. Where public
receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from
the public place by the person responsible for its presence and properly
disposed of elsewhere as provided herein.
§ 3-14.10. Litter in Streams and Fountains. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, stream or any other
body of water in a public place or elsewhere within the township.
§ 3-14.11. Placing Commercial and Noncommercial Handbills on
Vehicles. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be
unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without
charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of
a vehicle who is willing to accept it.
§ 3-14.12. Depositing Commercial and Noncommercial Handbills on
Uninhabited or Vacant Premises. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or
continuously uninhabited or vacant.
§ 3-14.13. Litter on Occupied Private Property. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the township, whether owned by such person or not, except that
the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.
§ 3-14.14. Owner to Maintain Premises Free of Litter. [Ord. #1424,
§ 10]
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this subsection
§ 3-14.8 GENERAL § 3-14.14
1:97
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles
for collection. It shall be the duty of the owner or owners, occupant or
occupants of any private property to place any authorized private
receptacles at the curb in front of such private property on the day of
collection of garbage and refuse at such premises.
§ 3-14.15. Litter on Vacant Lots. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the township whether owned by such person or not.
§ 3-14.16. Clearing of Litter from Open Private Property by
Township. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
a. Notice To Remove. Any office designated by the department of public
works or department of public affairs is hereby authorized and
empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private property
within the township or the agent of such owner to properly dispose of
litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous to public
health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by personal service, or by
registered mail, addressed to the owner, at his last known address.
b. Action Upon Noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect, or refusal of
any owner or agent so notified, to properly dispose of litter dangerous
to public health, safety or welfare within 10 days after the receipt of
written notice provided for in paragraph a above, or within 15 days
after the date of such notice in the event the same is returned to the
township post office department because of its inability to make
delivery thereof, provided the same was properly addressed to the last
known address of such owner, or agent, the enforcing officer is hereby
authorized and empowered to order its disposal by the township.
c. Charges Included in Tax Bill. When the township has effected the
removal of such dangerous litter or has paid for its removal, the actual
cost thereof, plus accrued interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the
date of the completion of the work, if not paid by such owner prior
thereto, shall be charged to the owner of such property on the next
regular tax bill forwarded to such owner by the township and the
charge shall be due and payable by the owner at the time of payment of
such bill.
d. Recorded Statement Constitutes Lien. Where the full amount due the
township is not paid by such owner within 30 days after the disposal of
such litter, as provided for in paragraphs a and b above, then, and in
that case, the enforcing officer shall cause to be filed in the tax
collector's office of the township a sworn statement showing the cost
and expense incurred for the work, the date the work was done and the
location of the property on which the work was done. The filing of such
sworn statement shall constitute a lien on the property, and shall
remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and
interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection, until final payment has
§ 3-14.14 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-14.16
1:98
§ 3-14.17. Locating of and Responsibility for Litter Receptacles.
[Ord. #2073, § I; Ord. #2084, § I]
§ 3-15. (RESERVED)10
§ 3-16. PARK REGULATIONS.
§ 3-16.1. Injury or Removal Prohibited. [Ord. #1424, § 12]
It shall be unlawful for any person without the written permission of the
commissioner of parks and public property to cut, break, climb, injure or
remove any tree, plant or shrub planted or growing in any public park
within the township or cause, authorize or procure any person to cut, break,
climb, injure or remove any such tree, plant or shrub or any portion of such
tree, plant, or shrub or to injure, misuse or remove or cause, authorize
been made. The costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner
fixed by law for the collection of taxes and further, shall be subject
to a delinquent penalty of 8% in the event same is not paid in full
on or before the date the tax bill upon which the charge appears
becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with
the provisions hereof shall be prima facie evidence that all legal
formalities have been complied with and that the work has been done
properly and satisfactorily, and shall be full notice to every person
concerned that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes
a charge against the property designated or described in the statement
and that the same is due and collectable as provided by law.
a. Private Outdoor Sites. Outdoor litter receptacles and their servicing are
required at the following places which exist in the municipality: Drivein-
restaurants, all street vendor locations, constructions sites, gasoline
service stations, shopping centers, parking lots and at special events to
which the public is invited, including sporting events, parades,
carnivals, circuses and festivals. The proprietors of these places or the
sponsors of their events shall be responsible for providing and servicing
the receptacles such that adequate containerization is available.
b. Private Indoor Sites. Indoor litter receptacles and their servicing are
required at all indoor retail establishments. Said receptacles shall be
visible and accessible to the public.
c. Public Outdoor Sites. Outdoor litter receptacles and their servicing are
required at government buildings, schools, railroad stations, parks, and
at one-quarter mile intervals along the sidewalks along Ridge Road,
Stuyvesant Avenue and Valley Brook Avenue between Ridge Road and
Stuyvesant Avenue. The receptacles shall be provided and serviced by
the municipality.
10.Editor’s Note: Former Section 3-15, Loitering, previously codified herein and containing
portions of Ordinance No. 1529 was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance No. 2642.
§ 3-14.16 GENERAL § 3-16.1
1:99
or procure any person to injure, misuse or remove any device set for the
protection of any tree, plant or shrub in any public park of the township.
§ 3-16.2. Entering. [Ord. #1424, § 12]
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon any portion of any lawn or
cultivated ground of any public park within the township when forbidden so
to do by an official sign or other official notification.
§ 3-16.3. Depositing Waste. [Ord. #1424, § 12]
It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, deposit or cause to be thrown
or deposited or leave any paper or waste material whatsoever in or upon
any part of the surface of any public park or lawn within the township.
§ 3-16.4. Structures. [Ord. #1424, § 12]
It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, damage or in any way injure or
cause to be defaced, damaged or injured any statuary, fountain, monument
or memorial or other structure or park in the township.
§ 3-17. PLAYGROUND AND RECREATION AREAS.
§ 3-17.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1575, § 1]
As used in this section:
BOARD OF EDUCATION — Shall mean the board of education of the
township.
LITTER — Shall mean all waste material which, if thrown, scattered or
deposited, tends to create an unsightly condition or a danger to public
health, safety, or welfare.
PARKS DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the department of parks and public
property of the township.
PLAYGROUND OR RECREATION AREAS — Shall mean those public lands
owned by the township or board of education, devoted to active or passive
recreation, and which are under the supervision and control of the parks
department or board of education.
VEHICLE — Shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn.
§ 3-17.2. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. #1575, § 2; Ord. #2670, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to do or commit any of the following acts
or things in a playground or recreation area:
a. To operate a vehicle or to ride in or upon the same except on an
established road or way.
§ 3-16.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-17.2
1:100
b. To operate a vehicle on an established road or way at a speed in excess
of ten miles per hour.
c. To kill, injure or disturb any animal or bird or to damage any tree,
shrub, grass or plant or to damage any building, sign, structure or
equipment of the parks department or board of education.
d. To use any firearms, explosives, air rifles, sling shots or any other
weapon, except as may be provided by law.
e. To throw, scatter or deposit any litter, except in receptacles provided for
the same.
f. To use any loud, violent, obscene or profane language or to conduct
oneself in a disorderly or obscene manner to commit any nuisance.
g. To break, throw or place any glass on the lawns, walks, roads, benches,
tables or other area.
h. To disturb or interfere with any improvements under construction or
about to be constructed.
i. To enter any area in disregard of signs or posted notices forbidding the
same.
j. To give entertainment of any kind or to transact business of any kind or
to hold public gatherings, meetings, or assemblies without the prior
written permission of the parks department or the board of education.
k. To occupy any area for picnic parties, assemblages, business or
entertainment other than those designated for such purposes by the
parks department or the board of education and subject to the control
and supervision of such use by the parks department or the board of
education.
l. To take a pet or other animal on a leash or to permit a pet or other
animal to run at large. Assistance animals used by disabled persons are
exempted from this provision.
m. To sell, vend, distribute or give away any article or merchandise
whatever without the prior written permission of the parks department
or the board of education.
n. To carry, possess, dispose and consume any intoxicating liquors, wines
or beers; provided, however, that upon written application setting forth
the name and address of the applicant, the date, time, place and
purpose of the application, the mayor and council may suspend the
provisions of this paragraph or any part thereof, for civic or public
affairs within a specified location.
o. To occupy any playground or recreation area between one hour after
sunset and one-half-hour before sunrise, without first obtaining a
permit in accordance with this chapter, except in an emergency and
§ 3-17.2 GENERAL § 3-17.2
1:101
§ 3-17.3. Lyndhurst Basketball League. [Ord. #2210]
Recognizing the intense use to which the basketball courts at Landell's
Field are being put to, as well as the competing demands on the available
court time by the various age groups wishing to use the courts, it is
determined to be in the best interest of the Township of Lyndhurst to
organize and regulate the use of the Landell's Field basketball courts
through the creation of the Lyndhurst Basketball League under the auspice
of the Lyndhurst Recreation Commission. Therefore, the board of
commissioners of the Township of Lyndhurst ordain that:
§ 3-17.4. Use of Recreational Facilities. [Ord. #2447, § I]
Recognizing the intense use to which the football, softball, baseball and
soccer fields are being put to, as well as the competing demands on
available field time by the various age groups wishing to use the facilities,
after notifying the police department. However, if the playground or
recreation area is illuminated by artificial lighting, it shall not be
occupied after such lighting has been extinguished.
p. To permit or to cause a vehicle to remain standing for a period longer
than five minutes between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour
before sunrise; provided however, that this regulation shall not apply to
emergency repairs or to the attendance of the vehicle's occupants'
function authorized by the parks department or board of education.
q. To use roads or ways for the purpose of demonstrating any vehicle, or
for the purpose of instructing another to operate any vehicle or for
learning to operate any vehicle.
r. To smoke in violation of any state or local law, rule or regulation, or
smoke in violation of any board of education rule or regulation.
s. To purposefully or recklessly create a hazardous or physically
dangerous condition which could harm another person, or to engage in
a course of alarming conduct with the purpose to alarm or seriously
annoy another person.
a. The Lyndhurst Recreation Commission be authorized to create the
Lyndhurst Basketball League.
b. This league shall require all applicants to register with the commission
or an employee(s) of the township parks department designated by that
commissioner. Membership in the league shall be limited to Lyndhurst
residents. Applicants for membership must supply proof of residency.
The recreation commission shall determine what period of time the
courts shall be open and when the lights shall be used and when the
lights shall be turned off. The courts shall be kept locked when not used
under the auspice of the league. The commission shall arrange for adult
supervision of the courts whenever they are open.
§ 3-17.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-17.4
1:102
it is determined to be in the best interest of the Township of Lyndhurst to
regulate the use of all recreation areas as follows:
§ 3-17.5. Town Hall Park. [Ord. #2670, § 1]
a. The use of recreational facilities shall continue to be by permit issued
by the department of parks and public property for dates and time for
such use.
b. All programs run by the recreation commission shall have the first
option for obtaining permits for use of the recreational facilities. Any
other persons, groups, or entities may obtain a permit or permits for the
use of recreational facilities provided that the recreation commission
has determined that the granting of said permit or permits will not
interfere with programs run by the recreation commission which will be
using the facilities for games or practices, or for the general
maintenance of the facilities.
c. The department of parks and public property shall establish a fee for
the issuance of a permit appropriate to cover the expense of
maintaining the facility during the period of use governed by the
permit. The fee will be equivalent to the fee charged by the County of
Bergen for the seasonal use of the facility.
a. Unlawful Acts. In addition to the prohibited acts contained in
subsection 3-17.2, it shall be unlawful to commit any of the following
acts or things in Town Hall Park, located at the rear of the Lyndhurst
Town Hall, 367 Stuyvesant Avenue, as follows:
1. To throw, scatter or deposit garbage or waste of any kind including
containers, wrappers, drinks, food, candy or gum, except in
receptacles provided for the same.
2. To use wheeled vehicles or things of any kind, including golf carts,
bicycles, tricycles, roller skates, skateboards, roller blades, carts,
shopping carts, or any kind of wheeled or motorized transportation.
However, the following are exempted from this provision:
authorized use of such wheeled vehicles or things by township;
board of education or school employees; infant strollers and
assistance wheel chairs used by disabled persons.
3. To engage an event, unless permitted, sponsored or authorized by
the township or a permit is issued by the department of parks and
public property for dates and times for such use.
4. To obstruct, impede, disturb or interfere with the passage of
pedestrians on the sidewalks, trails, passageways, roads and
driveways.
5. To play, practice, or engage in a game, sport or activity which
involves a ball or object which is thrown, batted, struck or
projected in any way, including but not limited to, baseball, softball,
§ 3-17.4 GENERAL § 3-17.5
1:103
§ 3-18. PARKING VEHICLES ON POSTED LAND.
§ 3-18.1. Prohibited. [Ord. #1513, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle on
lands of another, whether publicly or privately owned in the township after
notice has been posted as hereinafter provided by the owner, occupant,
lessee or licensee prohibiting such parking. Nothing herein contained shall
apply to any lands lying within the bounds of any public street or highway.
§ 3-18.2. Posting of "No Parking" Signs. [Ord. #1513, § 2]
Suitable signs not less than 18 inches by 24 inches bearing the words "No
Parking" together with any qualifications or restrictions of such parking,
if any, and conspicuously displayed shall be posted on the lands by the
owner, occupant, lessee or licensee thereof where this section is effective.
Defacing, tampering with or damaging such signs when posted shall
constitute a violation of this section.
§ 3-19. SHOPPING CARTS.
§ 3-19.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1591, § 1]
As used in this section:
CART — Shall mean a hand-drawn or propelled vehicle or wheeled
container made of metal, wood or other material such as is generally
provided by merchants for the use of their customers in carting or carrying
goods, wares and merchandise to automobiles or other vehicles.
STREET — Shall mean and include street, avenue, road, alley, lane,
highway, boulevard, concourse, driveway, culvert, crosswalk, sidewalk,
stickball, wiffleball, football, volleyball, basketball, soccer, kickball,
handball, tennis, ping pong, golf, Frisbee, or flying of kites, model
airplanes or other objects, except in the area of the handball court,
or in any permitted area designated by the township.
b. Use of Certain Facilities. Use of the following facilities in Town Hall
Park shall be by permit issued by the Department of Parks and Public
Property for dates and times for such use as follows:
1. Use of the gazebo by commercial groups, organizations or entities.
2. Use of the band shell by any persons, groups, organizations or
entities.
3. The department of parks and public properties shall establish a fee
for the issuance of the permit appropriate to cover the expense of
maintaining the facility during the period of use governed by the
permit.
§ 3-17.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-19.1
1:104
park, public parking lot, public parking area and public places used by the
general public.
§ 3-19.2. Leaving Shopping Carts on Streets or Private Property.
[Ord. #1591, § 2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or suffer or permit to be left any
cart, either owned by him or in his possession, custody or control upon any
public thoroughfare or upon any private property not his or her own.
§ 3-19.3. Identification Tag Required. [Ord. #1591, § 3]
Any cart provided or made available for use by any person, his agent or
employee shall have securely attached thereto a plainly-visible metal or
plastic identification tag. The number of the cart, the name and address of
its owner and location of the premises where it is actually available for use
shall be legibly printed on the identification tag.
§ 3-19.4. Inspection. [Ord. #1591, § 4]
The public works department of the township shall be authorized to enter
upon premises at any reasonable hour of a business day where carts are
provided, for the purpose of inspecting carts for proper identification and
otherwise effecting compliance with the provisions of this section.
§ 3-19.5. Public Works Department to Remove and Store Carts.
[Ord. #1591, § 5]
The public works department of the township shall remove or cause to be
removed any cart found upon any street and shall take the cart to a place
provided by the township where it shall be held until redeemed, sold or
otherwise disposed of as hereinafter provided in this section.
§ 3-19.6. Notice to Owner; Redemption Charges. [Ord. #1591, §§ 6,
7; Ord. #1847, § 1]
Whenever the public works department shall take any cart into their
possession bearing identification of ownership or right to possession, a
notice shall be sent by ordinary mail to such person advising him or it that
such cart is being held by the public works department and that the cart
may be redeemed upon payment to the township of a fee or charge of $15.
Such cart may be redeemed by the owner thereof as shown by the
identification of ownership or right to possession at any time prior to a sale,
dismantling, destruction or disposal thereof and he or it shall be entitled to
receive such cart upon payment of the fee or charge of the sum of $15.
§ 3-19.1 GENERAL § 3-19.7
1:105
§ 3-19.7. Sale of Carts Held for Six Months; Redemption by Owner
After Advertisement. [Ord. #1591, § 8; Ord. #1847, § 1]
When any cart remains in the custody of the public works department for
six months after coming into their possession and with respect to which no
person has presented to the township proof establishing to its satisfaction
such person's ownership or right to possession, the township shall give
public notice in a newspaper circulating in the township that, at a specified
time and place, such cart will be sold at public auction. The sale shall be
conducted by the township clerk or by such other person as the board
of commissioners shall designate. If, after such notice of sale is given, an
owner or other person entitled to redeem any cart prior to the sale may
redeem the cart and pay to the township or its duly authorized agent the
sum of $30.
§ 3-19.8. Disposition of Funds Collected. [Ord. #1591, § 9]
Upon a redemption or sale of a cart, the proceeds shall be deposited in the
general funds of the township or in such manner as shall be designated by
the board of commissioners.
§ 3-20. MAINTENANCE OF TRUCKS.
§ 3-20.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1514, § 1]
As used in this section:
AUTOMOBILE — Shall mean and include all motor vehicles, motorcycles,
trucks and truck tractors.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — Shall mean a place of business where
gasoline, or any highly volatile fuels for motor vehicles or internal
combustion engines are sold or offered for sale at retail, and dispensed into
the fuel tanks of such motor vehicles.
TRUCK — Shall mean every motor vehicle designed, used and maintained
primarily for the transportation of property.
TRUCK TRACTOR — Shall mean every motor vehicle designated and used
primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a
load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
§ 3-20.2. Hours Prohibited. [Ord. #1514, § 2; Ord. #2384, § I]
It shall be unlawful to perform any mechanical maintenance on trucks
or truck tractors at any gasoline service station within the Township of
Lyndhurst between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. It shall further
be unlawful to perform any mechanical maintenance on trucks or truck
tractors at any gasoline service station within the Township of Lyndhurst at
any time on Sundays.
§ 3-19.7 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-20.3
1:106
§ 3-20.3. Emergency Repairs Permitted. [Ord. #1514, § 3]
It shall not be unlawful to perform mechanical maintenance on any
automobile, truck or truck tractor in need of emergency repairs during the
hours herein prohibited for the performance of mechanical maintenance on
trucks and truck tractors.
§ 3-21. TRESPASSING PROHIBITED UPON MEADOWLAND
PROPERTIES.
§ 3-21.1. Declaration. [Ord. #1668, § 1]
The board of commissioners, having determined that there exists potentially
hazardous and dangerous conditions due to wanton fires caused
intentionally or negligently by person or persons traveling through the
area of the township commonly known as the Meadowlands, have hereby
determined that for the public safety, health and welfare of the citizens
and persons residing in the township and employed in the Meadowlands
area that it is the declaration of the board of commissioners that the
Meadowlands area be restricted from any and all traffic except by consent
of the owners, occupiers, lessees, licensees or public officials of the
township on or over any lands located in the Meadowlands area.
§ 3-21.2. Definitions. [Ord. #1668, § 2]
As used in this section:
MEADOWLANDS — Shall mean the area encompassed by the Hackensack
River on the easterly boundary of the Township of Lyndhurst; the dividing
line between the Borough of Rutherford and the Township of Lyndhurst on
the northerly boundary; the dividing line between the Borough of North
Arlington and the Township of Lyndhurst on the southwesterly boundary;
and the dividing line between the Township of Lyndhurst and the Town of
Kearny on the southerly and southeasterly boundary line to the Hackensack
River; and the boundary line on the westerly shall be bounded by Polito
Avenue from the intersection of Polito Avenue with Rutherford Avenue on
the northerly boundary of the Township of Lyndhurst and Polito Avenue
extended southerly to where Polito Avenue intersects the main line of the
Erie Lackawanna Railroad and then easterly along the main line of the
Erie Lackawanna Railroad to its intersection with the Harrison-Kingsland
connecting branch and then southerly along the Harrison-Kingsland
connecting branch to its intersection with the boundary line between the
Township of Lyndhurst and the Borough of North Arlington.
POSTING — Shall mean the posting of a sign approved by resolution of
the board of commissioners setting forth the prohibition of trespassing on
lands where signs are posted setting forth the number of the ordinance and
the penalty for violation, which sign shall be posted every 250 feet along
the public streets known as Valley Brook Avenue as it extends east and
south to its intersection with the main line of the Erie Lackawanna Railroad
and posting shall be deemed to be public notice of the prohibition against
§ 3-20.3 GENERAL § 3-21.2
1:107
trespassing on public or private lands adjacent to or continuous to lands
fronting on Valley Brook Avenue, and posting of signs along any entrance
roadway, path or other means of access anywhere in the Meadowlands area.
TRESPASS — Shall mean the invasion and traveling over of any public or
private lands or public roads by any person or persons on foot or in vehicles
without the consent of the owner, occupier, lessee, licensee or public official
of the township.
§ 3-21.3. Trespassing Prohibited. [Ord. #1668, § 3]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to commit a trespass
within the area designated as the Meadowlands in the Township of
Lyndhurst upon either public or private property without the consent of
the owner, occupier, lessee or licensee of the public or private lands or the
consent of a public official of the township.
§ 3-21.4. Specific Acts of Trespassing Enumerated. [Ord. #1668,
§ 4]
Without constituting any limitation upon the provisions of subsection
3-21.3, any of the following acts by any person shall be deemed included
among those that constitute trespasses in violation of the provisions of
subsection 3-21.3, and appropriate action may be taken hereunder at any
time to prevent or punish any violation of this section.
The enumerated acts shall include:
§ 3-21.5. Violation and Penalties. [Ord. #1668, § 6]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $250 or by
imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both
a. Any entry upon the premises, or any part thereof, of any public or
private property in violation of a notice posted along the public road on
the premises or at any point of approach or entry or in violation of any
notice, warning or protest, given orally or in writing by the owner or
occupier of the lands or by a police officer of the township designated
by the chief of police.
b. The pursuit of a course of conduct or action incidental to the making of
an entry upon public or private lands in the Meadowlands in violation of
a notice posted on the roadway along the premises or at any point of
approach or entry or in violation of any notice, warning or protest given
orally or in writing by the owner or occupier of the lands or by a police
officer of the township designated by the chief of police.
c. A failure or refusal to depart from the premises of another located in
the Meadowlands upon request, either orally or in writing by any owner
or occupier or by a police officer of the township designated by the chief
of police.
§ 3-21.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-21.5
1:108
in the discretion of the court or judge before whom such conviction shall be
had.
§ 3-22. MASSAGE PARLORS, BATH PARLORS, ADULT BOOK
STORES; DISPLAY OF INDECENT AND OBSCENE MATERIAL.11
§ 3-22.1. Purpose. [Ord. #1684, § 1]
The purpose of this section is to control and regulate the distribution, sale,
circulation and exposure of magazines, pictures, drawings, photographs
and other publication devoted to the presentation and exploration of sexual
acts, normal or perverted, lust, passion, depravity, nudity, immorality, and
the distribution and sale of devices, implements and other materials
designed to sexually stimulate.
It is further declared that the operation of any establishment, public or
private, as a massage parlor, bath parlor or any similar type of business
where any physical contact with the recipient of such service is provided by
a person of the opposite sex is a matter of public concern and the provisions
hereinafter described are enacted and their necessity in the public interest
is hereby declared as a matter of legislative determination.
§ 3-22.2. Definitions. [Ord. #1684, § 2]
As used in this section:
a. Obscene shall mean that which to the average person, applying
contemporary community standards, when considered as a whole, has
as its dominant theme or purpose, an appeal to the prurient interest.
Any magazine, picture, drawing, photograph, or other publication and
any mechanical or electronic gadget, implement or device designed to
sexually stimulate shall be obscene within the meaning of this section, if
it is established that:
1. The dominant theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to the
prurient interest; and
2. The material is patently offensive because it affronts contemporary
community standards, relating to the description or representation
of sexual matters; and
3. The material is utterly without redeeming social value, or the work
taken as a whole lacks serious artistic, literary, political or scientific
value.
b. Person shall mean any individual, firm, corporation, partnership or any
other type of form of business which may be conducted in this state.
11.Editor's Note: For licensing and regulating of massage therapy see Section 22-7.
§ 3-21.5 GENERAL § 3-22.2
1:109
§ 3-22.3. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. #1684, § 3]
It shall be unlawful for any person as defined herein to:
§ 3-22.4. Violation and Penalty; Revocation of License. [Ord. #1684,
§ 4]
Any person who shall violate any of the prohibitions of subsection 3-22.3
shall upon conviction be subject to a fine stated in Section 3-1 of this
chapter.
A violation of subsection 3-22.3a shall also be grounds for revocation of any
license or certificate of occupancy issued by the township on the premises.
§ 3-23. TRESPASSING PROHIBITED UPON RAILROAD PROPERTY.
§ 3-23.1. Declaration. [Ord. #1750, § 1]
The board of commissioners having determined that there exists potentially
hazardous and dangerous conditions due to wantonly set fires and
vandalism caused intentionally or negligently by person or persons going
upon railroad property and having further determined that there is as well
a real threat to the safety of the aforementioned person or persons, do
declare that all railroad property located in the township be restricted from
any and all pedestrian or vehicular traffic except by consent of the owners,
occupiers, lessees, licensees or public officials of the township.
§ 3-23.2. Definitions. [Ord. #1750, § 2]
As used in this section:
POSTING — Shall mean the placing of a sign approved by resolution of the
board of commissioners setting forth the prohibition of trespassing on lands
setting forth the number of the ordinance and the penalty for such violation.
Said sign shall be posted on all railroad property.
c. Adult book store shall mean any business or business operation which
sells, distributes, or otherwise conveys any obscene materials
described in paragraph a of this subsection.
a. Operate any establishment, regardless of whether it is a public or
private facility, as a massage parlor, bath parlor or any similar type
business where any physical contact with the recipient of such service
is provided thereby resulting in sexual conduct.
b. Use or occupy any building, structure or premises as an adult book
store as herein defined.
It shall not be a violation of this section to sell magazines that fall
within the prohibitions of this section provided that they are not openly
exposed in public view.
§ 3-22.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-23.2
1:110
RAILROAD PROPERTY — Shall mean all station buildings, waiting areas,
stairwells, parking lots and rights of way and bridges located in Lyndhurst
and belonging to Conrail Corporation, the State of New Jersey or the Erie
Lackawanna Railroad.
TRESPASS — Shall mean the entry and/or traveling upon any public or
private lands in violation of a posted notice, by any person or persons,
without the consent of the owner, lessee, licensee or public official of the
township.
§ 3-23.3. Trespassing Prohibited. [Ord. #1750, § 3]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to commit a trespass
on railroad property within the Township of Lyndhurst without the consent
of the owner, occupier, lessee or licensee of the lands or the consent of a
public official of the township. All law-abiding passengers shall be deemed
to have the consent of the land owner.
§ 3-23.4. Violation and Penalties. [Ord. #1750, § 4]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $50 in the
discretion of the court or judge before whom such conviction shall be had.
§ 3-24. PARAPHERNALIA RELATING TO CONTROLLED
DANGEROUS SUBSTANCES.
§ 3-24.1. Display, Sale, Advertise Paraphernalia Prohibited. [Ord.
#1724, § 1]
No person shall advertise, display, sell or offer to sell any type of syringe,
needle, eye dropper, spoon, pipe, testing kit, or other paraphernalia or
appliances designed for or ordinarily used in smoking, testing, weighing,
measuring, injecting, cooking or sniffing marijuana, cocaine, opium, hashish
or other controlled dangerous substance as defined by N.J.S.A. 24:21-1 et
seq.
§ 3-24.2. Maintain Premises for Manufacture, Distribution, Use,
Etc. Prohibited. [Ord. #1724, § 2]
It shall constitute a common nuisance to maintain any building, conveyance,
or premises whatever, which is resorted to by persons for the manufacture,
distribution, dispensing, administration or use of any type of syringe,
needle, eye dropper, spoon, pipe, testing kit or other paraphernalia or
appliances designed for or ordinarily used in smoking, testing, weighing,
measuring, injecting, cooking or sniffing marijuana, cocaine, opium, hashish
or other controlled dangerous substances as defined by N.J.S.A. 24:21-1 et
seq.
§ 3-23.2 GENERAL § 3-24.3
1:111
§ 3-24.3. Penalty. [Ord. #1724, § 3]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500, or by
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. A separate offense
shall be deemed to have been committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 3-25. MOTOR-DRIVEN OFF-ROAD VEHICLES.
§ 3-25.1. Purpose. [Ord. #1724, § 1]
The purpose of this section shall be to set standards for the operation of
motor-driven off-road vehicles within the Township of Lyndhurst so as to
improve standards of safety as well as to minimize the impact of operation
of such vehicles on residents of the township, the public at large, and the
environment.
§ 3-25.2. Definitions. [Ord. #1774, § 2]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OFF-ROAD VEHICLES — Shall mean a motor-driven vehicle designed
primarily for transportation of the driver, including mini-bikes, trail bikes,
unlicensed motorcycles, motor scooters, motor bikes, go carts, dune
buggies, all terrain vehicles or other recreational vehicles designed
primarily for transportation of the driver on other than the public or private
roadway. This section shall not apply to lawn mowers, tractors, farm, lawn,
garden or similar equipment when used for purposes for which they were
designed. Vehicles required to be registered under Title 39, Motor Vehicles,
of the New Jersey Statutes shall be regulated by that statute and are
specifically exempted from registration under this section.
REGISTRATION — Shall mean:
Any person who shall own an off-road vehicle, as defined above in this
subsection, and who intends to use same or to permit same to be used
within the boundaries of the Township of Lyndhurst shall, prior to such
operation, register such vehicle with the Lyndhurst Police Department.
A person wishing to register an off-road vehicle shall complete an
application form furnished by the Lyndhurst Police Department which
application shall include, but is not limited to the following information:
the name and address of the registrant, the name and address of
the owner, and where applicable, the year, make, model, type, color,
horsepower, and serial number of the vehicle being registered. In the
case of a registrant under 18 years of age, a parent or guardian must
accompany the registrant, giving their name, address, his or her
consent to the registration, and his or her agreement for the
responsibility for the operation of said vehicle according to the terms
of this section. Each registrant shall pay a fee of $5 which shall be
1.
§ 3-24.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-25.2
1:112
§ 3-25.3. Regulation of Operation. [Ord. #1774, § 3]
used to defray the cost of application and identification plate. Upon
acceptance of the application fee, the Lyndhurst Police Department
shall issue an identification plate bearing the registration number and
date of issue, which plate shall be prominently displayed on the vehicle
and maintained in a legible condition. The registrant shall also be given
a copy of this section and in the case of the registrants being under
the age of 18, a copy shall be given to the parent or guardian who
has accompanied the registrant and signed the consent letter described
above.
The initial registration period shall commence upon the effective date
of the section and it is intended that all owners shall have registered
the vehicles and complied with this section not later than three months
thereafter. Subsequent to such date, individuals acquiring such vehicles
shall have 10 days from the effective date of such acquisition within
which to register such vehicles.
2.
In the event ownership of the vehicle is transferred, the new owner
shall register such vehicle pursuant to the terms above, within 10 days
of effective ownership.
3.
In the event the identification plate is lost or becomes illegible, a
replacement shall be obtained within 10 days from the Lyndhurst Police
Department upon payment of a replacement fee of $4.
4.
No registration shall be required to operate an off-road vehicle on
private property by either the owner of such property, or any other
person who resides with the owner of such property.
5.
a. It shall be unlawful to operate any off-road vehicle within the township
under the following circumstances:
1. An unregistered off-road vehicle, except as provided in paragraph
b5 of subsection 3-25.2.
2. On the private property of another person or party, unless the
operator of the vehicle has the express written permission of the
owner, to operate the vehicle thereon. Such permission shall be in
writing and shall be exhibited to police officers upon request or
furnished to the police department within 48 hours.
3. On any public street, sidewalk or bike path within the Township of
Lyndhurst unless the operator is fully dismounted.
4. On public grounds, unless permission for operation of such vehicles
on said grounds has been specifically given by the proper public
authority.
5. Without any muffler device or in case of vehicles with two-cycle
engines, without any spark arrestor or in violation of noise
§ 3-25.2 GENERAL § 3-25.3
1:113
§ 3-25.4. Penalties. [Ord. #1774, § 4]
§ 3-26. HOURS OF OPERATION FOR RETAIL BUSINESSES AND
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS RESTRICTED.
standards described in Lyndhurst Ordinance No. 1738, Sections 3;
4.3.3; 5.2.7; 5.2.14; 8 and 10.12
6. In a manner creating loud or unusual noise so as to disturb or
interfere with the peace and quiet of other persons.
b. 1. It shall be unlawful for the registrant owner or person having
control or custody of an off-road vehicle to allow or enable such
registered vehicle to be used or operated by another in violation of
paragraph a of subsection 3-25.3.
2. In the case of a registrant, under age 18, it shall be unlawful for the
parent or guardian of such registrant to allow or enable such
registered vehicle to be used or operated by the registrant or any
other operator in violation of paragraph a of subsection 3-25.3.
3. Where a vehicle is operated in violation of this section, it shall be
presumed that the registrant or in the case of registrant under 18,
the parent or guardian of the registrant enabled the vehicle to be
operated.
a. For registrants 18 years of age or over, violation of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not
more than $200 or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term of up to
30 days or both. The Township of Lyndhurst police department may, in
addition to issuing a summons, also immediately confiscate the off-road
vehicle used or operated in violation of this section. The vehicle shall be
returned to the registrant upon completion of registration and upon
payment of any towing or removal costs.
b. In the event that the provisions of this section are violated by an
operator or a registered owner of the vehicle who is at the time of such
violation under the age of 18, such violation shall result in the following:
1. For the first violation, the operator shall be warned by the police
and a letter shall be sent to the registrant and separately to the
parent or guardian signing the consent letter for the registrant; the
letter shall state the offense and describe the penalties for
violation. A copy of this section shall be included with the letter to
the parent or guardian.
2. Upon second or subsequent conviction for violation of this section
by the same registrant (or involving the same vehicle) the court
may order confiscation of the vehicle in question by the police
department for a period not to exceed 90 days for each violation.
12.Editor’s Note: Refer to Chapter 24, Noise Control Code.
§ 3-25.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-26.1
1:114
§ 3-26.1. Restrictions on Business or Commercial Establishment
When Located in or Contiguous to a Residential Zone. [Ord. #1904,
§ I; Ord. #1941, § I; Ord. #2400, § I; Ord. #2636, § 1; Ord. #2649,
§ 1; Ord. #2800-11]
No retail business or commercial establishment of any nature to which the
public is invited located in or contiguous to a residential zone shall conduct
business between the hours of 12:00 midnight of each day and 5:00 a.m. of
the following day other than (1) restaurants serving food in the premises in
which three employees are on duty; and (2) gas stations only for the sale
of gasoline and petroleum products, and where no cash is accepted after
midnight and where such fact is announced to the public by prominently
displayed notices.
§ 3-26.2. Exceptions to Regulations. [Ord. #1904, § II; Ord. #1941,
§ II]
This section shall not apply to any licensed business or commercial
establishment for on the premises consumption of alcoholic beverages
regulated by N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., nor shall this section apply to any
registered pharmacy regulated by N.J.S.A. 45:14-1 et seq. with a licensed
pharmacist on duty.
§ 3-26.3. Location of Residential Zones. [Ord. #1941, § III]
Any property located east of Polito Avenue shall be presumed not to be
in or contiguous to a residential zone; in any other area the construction
official shall advise the property owner if the property is in or contiguous to
a residential zone.
§ 3-27. OPERATION OF TRUCKS AND NON-PASSENGER MOTOR
VEHICLES RESTRICTED.
§ 3-27.1. Operation of Vehicles Leaving Accumulations of Dirt on
Paved Roadway Prohibited. [Ord. #1940, § I]
No operator of a non-passenger motor vehicle shall allow a vehicle to
enter unto a township owned paved roadway from unpaved private property
located within the township in a manner so as to leave a visual accumulation
of dirt on the paved roadway.
§ 3-27.2. Enforcement. [Ord. #1940, § II]
This section may be enforced by any police officer, construction official,
health officer or code enforcer.
§ 3-27.3. Violations, Penalty. [Ord. #1940, § III]
The penalty for violation of this section shall be a fine from zero to $500.
§ 3-26.1 GENERAL § 3-28
1:115
§ 3-28. DISTRIBUTION OF SOLICITED OR UNSOLICITED
CIRCULARS, LEAFLETS, NEWSPAPERS AND OTHER LIKE PRINTED
MATTER TO PRIVATE PREMISES.
§ 3-28.1. Regulations. [Ord. #2140; Ord. #2150, § 1; Ord. #2159,
§ I]
§ 3-28.2. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #2140; Ord. #2150, § I;
Ord. #2159, § I]
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to deliver, or for any person, firm or
corporation to cause the delivery of any solicited or unsolicited
shoppers, circulars, leaflets, flyers, newspapers, and other like printed
matter to private premises within the Township of Lyndhurst except in
accordance with the terms hereof.
b. Such printed matter shall be placed where specifically designated by
the property owner or if no such place is so designated then on the
grounds of the property.
c. It shall be a violation of the ordinance for the printed matter to be left
on the public street, the area between the public sidewalk and the
street commonly referred to as the tree belt, or the public sidewalk
itself.
d. There shall be no delivery of such printed matter to premises the
owners of which have notified the publisher or the delivery person that
such delivery shall cease or be suspended for a stated period of time.
e. When delivery is made from the interior of a motor vehicle, the delivery
shall be on the same side of the street, to the right of the vehicle as the
motor vehicle is proceeding, with the exception that on a one-way
street, delivery may be made to both sides of the vehicle.
f. 1. When delivery is being made from within a motor vehicle the
vehicle shall come as close to the right side curb as safely as
possible before delivery is made.
2. When said delivery is being made by the driver as opposed to a
passenger the speed of the vehicle at the time of delivery shall be
commensurate with the weather conditions, vehicular traffic
conditions, and the pedestrian traffic conditions but shall not
exceed 10 miles per hour.
g. Whenever possible delivery shall not be made between the hours of
7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.
h. With respect to apartments or condominiums, with enclosed foyers the
paper is to be delivered, not wrapped in plastic or any other container,
in the foyer in one neat pile (to cover all residents therein).
§ 3-28 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-28.2
1:116
§ 3-29. CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON PRIVATE
PROPERTY.
§ 3-29.1. Regulations. [Ord. #2468, § I]
§ 3-29.2. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #2468, § I]
a. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a violation of any provision
of this section shall be subject to a fine of not more than $50 for a first
offense, no more than $100 for a second offense and no more than $500
for a third and/or subsequent offense in a calendar year. Each delivery
in violation of the terms hereof after due notice thereof has been
served, shall be deemed a separate offense.
b. For each violation either the deliverer, the business entity publishing
the material delivered, or the business entity paying the deliverer shall
be subject to prosecution.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age to purchase
alcoholic beverages, to knowingly possess or consume any alcoholic
beverage in or on any private property.
b. This section shall not prohibit an underage person from consuming or
possessing an alcoholic beverage in connection with a religious
observance, ceremony, or rite nor shall this section prohibit an
underage person from consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage
in the presence of and with the permission of a parent, guardian or
relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume
alcoholic beverages.
c. As used in this section: "Guardian" means a person who has qualified as
a guardian of the underage person pursuant to testamentary or court
appointment. "Relative" means the underage person's grandparent,
aunt or uncle, sibling, or any other person related by blood or affinity.
d. This section shall not prohibit possession of alcoholic beverages by any
such person while actually engaged in the performance of employment
by a person who is licensed under Title 33 of the Revised Statutes, or
while actively engaged in the preparation of food while enrolled in a
culinary arts or hotel management program at a county vocational
school or post secondary educational institution. However, this section
shall not be construed to preclude the imposition of a penalty under
N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other section of law against a person who is
convicted of unlawful alcoholic beverage activity on or at premises
licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages.
a. A person found guilty of a violation of this section shall be punished by a
fine of $250 for a first offense and $350 for any subsequent offense.
b. The municipal court may, in addition to the fine authorized for this
offense, suspend or postpone for six months the driving privilege of the
§ 3-28.2 GENERAL § 3-29.2
1:117
§ 3-30. SMOKE-FREE SCHOOL ZONE.
§ 3-30.1. Creation of a Smoke-Free School Zone. [Ord. #2477, § I]
It shall be unlawful for students enrolled in elementary and secondary
educational institutions to use or possess in plain public view a cigarette
or any other tobacco products within the public right-of-way areas within a
radius of 1,000 feet of any elementary or secondary educational institution
when classes or other student activities are in session and one hour before
and one hour after such activities.
§ 3-30.2. Enforcement. [Ord. #2477, § I]
defendant. Upon the conviction of any person and the suspension or
postponement of that person's driver's license, the municipal court
shall forward a report to the Division of Motor Vehicles stating the
first and last day of the suspension or postponement period imposed
by the court pursuant to this section. If a person at the time of the
imposition of sentence is less than 17 years of age, the period of
license postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the
privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day
the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months after
the person reaches the age of 17 years.
c. If a person at the time of the imposition of a sentence has a valid
driver's license issued by this state, the municipal court shall
immediately collect the license and forward it to the Division of Motor
Vehicles along with the report. If for any reason the license cannot be
collected, the municipal court shall include in the report the complete
name, address, date of birth, eye color, and sex of the person, as well as
the first and last date of the license suspension period imposed by the
court.
d. The municipal court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if
the person is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period
of license suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. A person shall be required to
acknowledge receipt of the written notice in writing. Failure to receive
a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing the receipt of a
written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent charge of a
violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
e. If the person convicted under this section is not a New Jersey resident,
the municipal court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the
nonresident driving privilege of the person based on the age of the
person and submit to the Motor Vehicle Commission the required
report. The municipal court shall not collect the license of a nonresident
convicted under this section.
a. Whenever a police officer reasonably believes there exists a violation of
this section, he/she may issue a summons and complaint not later than
§ 3-29.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-30.2
1:118
§ 3-31. REGULATIONS FOR OFF-DUTY EMPLOYMENT OF POLICE
OFFICERS.
§ 3-31.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2545, § 1; Ord. #2903-14]
There is hereby established in the Township of Lyndhurst regulations
regarding the employment of off-duty law enforcement officers of the
Lyndhurst Police Department and to authorize the outside employment of
township police while off-duty.
30 days after discovery of the alleged violation. The complaint shall be
written and shall state with reasonable particularity the nature of the
violation, including reference to the subsection of this section alleged to
have been violated. The complaint shall be delivered or sent by certified
mail to the alleged violator.
b. Any person charged with enforcement of this section, after giving
proper identification, may inspect any matter, thing, incident, or event
as necessary.
c. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this section.
d. Penalties. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any
person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $50 nor more than
$200 for each offense. Penalties for first violations may be in the form of
community service.
a. Members of the police department shall be permitted to accept police
related employment for private employers or school districts only
during off-duty hours and at such time as will not interfere with the
efficient performance of regularly scheduled or emergency duty for the
township.
b. Any person or entity desiring to employ off-duty police shall first obtain
the approval of the chief of police, which approval shall be granted if in
the opinion of the chief of police, such employment would not be
inconsistent with the efficient functioning and good reputation of the
police department, and would not unreasonably endanger or threaten
the safety of the officer or officers who are to perform the work.
c. Upon approval of the chief of police of off-duty police employment,
pursuant to paragraph b hereof, the chief, or his designee, which may
be a collective bargaining unit representative, shall determine, by
means of a written rotating list, those members of the police
department who may be eligible for any individual off-duty employment
assignment (or post). Such a list, or lists, shall only include members of
the police department having a rank of patrol officer, sergeant,
lieutenant, or assigned the rank of detective. Said list shall be based on
members who have signed up for such off-duty employment on a
voluntary basis. The list shall include those members wishing
§ 3-30.2 GENERAL § 3-31.1
1:119
§ 3-31.2. Escrow Accounts. [Ord. #2545, § 1]
§ 3-31.3. Requests for Services. [Ord. #2545, § 1]
All requests to the township for the services of off-duty law enforcement
officers in the Lyndhurst Police Department for a period of one week or
longer shall be forwarded to the chief of police for posting at least 10 days
before such services are required. Any law enforcement officer, when so
employed by the township, shall be treated as an employee of the township
provided, however, that wages earned for outside employment shall not
be applied toward the pension benefits of law enforcement officers so
employed, nor shall hours worked for outside employment be considered in
any way compensable as overtime.
§ 3-31.4. Rate of Compensation; Administrative Fees; Payment for
Services. [Ord. #2545, § 1; Ord. #2656, § 1]
(volunteering) to work an off-duty employment assignment and such
off-duty employment assignment shall be based solely on seniority. No
member holding the rank higher than lieutenant may be placed on said
off-duty employment list, and members holding these ranks may not
work such off-duty assignments, unless no other member of the police
department has volunteered to work such an assignment. However, any
off-duty employment assignment (or post) relating to a public entity,
such as the Township of Lyndhurst, New Jersey Meadowlands District,
County of Bergen, Lyndhurst Board of Education, State of New Jersey,
etc., may be filled by a member of the police department based on
seniority and without regard to rank.
a. Any person or entity requesting the services on an off-duty law
enforcement officer in the Lyndhurst Police Department shall estimate
the number of hours such law enforcement services are required, which
estimate shall be approved in writing by the chief of police, and shall
establish an escrow account with the treasurer of the township by
depositing an amount sufficient to cover the rates of compensation and
administrative fees set forth in subsection 3-31.4 for the total estimated
hours of service.
b. Prior to posting any request for services of off-duty law enforcement
officers, the chief of police or his designee, shall verify that the balance
in the escrow account of the person or entity requesting services is
sufficient to cover the compensation and fees for the number of hours
specified in the request for services. The chief of police shall not post a
request for services from any person or entity unless all fees and
compensation required in the manner described above have been
deposited with the township treasurer. No officer shall provide any such
services for more hours than are specified in the request for service.
§ 3-31.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-31.4
1:120
§ 3-32. INSTALLATION, USE, AND MAINTENANCE OF
NEWSRACKS.
§ 3-32.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2550, § 1]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DISTRIBUTOR — Shall mean the person or business entity responsible for
placing a newsrack in a public place or public street, as herein defined.
NEWSPAPER — Shall mean any newspaper of general circulation as defined
by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office
Department of the United States in accordance with federal statute or
regulation and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer
as provided by general law.
NEWSRACK — Shall mean any self-service or coin-operated box, container,
storage unit, or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the
display and sale of newspapers only.
ROADWAY — Shall mean that portion of a street improved, or designated,
or ordinarily used for vehicle travel.
SIDEWALK — Shall mean any surface provided for the use of pedestrians.
STREET — Shall mean all that area dedicated to public use for public street
purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways,
alleys, and sidewalks.
§ 3-32.2. Purpose. [Ord. #2550, § 1]
The purpose of this section is to establish regulations and requirements
to obtain permits for the installation, use, operation, and maintenance of
newsracks on public streets or other public places in the township.
§ 3-32.3. Permit Required. [Ord. #2550, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, place,
maintain, or operate on any public street, sidewalk, or other public place in
the township any newsrack without first having obtained a permit from the
department of public works specifying the exact location of such newsrack
a. Rates of compensation for contracting the services of off-duty law
enforcement officers and administration fees are hereby established as
follows:
1. Rates of compensation: $25 per hour.
2. Administration fee: $50 to cover administrative costs, overhead
and out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the Township of Lyndhurst.
b. Payment to off-duty law enforcement officers for outside employment
shall be made through the township's payroll process.
§ 3-31.4 GENERAL § 3-32.3
1:121
or newsracks. One permit may be issued to include any number of
newsracks and shall be signed by the applicant.
§ 3-32.4. Application for Permit. [Ord. #2550, § 1]
Application for such permit shall be made in writing to the department of
public works, and approved by that department, upon such form as shall be
provided by that department and shall contain the name and address of the
applicant and the proposed specific location of said newsrack or newsracks
and shall be signed by the applicant.
§ 3-32.5. Issuance, Term, Conditions, Fees. [Ord. #2550, § 1]
a. Permits may be issued for the installation of a newsrack or newsracks
and the installation, use, or maintenance thereof shall be conditioned
upon compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A permit fee in the
amount of $100 is required for each newsrack installed. The amount of
the fee may be amended by ordinance of the township board of
commissioners at any time subsequent to the adoption of this chapter.
b. The permit shall be valid for a period of one year, on a calendar-year
basis, commencing on January 1 and shall be renewable on January 1 of
any subsequent year. The annual fee shall be prorated if the permit is
issued effective subsequent to January 1.
c. No permit shall be issued or continued in operation unless the applicant
and any other persons, organizations, firms, companies or corporations
on whose behalf the application is made by filing such application do
represent, stipulate, contract, and agree that they will jointly and
severally defend, indemnify, and hold the township harmless against
liability for any and all claims for damage to property or injury to or
death of persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the
permit or the control, maintenance, or ownership of the newsracks
permitted.
d. Before the department of public works may issue a newsrack permit to
any person, that person must execute an indemnification agreement
substantially as follows:
"The applicant and any other persons, organizations, firms, companies
or corporations on whose behalf the application is made represent,
stipulate, contract, and agree that they do jointly and severally defend,
indemnify, and hold harmless the Township of Lyndhurst against
liability for any and all claims for damage to property or injury to or
death of persons arising out of or resulting from the issuance of the
permit or the control, maintenance, or ownership of the newsracks
permitted."
e. Before the department of public works may issue a newsrack permit to
any person, that person shall file with the department of public works
an insurance policy of a company duly licensed to transact business
§ 3-32.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-32.5
1:122
§ 3-32.6. Installation and Maintenance Standards. [Ord. #2550, § 1]
Any newsrack which, in whole or in part, rests upon, in, or over any public
sidewalk, roadway, street or public place shall comply with the following
standards:
under the insurance laws of this state in the sum of $100,000 for one
person and for more than one person $1,000,000, insuring against
loss from liability imposed by law upon the distributor for damages on
account of bodily injury or death suffered, and in the sum of $50,000
against loss on account of property damage suffered by any person or
persons as a result of an accident occurring by reason of the ownership,
control, or maintenance of the newsracks permitted, and no license
shall continue effective unless such insurance in the full and collectible
amount of $100,000 for one person and $1,000,000 for more than one
person for bodily injuries or death and $50,000 for property damages
shall remain in force during the entire term of the license. Such
insurance policy shall provide for the payment of any final judgment
recovered by any person on account of the ownership, maintenance,
and control of such newsracks or any fault in respect thereto and shall
be for the benefit of any person suffering loss, damage, or injury as
aforesaid.
a. No newsrack shall exceed 60 inches in height, 24 inches in width, or 20
inches in thickness.
b. No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than those dealing with the display, sale, or purchase of the
newspapers sold therein.
c. Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to
permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in
the event that he or she is unable to receive the publication paid for.
The coin-return mechanisms shall be maintained in good working order.
d. Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place so as to
be seen by anyone using the newsrack a notice setting forth the name
and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working
telephone service to report a malfunction or to secure a refund in the
event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism or to give the
notices provided for in this section.
e. Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in
good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be serviced and maintained so
that:
1. It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling, and cracked paint
in the visible painted areas thereof.
2. It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted
metal areas thereon.
§ 3-32.5 GENERAL § 3-32.6
1:123
§ 3-32.7. Location and Placement. [Ord. #2550, § 1]
Any newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon or on any portion of
a public street, sidewalk, or public place, or projects onto, into, or over
any part of a public street or sidewalk shall comply with the following
requirements:
3. The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the
publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free
of cracks, dents, blemishes, and discolorations.
4. The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof, if any, are
reasonably free of tears, peeling, or fading.
5. The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.
f. It shall be unlawful for any person or place to maintain any publication
or material in newsracks which exposes to public view any pictorial
material which depicts or appears to depict nudity or offensive sexually
explicit material.
g. Each newsrack shall be maintained to prevent the newspapers from
being scattered about the area.
a. No newsrack shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into, or
over any part of the roadway or any public street or which rests wholly
or in part upon, along, or over any portion of the roadway of any public
street.
b. No newsracks shall be permitted to rest upon, in, or over any public
street or sidewalk when such installation, use, or maintenance:
1. Endangers the safety of persons or property;
2. Unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrians or
vehicular traffic, including any legally parked or stopped vehicles;
3. Unreasonably interferes with the ingress or egress from any
residence or place of business; or
4. Unreasaonably interferes with the use of traffic signs or signals,
hydrants, or mailboxes permitted at or near said location.
c. The newsrack or newsracks shall be placed or otherwise secured so as
to prevent their being blown down or around the public street or
sidewalk but shall not be chained or otherwise secured to any traffic or
street signs, signals, hydrants, or mailboxes.
d. No newsracks shall be placed, installed, used, or maintained:
1. Within three feet of any marked crosswalk.
2. Within three feet of a curb.
§ 3-32.6 LYNDHURST CODE § 3-32.7
1:124
§ 3-32.8. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #2550, § 1]
Any violation of this Section 3-32 shall subject the violator to the general
penalty set forth in Section 3-1 of this chapter.
Chapter 4
GENERAL LICENSING
[Editor's Note: See also Chapter 3 for barber shop hours and
itinerant restaurant requirements.]
[Licensing of retail food establishments and licensing of food and
beverage vending machines are contained in Chapter 22, Health.]
[See Chapter 6 for the licensing of alcoholic beverage
establishments.]
[See Chapter 15 for the licensing of taxicabs.]
§ 4-1. INSTALLATION OF ALARM SYSTEMS.13
§ 4-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1635, § 1]
As used in this section:
ALARM CONSOLE — Shall mean the console or control panel of devices
giving a visual or audio response or both, and located within the confines of
the township police department.
3. Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box, or
other emergency facility.
4. Within five feet of any driveway.
5. At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet.
6. Within three feet of or on any public area improved with lawn,
flowers, shrubs, trees, or other landscaping.
7. Within 500 feet of any other newsrack on the same side of the
street in the same block, containing the same issue or edition of the
same publication.
8. Within 10 feet of any standby or sprinkler connection or related
safety or fire equipment.
9. Within five feet of any building, unless written permission is
secured from the property owner and filed with the application.
13.Editor's Note: See Chapter 8, § 8-8, for additional regulations for fire alarm systems.
§ 3-32.7 GENERAL § 4-1.1
1:125
ALARM DEVICE — Shall mean any type of alarm system actuating
equipment in the alarm console providing warning of intrusion, fire, smoke,
flood or other peril.
ALARM INSTALLATION — Shall mean any alarm device or combination of
devices installed for one or more buildings at a location other than the
alarm console.
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — Shall mean and be limited to a member
of the township police department.
DIAL ALARM — Shall mean that type of device using telephone lines
transmitting an alarm directly through the police switchboard.
FALSE ALARM — Shall mean any alarm actuated by inadvertence,
negligence or unintentional act of someone other than an intruder, and
shall include as well, alarms caused by malfunctioning of the alarm device
or other relevant equipment, but shall not include alarms created by
malfunction of the alarm console, nor by acts of God, atmospheric
conditions or causes beyond the control of the permittee.
LICENSEE — Shall mean the person obtaining the license to maintain the
alarm console as hereinafter set forth.
LOCAL ALARM — Shall mean any alarm or device which when actuated
produces a signal not connected to the alarm console such as store burglar
alarms actuating bell devices.
PERMITTEE — Shall mean any person owning an alarm device to maintain
the alarm console as hereinafter set forth.
§ 4-1.2. Alarm Console License. [Ord. #1635, § 2]
a. There is established a police alarm console license which shall be
granted by the board of commissioners as set forth in subsection 4-1.4.
Any licensee shall have exclusive use and control of the alarm console
except for use by the township police department, and the licensee will
be responsible at no cost to the township for the establishment,
construction and installation of the console containing equipment and
being of a design approved by the director of public safety or his agent
and for the care, maintenance and management of the console; the
licensee shall locate the console and relocate the console if necessary
under the supervision of the director of public safety or his agent at no
cost to the township. For any license granted hereunder the licensee
will assume all liability and agree to indemnify and save harmless the
township, its agents and the township police department for any acts in
conjunction with the operation of the police alarm console and in
conjunction therewith he shall furnish annually to the township clerk a
noncancellable insurance certificate indicating complete liability
coverage in an amount no less than $300,000 for each person and
$500,000 for each accident, and $50,000 property damage for each
accident.
§ 4-1.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-1.2
1:126
b. Any connection to the police alarm console shall be of a type inspected
and approved by an inspector designated for this purpose by the
director of public safety, and any person aggrieved by a decision may
appeal the decision in writing within 10 days to the director of public
safety.
c. All alarms in operation and connected to the alarm panel board, located
in police headquarters except dial alarms will be connected hereunder
to the alarm console by the licensee and no connection cost for the
transfer shall be permitted.
d. The licensee for the police alarm console shall be permitted to charge
subscribers a maximum installation fee of $50 and a maximum monthly
retainer or maintenance fee of $7; except, however, that no fee shall be
charged to the township of the township board of education for monthly
charges or console connection charges for any existing or future
systems in public buildings, and any equipment or alarm devices
installed by the alarm console licensee in such public buildings shall be
a wholesale cost exclusive of labor charges.
e. The licensee shall install initially an annunciator or display console
having no less than 250 zones available for present systems and future
connections, which console shall be approved by the Underwriters
Laboratories.
f. Except as provided in subsection 4-1.5, any license issued hereunder
shall be for a term of five years from the date of approval by the board
of commissioners, and the licensee shall post annually with the
township clerk prior to the anniversary date of the granting of the
license a performance bond in the amount of $5,000 noncancellable
without notification to approval by the board of commissioners
guaranteeing performance for each year of the obligation of the
licensee and insuring maintenance of the console and alarm system
during the period when the license is in force. Failure of the licensee to
provide the annual bond shall mean automatic revocation of the license.
g. The licensee for the privilege of obtaining this license shall pay to the
township a minimum annual sum of no less than 5% of the gross rental
earned annually by the licensee from subscribers connected to the
alarm console, which payment shall be made within 30 days of the close
of each fiscal year in which the license is in force; and the licensee, by
acceptance of the license, shall be deemed to have agreed to having the
books and accounts of the licensee open to inspection by the township
auditor or other designated representative of the board of
commissioners to verify the annual account which shall be submitted by
the licensee coincidental with the fee described. The aforesaid payment
shall be made to the director of public safety and shall be accompanied
by a sworn or certified statement. The sum and a copy of the certified
statement shall be delivered by the director of public safety within 48
hours to the township treasurer.
§ 4-1.2 GENERAL § 4-1.3
1:127
§ 4-1.3. Determination of Licensee. [Ord. #1635, § 3]
§ 4-1.4. Permits and Fees. [Ord. #1635, § 4]
a. Prequalification. Persons desiring to bid for the license shall make
application to the director of public safety. The application shall
disclose whatever information may be required by the director of public
safety concerning the ability of the proposed applicant to comply with
the requirements of this chapter and the Local Public Contracts Law
and shall indicate in any event that:
1. The licensee has satisfactory financial and personal references
indicating his or its ability to comply with the terms of this chapter.
2. The licensee has an office in the township within a 20 mile radius
thereof with adequate personnel available on a twenty-four hour
basis to service the equipment.
b. Determination. Upon receipt by the township purchasing agent of a list
of those persons or corporations who prequalified, the purchasing
agent shall then designate the time and place for receiving sealed bids
by those eligible to submit bids as set forth in paragraph a of subsection
4-1.3. The bid shall indicate the bond and other requirements of this
chapter and shall offer gross rental prescribed by this chapter or a
greater amount and the maximum installation and monthly charges
prescribed by this chapter or a lesser amount. Upon the return of the
sealed bids, the board of commissioners may award the license to the
person whose bid taken as a whole is the most advantageous to both the
subscribers to the system and to the township from a-cost and revenue
standpoint, and in conjunction therewith the board of commissioners
reserve the right to reject any and all bids.
c. Renewals. Renewals of the license or award of new licenses should any
license be terminated in accordance with subsection 4-1.5 shall be
accomplished by following the procedures of paragraphs a and b of
subsection 4-1.3.
a. Any person who owns or operates a police alarm device or a local alarm
shall make application for the continuance thereof in writing to the
director of public safety. The application shall contain at least the
location of the device, the name of the installer of the device, the type of
device, provisions relating to false alarms and testing procedures, a list
of persons to be contacted in the event of any alarm and other
information as may be required by the director.
b. Local alarms shall be registered, but no fee shall be charged therefor.
c. For alarm devices the permittee shall pay whatever charges are
required by any alarm company making the installation, and in addition
thereto the connection and monthly maintenance charges as
hereinabove provided for the licensee for the alarm control panel.
§ 4-1.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-1.4
1:128
§ 4-1.5. Limitations. [Ord. #1635, § 5]
The township shall be under no duty or obligation to any permittee
hereunder or to any alarm console licensee hereunder, the alarm console
and allied equipment being maintained at will and subject to termination
at any time by cancellation of the system by resolution duly adopted by the
board of commissioners and any individual permit issued hereunder may be
revoked at any time by the board of commissioners upon recommendation
of the director of public safety provided that thirty-day notice is given in
writing to the permittee.
§ 4-1.6. Regulations. [Ord. #1635, § 6; Ord. #1970, § I; Ord. #2060,
§ I; Ord. #2281, § I; Ord. #2736, § 1]
d. Owners of fire alarm devices shall be governed by the false alarm
procedures and penalty set forth in paragraph c of subsection 4-1.6.
e. Any permit granted hereunder shall be accepted upon the express
condition that the permittee shall indemnify and hold the township
harmless from and on account of any and all damages arising out of the
activities of the permittee, its alarm contractor, or the alarm console
licensee.
a. Dial Alarm. Any alarm device, which when activated automatically or
electronically selects a telephone line connected to a central alarm
station or to police headquarters reporting a prerecorded message,
requesting police assistance.
1. Dial alarms shall be coded to dial a separate number which can be
obtained from the director of public safety or his agent. No dial
alarm shall be coded to dial the number of the general police
switchboard of the township.
2. Message shall conform to approved format on application.
3. Total length of message shall not exceed 15 seconds.
4. Message shall be received by police headquarters twice, but no
more than twice.
5. This device shall provide an automatic line seizure feature in the
event this line is busy with an incoming or outgoing call.
6. In the event that any person has a dial alarm device in existence on
the effective date of this chapter, he shall have 30 days in which to
register same. Any person not so complying shall be liable to a
penalty payable to the township in the amount of $50.
7. Any person having a dial alarm device which dials the general
police number, upon discovery thereof shall receive notice in
writing from the director of public safety requiring the owner to
comply with the terms of this chapter, and if the owner fails to do so
§ 4-1.4 GENERAL § 4-1.6
1:129
§ 4-1.7. Additional Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #1635, § 7]
The director of public safety may promulgate written rules and regulations
supplementing this chapter in order to provide for record keeping and
efficient management of the system; provided that the board of
commissioners shall first approve the rules or any changes thereto by
appropriate resolution.
within 30 days of the receipt of the notice he shall then be liable to
pay the township a penalty of $50.
8. All components of such equipment shall be maintained by the
owner in good repair and when evidence exists that there has been
failure to comply with operational requirements of this chapter, the
director of public safety or agent is then authorized to demand that
such device be disconnected until such time as compliance with
current requirements is reestablished.
9. All audible alarms shall be equipped with a time relay or battery to
limit the sounding of an alarm to 30 minutes or less.
b. Representatives Required. Any licensee for the alarm console and any
permittee utilizing the services of any other alarm company connected
to the console shall provide for a representative to be on call at all
times, and service shall be provided within eight hours of notification by
the police department of any malfunction of any equipment.
c. False Alarms.
1. The director of the department of public safety shall keep a record
of all false alarms.
2. For each false alarm over the number of four during a calendar
year, a penalty of $25 shall be paid to the township.
3. If the penalties referred to in paragraph c2 above are not paid
within 30 days of written notice being given by the department of
public safety any member of the department so assigned by the
director is authorized to issue a summons and complaint in the
Lyndhurst Municipal Court where the penalty shall be a fine of $25
to $200.
d. Unauthorized Equipment. Any unauthorized equipment may be
disconnected by the director of public safety or his designated
representative for noncompliance with this chapter, and any person
installing or maintaining unauthorized equipment shall be prosecuted
for violation of this chapter, and each and every day the equipment is in
operation shall be considered a separate violation. Any permittee shall
by acceptance of the permit be deemed as having consented to
inspection of the premises on which the alarm devices are installed by
reasonable hours by the director of public safety or his designated
representative.
§ 4-1.6 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-2
1:130
§ 4-2. PIN AND PINBALL AMUSEMENT GAMES.
§ 4-2.1. License Required. [Ord. #1090; Ord. #1424, § 4; Ord.
#1827, § 1]
No person, owner or tenant shall operate, maintain, or install, or shall cause
to be operated, maintained or installed, in any store, building, public place,
or in any public place wherein the public is invited or may enter upon for
payment of a fee, or in any structure wherein a liquor license is operated,
or in any private club, any electric powered mechanical or electronic game
commonly referred to as pinball or electronic video amusement games, or
similar device, unless the person shall have first obtained a license for that
purpose from the board of commissioners.
§ 4-2.2. Number of Machines. [Ord. #1090; Ord. #1424, § 4; Ord.
#1827, § 1]
The maximum number of licensed game machines permitted to be issued by
the clerk for any store or building shall be four; any more than four being
deemed as changing the use of the structure to an amusement arcade and
subject to the requirements of the zoning ordinance.
§ 4-2.3. License Fee. [Ord. #1090; Ord. #1424, § 4; Ord. #1827, § 1;
Ord. #1867, § I; Ord. #1897, § I; Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
The license for the placing, operating, maintenance or use of such
amusement devices or machines mentioned aforesaid shall be issued in
the name of the proprietor of the premises where the machines are to
be installed, for the calendar year commencing January 1 and expiring
December 31 at 12:00 midnight. The fee for the issuance of the license shall
be $300 for the calendar year, or any part thereof, for each premises when
such machines are installed.
§ 4-2.4. Space Requirements. [Ord. #1090; Ord. #1424, § 4; Ord.
#1827, § 1]
In order to reduce the danger from panic, fire or other catastrophe and
to allow the free flow of people, each machine shall be set with one side
abutting a wall (where the design of the machine permits) with a minimum
of two feet of unobstructed space on each side of the machine not abutting
a wall except that any side of a machine where the player is expected to
stand shall have a minimum of five feet of unobstructed space. If there is
more than one machine, then each machine shall be required to meet the
unobstructed space requirement. For example, if two machines are side by
side, there must be four feet of unobstructed space between them.
§ 4-2.5. Filing of Application. [New; Ord. #1827, § 1; Ord. #1897,
§ II; Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
Applicants for any such license as may be granted hereunder shall file
with the township clerk an application, sworn to by the applicant, setting
§ 4-2 GENERAL § 4-2.5
1:131
forth the name and address of the applicant, the particular character of the
game or device for which the license is sought by the applicant, the place
wherein such machine or device is sought to be installed and maintained
and the name of the owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of such place,
and the character of activities or business carried on within such place.
The applicant shall deposit with the township clerk, together with such
application, the license fee of $300 for the inspection by the township
police chief, township building inspector and the township fire inspector,
all of which officials shall have free access to the premises where such
devices are located. The application shall further include a floor plan of
the premises locating the area for the licensed machines or devices, as
well as all tables, counters, display shelves and any other objects impeding
pedestrian traffic.
§ 4-2.6. Investigation of Applicant. [Ord. #1827, § 1]
The application, when received by the township clerk, shall be forthwith
turned over to the officials designated in subsection 4-2.5 who shall
investigate the truth of the particulars set forth in the application, and
who shall, after investigation, endorse upon such application his
recommendation for granting or rejecting the application. Any
recommendation for rejection shall include the reasons therefor. After the
return of such application with recommendations endorsed thereon the
township clerk shall submit such application to the board of commissioners.
§ 4-2.7. Restrictions on Issuance of License. [Ord. #1827, § 1]
No license in any event shall be issued to any person who shall have been
convicted of a crime and provided further that after a license is issued and
the person to whom it is issued shall thereafter be convicted of a crime,
the license shall immediately be revoked. No license shall be issued to any
corporation whose officers would not each qualify for a license.
§ 4-2.8. Gambling. [Ord. #1827, § 1; Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
No person shall use or permit to be used, any of the machines or devices
licensed hereunder for the purpose of gambling.
§ 4-2.9. Violations. [Ord. #1827, § 1; Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be liable to
pay a $300 mandatory fine.
§ 4-3. OTHER MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES.
§ 4-3.1. License Required. [Ord. #1090; Ord. #1424, § 4; Ord.
#2861-12, § 2]
No owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of any hotel, restaurant, saloon,
tavern, moving picture theatre, club, or other place of business or
entertainment, used or employed for or in furtherance of social activities
§ 4-2.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-3.1
1:132
or business of any kind and nature whatever, shall install, maintain or
operate, within any such place as mentioned hereinabove, any mechanical
amusement device or appliance, electric or automatic (excepting here from
mechanical vending appliances and machines and bagatelle or pinball
machines or automatic musical instruments and appliances), without first
obtaining a license therefor from the township board of commissioners.
§ 4-3.2. Filing of Application. [Ord. #1090; Ord. #1424, § 4; Ord.
#2861-12, § 2]
Applicants for any such license as may be granted hereunder shall file
with the township clerk an application, sworn to by the applicant, setting
forth the name and address of the applicant, the particular character of
the appliance or instrument license for which sought by the applicant, the
place wherein such appliance or instrument is sought to be installed and
maintained and the name of the owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of such
place, and the character of social activities or business carried on within
such place. The applicant shall deposit with the township clerk, together
with such application, a license fee of $50 for each such device or appliance
as the applicant shall seek license for, which sum shall carry such license in
effect, if granted, until midnight of December 31 following the date of such
application.
§ 4-3.3. Investigation of Applicant. [Ord. #1090; Ord. #1424, § 4]
The application, when received by the township clerk, shall be turned over
to the chief of police who shall investigate the truth of the particulars
set forth in the application and who shall, after investigation, endorse
upon such application his recommendation for the granting or rejection
of the application. If the chief of police recommends the rejection of the
application, he shall set forth upon the applications the reasons upon which
he bases his recommendation for the rejection thereof. After the return
of such application to the township clerk with recommendation endorsed
thereon by the chief of police, the township clerk shall submit such
application to the board of commissioners at its regular meeting after
receipt thereof by the township clerk from the chief of police.
§ 4-3.4. Restrictions on Issuance of License. [Ord. #1090; Ord.
#1424, § 4; Ord. #1897, § III]
A conviction for the violation of this chapter may be grounds for the
revocation of a license by the board of commissioners after a hearing.
Any applicant shall have the right to a hearing before the board of
commissioners.
§ 4-3.5. Definitions. [Ord. #1090; Ord. #1424, § 4]
As used in this section:
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE OR APPLIANCE — Shall mean any
mechanical device or contrivance which, by means of the insertion of a coin,
§ 4-3.1 GENERAL § 4-3.5
1:133
token, slug, disk or other article into a slot, crevice, opening or attachment
or connected in any manner with any such device or contrivance, affects the
operation thereof for use as a game, contest or amusement, or which may
be so used, excluding therefrom any device or appliance known as "pinball
machine" or "bagatelle," or the like or a musical device or vending machine.
§ 4-3.6. Transferability. [Ord. #1090; Ord. #1424, § 4]
Licenses granted under the provisions of this section shall not be
transferable.
§ 4-3.7. Inspection. [Ord. #1090; Ord. #1424, § 4]
All new devices or appliances licensed under the authority of this section
shall, in addition to inspection by the chief of police, be subject at all
times to inspection by the township police officers, and the police chief and
police officers shall have free access to the premises where such devices or
appliances are located and to such devices and appliances.
§ 4-3.8. Violations. [Ord. #1090; Ord. #1424, § 4]
§ 4-4. BILLIARDS AND POOL.
§ 4-4.1. License Required. [Ord. #1424, § 4]
No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard or pool parlor or a
place where billiards and pool are played for hire open to the public without
having first obtained a license as required.
§ 4-4.2. Application for License; Nontransferable. [Ord. #1424, § 4]
Application for license shall be filed in writing with the township clerk, on
a form to be provided by the township, together with a detailed drawing
or sketch of the room showing the dimensions and location of the billiard
or pool table in the room sought to be licensed and a proper license fee
accompanying such application, and shall specify:
a. Any person, but not including any corporation, who directly or
indirectly shall violate any of the provisions of this section, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty in Chapter 3, § 3-1.
b. Any corporation which by its officers, agents or employees shall violate
or permit violation of any of the provisions of this section shall upon
conviction thereof be liable to the penalty as stated in Chapter 3, § 3-1
and in default of the payment of such fine at the time of conviction, the
amount thereof shall be recovered from such corporation by means of
an action at law as in the nature of a debt owing to the township board
of commissioners, a municipal corporation of the State of New Jersey.
§ 4-3.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-4.2
1:134
§ 4-4.3. Compliance by Licensee. [Ord. #1424, § 4]
All licenses issued under this section shall meet the requirements of any and
all municipal ordinances, including the regulations for off-street parking.
§ 4-4.4. Limitation of Licenses. [Ord. #1424, § 4]
No more than one license shall be issued to any person, firm or corporation.
No person to whom a license is granted shall be, directly or indirectly,
associated with any other licensee as a partner, stockholder, officer,
employee, manager or agent.
§ 4-4.5. Revocation of License. [Ord. #1424, § 4]
The board of commissioners shall have the right to revoke any license
issued hereunder for the violation of any of the provisions of this section.
§ 4-4.6. Fees. [Ord. #1424, § 4; Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
The annual fee for such license shall be $350 for the first billiard or pool
table and an additional fee of $100 for each additional table.
§ 4-4.7. Investigation of Applicant. [Ord. #1424, § 4]
Application for license hereunder shall be first referred by the township
clerk to the director of public safety for such investigation as he may deem
necessary. Upon approval by the board of commissioners and the director of
public safety, the license shall be issued by the township clerk and the clerk
shall remit the fees to the tax collector. All licenses under this section will
expire on January 1 following their issuance and shall be renewed upon like
application as the original license provided that when the license is granted
for a shorter period than one year, the license fee shall be prorated. The
license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment of the
licensee. Such license shall be nontransferable and nonassignable, and shall
apply only to the premises for which such license is issued.
§ 4-4.8. Character of Applicant; Restrictions on Issuance of License.
[Ord. #1424, § 4]
No such license shall be issued to or held by any person who is not a person
of good character or who has been convicted of any crime; nor shall such
a. The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm, corporation,
partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and their
address.
b. The address of the premises for which the license is sought.
c. The number of billiard or pool tables to be operated on the premises.
d. The name and address of the operator of the parlor if other than the
proprietor.
§ 4-4.2 GENERAL § 4-4.8
1:135
license be issued to or held by any corporation if any officer thereof would
be ineligible for a license under the foregoing conditions.
§ 4-4.9. Evidence of Ownership to Be Filed with Clerk. [Ord. #1424,
§ 4]
Any proprietor or operator purchasing a billiard or pool table shall file with
the township clerk evidence of ownership before placing the billiard or pool
table for use.
§ 4-4.10. Increasing Number of Tables. [Ord. #1424, § 4]
In case a proprietor or operator licensed under the provisions of this section
desires, after the expiration of any license year, to increase the number of
tables to be used, he shall surrender his license to the township clerk who
shall issue a new license upon the approval of the board of commissioners,
showing the number of tables licensed thereunder, upon payment of the
proper license fee therefor.
§ 4-4.11. Location of Premises; Distances Required. [Ord. #1424,
§ 4]
No billiard and pool parlor and no place where billiards and pool are played
for hire shall be within 500 feet of any school or public place of worship, nor
within a radius of 1,000 feet of another billiard and pool parlor and a place
where billiards and pool are played for hire.
§ 4-4.12. Inspection of Premises. [Ord. #1424, § 4]
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to see that the licensed premises
are inspected periodically by a member of the police department to insure
conformity with the provisions of this section.
§ 4-4.13. Noise on Premises. [Ord. #1424, § 4]
It shall be unlawful to permit or cause any noise so loud or of such a nature
as to disturb the peace in and upon the licensed premises.
§ 4-4.14. Gaming on Premises. [Ord. #1424, § 4]
No proprietor, nor owner or operator shall permit or allow any person to
play billiards or pool for money or other valuable thing.
§ 4-4.15. Closing Hours of Premises. [Ord. #1424, § 4]
No billiard or pool parlor, or place where billiards or pool are played for
hire, shall be operated between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m.,
Monday through Saturday, and shall not operate on Sunday.
§ 4-4.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-4.16
1:136
§ 4-4.16. Liability Insurance. [Ord. #1424, § 4]
No such billiard or pool parlor or place where billiards or pool are played
for hire shall be operated, unless there is in force a public liability insurance
policy to cover any injury suffered as a result of the use of the equipment or
the operation of the billiard or pool parlor, or place where billiards or pool
are played for hire, in the amount of $50,000 for any one occurrence and
$25,000 for injury to any one person. A certificate of such policy shall be
filed with the township clerk with the application for a license.
§ 4-4.17. Minors Not to Be Permitted to Play. [Ord. #1424, § 4]
No proprietor or operator shall permit or allow any person under the age of
18 years to play billiards or pool.
§ 4-4.18. Employment of Minors. [Ord. #1424, § 4]
No minor under 18 years of age shall be employed, permitted or suffered to
work in, about or in connection in any licensed premises.
§ 4-4.19. Minors Not to Be Permitted to Loiter. [Ord. #1424, § 4]
Minors under the age of 18 years shall not, under any circumstances,
frequent, loiter, go or remain in any billiard or pool parlor or any place
where billiards or pool are played, licensed hereunder, at any time, unless
he is upon some lawful errand and sent under the direction and the consent
and knowledge of the parent, guardian or other person having the lawful
custody of such minor. It shall be unlawful for the proprietor or operator of
any billiard or pool parlor or any place where billiards or pool are played, so
licensed, to allow or permit any minor to frequent, loiter or remain within
the billiard or pool parlor or any place where billiards or pool are played in
violation of this section.
§ 4-5. GARAGE SALES.
§ 4-5.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1605, § 1]
As used in this section:
GARAGE SALES — Shall mean and include all sales entitled "garage sale",
"lawn sale", "attic sale", "rummage sale", or "flea market sale", or any
similar casual sale of tangible personal property which is advertised by any
means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of the sale.
GOODS — Shall mean and include any goods, warehouse merchandise or
other property capable of being the object of a sale regulated hereunder.
§ 4-5.2. License Required. [Ord. #1605, § 2; Ord. #2248, § II]
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a garage sale in the
township without first filing with the township clerk the information
hereinafter specified and obtaining from the clerk a license to do so, to
§ 4-4.16 GENERAL § 4-5.2
1:137
§ 4-5.3. Information Required. [Ord. #1605, § 4]
The information to be filed with the township clerk, pursuant to this section
shall be as follows:
§ 4-5.4. Hours Permitted. [Ord. #1605, § 3]
All garage sales shall be conducted between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00
p.m. only.
§ 4-5.5. Persons and Sales Excepted. [Ord. #1605, § 5]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to or affect the following
persons or sales:
be known as a garage sale license. The fee for the first license in any
twelve-month period shall be $5. The fee for the second license in any
twelve-month period shall be $25.
b. Only two such licenses shall be issued to any one person within a
twelve-month period and no such license shall be issued for more than
two consecutive calendar days.
c. Each license issued under this section shall be prominently displayed
on the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted throughout
the entire period of the licensed sale.
a. Name of person, firm, group, corporation, association or organization
conducting the sale.
b. Name of owner of the property on which the sale is to be conducted,
and consent of owner if applicant is other than owner.
c. Location at which sale is to be conducted.
d. Number of days of sale.
e. Date, nature of any past sale.
f. Relationship or connection applicant may have had with any other
person, firm, group, organization, association, or corporation
conducting the sale and the date or dates of such sale.
a. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which are specifically named or described in the
advertisement and which separate items do not exceed 10 in number.
b. Any bona fide charitable, eleemosynary, educational, cultural or
governmental institution or organization who receives an exemption in
writing from any or all of the terms of this section from the board of
commissioners.
§ 4-5.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-5.6
1:138
§ 4-5.6. Conduct at Sale. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
The person to whom such license is issued and the owner or tenant of the
premises on which such sale or activity is conducted shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance of good order and decorum on
the premises during the hours of such sale or activity. No such person shall
permit any loud or boisterous conduct on the premises nor permit vehicles
to impede the passage of traffic on any roads or streets in the area of such
premises. All such persons shall obey the reasonable orders of any member
of the police or fire departments of the township in order to maintain the
public health, safety and welfare.
§ 4-6. MOTELS AND TOURIST LODGES.
§ 4-6.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
As used in this section:
BUSINESS OF CONDUCTING TOURIST LODGE OR MOTELS — Shall mean
the renting, leasing, maintaining, keeping, operating, conducting or
providing of overnight or temporary sleeping or housing accommodations,
for a consideration, to tourists, transients or travelers in any building
or structure or group of buildings or structures, devoted exclusively or
primarily to the business, commonly known as tourist lodges, motels, tourist
cabins, motor lodges, motor courts, tourist courts or tourist camps whether
meals are served therein or not.
HOUSING OR LODGING UNIT — Shall mean any room, cabin or quarters,
whether or not physically attached or connected with any other building or
structure, used for sleeping or housing accommodations in the business of
conducting tourist lodges.
§ 4-6.2. Motel Regulations. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
a. Each licensee shall at all times cause to be maintained on the licensed
premises a register, consisting of consecutively numbered cards which
shall constitute the register of the licensed premises. This register shall
be preserved for three years upon the licensed premises.
b. No person shall occupy, and no licensee shall permit any person to
occupy any housing or lodging units on the licensed premises, unless
each person or the head of the party who is to occupy such housing unit
shall first:
1. Display to the licensee or a duly authorized agent or the employee
of the licensee in charge of the register, written evidence of his
identity and residence and in addition thereto, the official state
registration certificate of the motor vehicle then being used by the
registrant or his party, if any, or in the event the registrant arrives
in a taxi or other public conveyance, give the name under which
such carrier operates, or, in the event the registrant is conveyed to
the licensed premises in a private motor vehicle other than one
§ 4-5.6 GENERAL § 4-6.2
1:139
§ 4-6.3. Inspection by Police Department. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
It shall be the duty of the township police department to inspect the licensed
premises at any hour of the day or night to determine if the provisions of
this section are being complied with.
§ 4-6.4. Employment. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
No licensee shall employ, in, on or about the licensed premises any person
convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude within a period of five years
from the date of conviction.
§ 4-6.5. Application for License. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
No person shall engage in the business of conducting tourist lodges or
motels without first having applied for and obtained from the township a
license to do so. No such license shall be issued to any person who has been
being used by the registrant or his party, give the name and
address of the owner of the vehicle; and
2. Write in the register immediately following the proceeding
registration in ink, and in his own handwriting, his full and true
name and address and, in the case of the operator of the motor
vehicle or a member of his party, the make, year and state license
or registration number of the motor vehicle conveying him to the
licensed premises, or in the case the registrant arrives in a taxi or
other public conveyance, the name under which the carrier
operates, or in the case the registrant is conveyed to the licensed
premises in a private motor vehicle other than one being used by
the registrant or his party, the name and address of the owner of
the vehicle.
If the registrant does not write in the register the information
herein required as to the motor vehicle, public conveyance or
private motor vehicle, it shall be the duty of the licensee or his duly
authorized agent or employee to write in this information.
c. In addition to the foregoing information the licensee shall cause to be
written into the register in ink, the number or name of the housing or
lodging unit assigned to each registrant, the date and hour of
registration, a brief description or designation of the identification
displayed to the licensee by the registrant pursuant to paragraph b1
above, the signature of the person taking the information or accepting
the registration and the date which the occupant or occupants of each
housing or lodging unit quits and surrenders the same.
d. The register shall be kept and preserved by the licensee and shall be
available on request at any hour of the day or night to any police officer
of the township or any other duly authorized agent of the board of
commissioners.
§ 4-6.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-6.5
1:140
convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude nor shall any such license
be issued to any corporation in which any stockholder, holding five or more
percent of any of the stock thereof, or in which any director or officer shall
have been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude.
§ 4-6.6. Details of Application. [Ord. #1424, § 6; Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
Each applicant for such license shall make written application on forms
prescribed and supplied by the board of commissioners setting forth:
§ 4-6.7. Compliance Required. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
The township clerk shall forward the application to the health officer of
the board of health and to the township fire chief who shall inspect the
premises to determine whether or not the premises comply with board of
health and fire ordinances and regulations. If the premises do not so comply,
the officers shall attach to the application a written list of recommendations
a. The full name, residence and post office address of the applicant.
b. The exact location of the proposed licensed premises, giving the street
address, block and lot number as shown on the current tax map of the
township and the exact dimensions of the lands upon which the
business is to be conducted.
c. A description of the buildings, structures and accommodations upon the
lands, including a statement of the number of housing or lodging units,
the maximum number of persons who can be accommodated at any
given time; a description of the character of the buildings or structures
as to size, type of construction and whether or not the same are
fireproof; and description of automobile parking space and facilities.
d. The name of the person on the licensed premises upon whom process
may be served.
e. The name and address of the owner of the lands and buildings.
f. A detailed description of the register or system used for the registration
of persons to whom accommodations are extended.
g. Whether any persons constituting the individual or partnership
applicant or whether the corporate applicant or any stockholder
holding five or more percent of the stock thereof, or any director or
officer thereof, has ever been convicted of any crime, and, if so, the
details thereof, including, with respect to each conviction, the name of
the person convicted, the date thereof, the nature of the crime, the
court in which the conviction was entered and the punishment imposed.
h. In the case of corporate applicants the names and residences of all
stockholders holding five or more percent of any stock in the
corporation, the names and residences of all officers of the corporation,
and the office held by each.
§ 4-6.5 GENERAL § 4-6.7
1:141
and return the same to the township clerk who shall in turn return the
application to the applicant. If the premises do so comply, the officers shall
attach thereto certificates of approval. The township clerk shall present
the application, with the certificates of approval attached to the board of
commissioners. The board of commissioners shall thereupon cause to be
made such further investigation of the premises and of the information set
forth in the application as it may deem necessary and shall determine on the
basis of the investigation and application whether or not such license shall
be granted.
§ 4-6.8. Terms of License, Transfers, Changes. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
§ 4-6.9. Revocation. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
Any license issued under this section may be suspended or revoked for
any violation of this section or for any conviction of the licensee or of any
stockholder holding five or more percent of the stock of any corporate
licensee, or director or officer thereof, of a crime involving moral turpitude,
after due notice of the charges and a hearing by the board of
commissioners, at which the licensee shall be afforded full opportunity to
be heard.
§ 4-6.10. Fees. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
The annual fee for the license shall be $500 plus the sum of $10 for each
housing or lodging unit. The license fee is hereby declared for the purpose
of revenue.
§ 4-6.11. Violations. [New]
Any person convicted of giving false information or violating any of the
terms and provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalty as
established in Chapter 3, § 3-1.
§ 4-7. NEW OR USED CAR LOTS.
a. Any license issued under the provisions of this section shall be for a
term of one year, commencing January 1 and expiring December 31. No
license fee shall be apportioned, regardless of the date on which the
license shall be issued and to such applicant to whom the license may
be transferred as hereinafter provided. All licenses shall be displayed at
a prominent place on the licensed premises.
b. On application made therefor setting forth the same matters and things
as required by this section to be set forth in connection with an original
application for a license, the board of commissioners, with the consent
of the licensee and upon payment of a fee of 10% of the annual license
fee for the license sought to be transferred, may transfer to such
applicant any license issued under the terms and provisions of this
section. The 10% fee shall be retained by the board of commissioners
whether the transfer be granted or not.
§ 4-6.7 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-7.1
1:142
§ 4-7.1. License Required. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
§ 4-7.2. License Not Assignable or Transferable Without
Commissioners' Consent. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
The license shall authorize the licensee to conduct the business on the lot
specified in the license; shall not be transferable to another plot or lot, nor
shall the license be assignable or transferable in any manner, without the
consent of the board of commissioners.
§ 4-7.3. License Application; Contents. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
Every applicant for a license to engage in the business shall file with the
township clerk a written application signed by the applicant or applicants,
which application shall state:
§ 4-7.4. Prerequisites to Issuance of License. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to use any vacant lot, vacant
property or any portion of a lot outside of a building for the storage or
sale of used or new motor vehicles without first obtaining a license
therefor from the board of commissioners as herein provided.
b. Wherever one or more vehicles are stored on any such lot or land for
sale, whether adjacent to a duly established garage, service station, or
any other motor vehicle business or not, the license as herein provided
shall be required, and a separate lot or parcel of ground upon which the
business is conducted, provided that where several lots are contiguous
to each other and the business is conducted on all of the lots, only one
license shall be necessary.
a. The name and address of the applicant, and, if a firm or corporation, the
name and address of the officers, and the registered agent or partners.
b. The length of time that the applicant, or if the applicant is a firm or
corporation, the length of time that the manager or the person in
charge has been a resident of the township if such is the case; his place
of previous employment, and if the applicant has been convicted of a
crime, and if so, when, what offense, and in what court.
c. The detailed nature of their business to be conducted.
a. Prior to such issuance the licensee shall have such portion of the lot
used for the sale of used or new motor vehicles, paved with a hard
surfaced top.
b. No license shall in any event be issued unless the applicant has
obtained from the board of adjustment a certificate of approval of the
location to be used therefor.
§ 4-7.1 GENERAL § 4-7.4
1:143
§ 4-7.5. Separate License Required for Any Other Business. [Ord.
#1424, § 6]
If any other business than that herein especially licensed is to be conducted
on the premises and a license is required for the business by an ordinance
of the township a separate license must be secured therefor.
§ 4-7.6. Restriction of Licenses. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
The board of commissioners may restrict the number of such licensed
premises within the township and may impose such reasonable regulations
and rules with regard to the business to be conducted not contrary to law,
as the board of commissioners may deem necessary and proper for the
good, government, order, protection of persons and property, and for the
preservation of public health, safety, and welfare of the municipality and its
inhabitants, and as may be necessary to carry into effect the powers and
duties conferred and imposed upon the township by law. These restrictions
and regulations shall be made by resolution. Rules, regulations and
restrictions as set forth in this subsection may be promulgated and adopted
by the board of commissioners by resolution setting forth in particular such
rules, regulations and restrictions.
§ 4-7.7. Display of License. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
Each holder of a license herein authorized shall at all times keep the license
posted while in force in a conspicuous place on the premises described in
the application for such license.
§ 4-7.8. Licensee Subject to Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #1424,
§ 6]
No licensee hereunder shall purchase from or sell to any person under
the age of 18 years, any motor vehicle, without the written consent of the
parents or surviving parent or guardian of such minor.
§ 4-7.9. License Fee. [Ord. #1424, § 6; Ord. #2248, § II]
The annual license fee to be paid for the license shall be the sum of $150
and all licenses hereunder shall terminate on March 31 after the date of
issuance, and any license issued after November of the year shall be 60% of
the fee for the entire year. The license fee shall be for revenue and for the
purpose of regulating the business referred to herein.
§ 4-7.10. Dealer's License Fee. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
Dealers, however, defined in Section 39, Chapter 10 of N.J.S.A. as agents,
distributors or authorized dealers of the manufacturer of new motor
c. If the applicant is not the owner of the site where the business is to be
conducted, the owner's consent to the conduct of the business shall be
endorsed on the application.
§ 4-7.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-7.10
1:144
vehicles who have an established place of business in the township and
who store, display and sell used motor vehicles in connection with that
establishment on open lots in the township adjacent and contiguous to
such duly established place of business, will be required to pay an annual
fee of $100 for such license for open air premises so used, anything to
the contrary contained in this section notwithstanding, if the dealers are
regularly licensed as such by the commissioner of motor vehicles of the
State of New Jersey. However, licensed used motor vehicle dealers until they
also are licensed as dealers shall be required to pay the license fee as set
forth in subsection 4-7.9. The license fee shall be for revenue and for the
purpose of regulating the business referred to herein.
§ 4-7.11. Suspension and Revocation of License. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
Each application shall contain an agreement that the applicant accepts
the license to be granted upon the condition that it may be suspended or
revoked for a cause at any time by the board of commissioners. The licensee
shall, upon notice of revocation, be entitled to a hearing before the board
of commissioners upon making application for the hearing within 24 hours
after notice of revocation of the license.
§ 4-7.12. Hours of Business. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
All licensed premises shall close for business not later than 10:00 p.m. and
there shall be no lighting after 10:00 p.m. except for a night light.
§ 4-7.13. House trailers Prohibited. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
No premises licensed under this section shall store, park or sell new or used
house trailers.
§ 4-7.14. Inspection. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
All licensed premises shall be subject to inspection at all times by members
of the police department and other representatives of the township.
§ 4-7.15. Altered Vehicle Identification Marks; Prohibited Practices.
[Ord. #1424, § 6]
No licensee or his agent shall knowingly buy, sell, receive, dispose of,
conceal or have in his possession any motor vehicle from which the
manufacturer's serial number or any other number or identification mark
has been removed, defaced, altered, covered or destroyed for the purpose
of concealing the identity of such vehicle.
§ 4-7.16. Notification to Police Department. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
The licensee and any person employed by him to which is offered for sale
any motor vehicle part or accessory from which has been removed, defaced,
covered, altered or destroyed the manufacturer's serial number or any
other identification, shall immediately notify the police department.
§ 4-7.10 GENERAL § 4-7.17
1:145
§ 4-7.17. Prohibition as to Parking. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
No motor vehicle shall be placed by the licensee on the sidewalk, or any
part thereof, nor shall the licensee use the street or any part thereof for the
storage, display or sale of motor vehicles.
§ 4-8. MOTOR VEHICLE JUNK YARDS.
§ 4-8.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1465]
As used in this section:
MOTOR VEHICLE JUNK BUSINESS or MOTOR VEHICLE JUNK YARD —
Shall mean and include any business or any place of storage or deposit,
whether in connection with another business or not, which displays or in
or upon which there is displayed to the public view, two or more motor
vehicles which in the opinion of the board of commissioners are unfit
for reconditioning for use for highway transportation or used parts of
motor vehicles or old iron, metal, glass, paper, cordage, or other waste or
discarded material which has been a part of any motor vehicle, the sum of
which parts of materials shall in the opinion of the board of commissioners
be equal in bulk to two or more motor vehicles.
SOLID WALL or SOLID FENCE — Shall mean a wall of opaque construction,
preventing the emission or passing through of light, not transparent or
translucent, emplaced in a substantial manner to withstand prevailing
weather conditions, which wall or fence shall be approved by the township
building subcode official.
§ 4-8.2. License. [Ord. #1465]
No person shall establish a motor vehicle junk yard or business unless he
shall first obtain a license for such yard or business from the board for
commissioners.
§ 4-8.3. Application; Fee; Hearing; Regulations. [Ord. #1465]
a. Application and Fee.
1. Every person applying for a license to engage in the business shall
file with the township clerk a written application, signed by the
applicant or applicants, which application shall be on application
forms approved by the board of commissioners.
2. If the applicant is not the owner of the site where the business is to
be conducted, the owner's consent to the conduct of the business
shall be endorsed on the application.
3. Each applicant upon the presentation of the application shall pay a
fee of $10 together with the costs of publication and expense of the
hearing.
§ 4-7.17 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-8.3
1:146
4. Notice of such hearing shall be given such applicant and shall be
published once in a newspaper having a circulation within the
township not less than seven days before the date of such hearing.
b. Hearing.
1. The board of commissioners shall assign a hearing upon such
application to be held on less than two, or not more than four weeks
from the date of such application.
2. At such hearing the board of commissioners shall determine
whether or not the granting of the application would violate any
provisions of the zoning law now in effect in the township and
should the board of commissioners determine that no violation
exists or should the board of commissioners determine that no
unreasonable depreciation of surrounding property would ensue
from the establishment and maintenance of such junk yard or
business and that in its judgment the best interests of the town
require the operation of the junk yard or business at the location
designated, taking into consideration the proximity of schools,
churches or other places of public gathering, the sufficiency in
number of other similar places in the vicinity and the suitability of
the applicant to receive such license, then and in that event, the
board of commissioners shall grant the license.
c. Regulations. All licensed junk yards shall comply with the following
regulations:
1. No car or part of a car shall be kept, stored or stacked in such a
manner that rainwater would collect and remain in any part of the
parts thereof for a period longer than 48 hours.
2. It shall be unlawful to stack, pile or place motor vehicles, parts of
motor vehicles or other junk or materials upon such premises in
such a manner as to create a place for the harboring or breeding of
mice, rats or other vermin, or to stack, pile or place junk above the
height of the boundary fence surrounding the premises.
3. All yards or places where such business is or shall be conducted
shall be enclosed by a fence at least seven feet high and of a type
and construction as shall be approved by the building subcode
official.
4. It shall be unlawful to burn any automobile or automobile parts or
other junk or materials on the premises without application first
being made to the township fire chief who shall, in writing, approve
or disapprove the application, and if approved, shall designate the
time for such burning, which shall be under his supervision,
provided such burning is not otherwise prohibited by any statutes
of the State of New Jersey.
§ 4-8.3 GENERAL § 4-8.3
1:147
§ 4-8.4. License Fee; Term; Renewal Fee. [Ord. #1424, § 6; Ord.
#1783, § 1]
Each applicant for a license shall pay to the township clerk for each such
motor vehicle junk yard or business a license fee of $200. No such license
shall be effective for more than one year from date of issue. For each
renewal of such license the fee shall be $200.
§ 4-9. SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRIES.
§ 4-9.1. License Required. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
It shall be unlawful to establish or operate any self-service laundry in
the township without first having secured a license as herein provided.
Applications for such licenses shall comply with the general provisions
relating to applications for license and permits.
§ 4-9.2. Definition. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
As used in this section:
SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRIES — Shall mean any establishment in which coinoperated
facilities are available for washing clothes or for drying clothes, or
both, and which is open and available to the general public for use.
§ 4-9.3. Hours. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
It shall be unlawful to keep any such establishment open for business
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
§ 4-9.4. Installation. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
Installation of all equipment in such establishments shall be in conformity
with the chapter relating to and adopting the fire prevention code.
5. It shall be unlawful to hammer or pound any metal or other
materials on the premises between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. from Monday to Saturday inclusive, or at any time on Sundays.
6. Any inoperable vehicle stored in a licensed junk yard shall have all
gasoline removed from the vehicle within one hour after the vehicle
is so stored.
7. No license issued pursuant to the terms of this section shall be
assigned or transferred without the prior approval of the board of
commissioners. Any application for transfer of a junk yard license
secured pursuant to this section to a new applicant shall be
considered for all purposes in the same manner as a new
application for this license.
§ 4-8.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-9.5
1:148
§ 4-9.5. Enforcement. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
It shall be the duty of the director of public safety to see to the enforcement
of this section as to cause such inspection to be made of the premises as
may be necessary for the purpose.
§ 4-10. REGISTRATION OF MERCHANTS AND BUSINESSES.
§ 4-10.1. Certificate of Registration; Exceptions. [Ord. #1424, § 6;
Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
No person shall hereafter conduct or operate any store, gasoline service
station or establishment in the township for the sale or exchange of
merchandise, food, goods, wares, chattels, laundromats of every kind of
description, or for services or repairs to goods, wares and chattels of every
kind and description, including tattoo establishments (where a minimum
of one paid for tattoo is performed (painted) within any twelve-month
period) without first having obtained a certificate of registration; provided,
however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to any person,
holding a license or certificate issued by any department, board,
commission or other agency of the State of New Jersey; and, provided
further, that no person shall be required to obtain a certificate of
registration in order to sell at wholesale or retail any products of his farm.
§ 4-10.2. Applications. [Ord. #1424, § 6; Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
All applications for a certificate of registration shall be in writing on forms
furnished by the township, signed by the applicant and presented to the
township clerk. The application shall state the correct name under which
the business is being operated, the name and address of the applicant, the
kind of business to be conducted and the location of the place where the
business is to be conducted.
§ 4-10.3. Issuance of Certificate. [Ord. #1424, § 6; Ord. #2861-12,
§ 2]
Upon receipt of the application and payment to him of the fee herein
provided, the township clerk shall issue a certificate of registration for the
business set forth in the application and, in addition, he shall report the
issuance of the same to the board of commissioners, the chief of police, the
building subcode official, the chief of the fire prevention bureau and the
board of health.
§ 4-10.4. Duration. [Ord. #1424, § 6; Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
All certificates of registration issued pursuant to this section shall expire on
April 1 of each year.
§ 4-9.5 GENERAL § 4-10.5
1:149
§ 4-10.5. Fee. [Ord. #1424, § 6; Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
The fee for a certificate of registration issued pursuant to this section shall
be $5. In addition, all businesses shall pay the fee(s) required in subsection
4-11.8 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 4-10.6. Exhibited. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
All certificates of registration issued hereunder shall be exhibited in a
prominent place in the place of business described in the application.
§ 4-10.7. Nontransferable. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
Every certificate of registration issued hereunder shall apply only to the
person to whom issued and shall not be transferable.
§ 4-10.8. One Place of Business. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
No certificate of registration shall be issued to cover more than one place
of business.
§ 4-10.9. Separate Certificates. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
Every business enterprise or concession occupying the same place of
business and conducting business under a common trade or business name
with other business enterprises or concessions shall be required to obtain
separate certificates of registration therefor.
§ 4-10.10. Change of Information. [Ord. #1424, § 6]
The holder of a certificate of registration issued hereunder shall
immediately notify the township clerk in writing of any change in the
information set forth in the application upon which the same was issued.
§ 4-11. BUSINESS LICENSES — TRANSIENT MERCHANTS AND
MERCANTILE LICENSES.
§ 4-11.1. Purpose. [Ord. #891, A1; Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
The purpose of this section is to prevent unfair competition and dishonest
and unhealthy business practices by the regulation of the conduct of the
persons receiving a license hereunder, and by the imposition of license
fees for revenue upon all persons hereinafter designated and required to
pay such fees. All establishments, including mobile or temporary business
shall comply with public safety regulations and applicable sections and
provisions of the ordinances of the Township of Lyndhurst and general law.
Licenses shall be issued without payment to certain tax exempt entities
(vendors), who shall be persons who sell goods and services; the proceeds of
which are devoted exclusively to the purpose of a philanthropic, charitable
or religious association or entity on whose behalf he acts as an agent
without pay.
§ 4-10.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-11.2
1:150
§ 4-11.2. Violations. [New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be liable to
the penalty stated in Chapter 3, § 3-1.
§ 4-11.3. Exemptions from License. [Ord. #891, A3; Ord. #2861-12,
§ 2]
The requirements of this section shall be held not to include the following
persons who are expressly exempt, from its application, so far as any fee
is required, but shall in all other respects abide by the provisions of this
section as a matter of regulation:
§ 4-11.4. Application for License. [Ord. #891, A4; Ord. #2861-12,
§ 2]
Any person desiring a license shall file with the township clerk an
application form, separate blanks being provided for each of the classes of
licenses. The application form shall contain the following information:
a. Any person honorably discharged from the military, naval, or marine
forces of the United States;
b. Any blind person who is a resident of this township;
c. Any person who is an exempt member of a fire department as defined
by New Jersey Public Laws 1911, Chapter 133.
a. For All License Classes:
1. Name of applicant.
2. Permanent home residence.
3. Name and address of firm represented, the names and addresses of
the person from whom goods making up the stock were or are to be
purchased.
4. Three business references.
5. The place or places of residence of the applicant for the preceding
three years.
6. The length of time for which the license is desired.
7. A description of the wares to be offered for sale.
8. The number either of arrests or convictions for misdemeanors or
crimes and the nature of the offenses for which arrested or
convicted.
9. To the application shall be appended a letter from the firm for
which he purports to work, authorizing the applicant to act as its
representative.
§ 4-11.2 GENERAL § 4-11.4
1:151
§ 4-11.5. Granting of License. [Ord. #891, A5]
Following the filing of the application, the chief of police shall verify the
information respecting the moral character of the applicant and shall signify
his approval or rejection on the reverse side of the form; and the township
clerk shall verify the financial information, approving or rejecting the
application on its reverse side. For the issuance of licenses to transient
merchants and transient merchant-peddlers, the value of goods to be
offered for sale may be verified by the officers through an appraisal made
by a competent person designated by the officer. Upon verification of the
application and payment of the prescribed fee, the license therewith shall
be issued by the township clerk, for all license classes, the license issued
shall not authorize any persons except the designated person named in
the license, to engage in business thereunder. The license shall not be
transferable from the person to whom issued to any other person. A
separate license must be obtained by a licensed peddler for every agent
or employee working for him. A separate license must be obtained by a
licensed transient merchant for each branch or separate place of business
in which his business is conducted; and each license shall authorize the
person to conduct business only at the location which is indicated therein.
All licenses provided for in this section shall expire on December 31 of each
year.
§ 4-11.6. Recording and Reporting Licenses. [Ord. #891, A6]
b. For Transient Merchant Licenses. In addition to the foregoing items,
the application shall show:
1. A sworn statement of the true invoice of the amount, average
quality or kind, and value of the goods to be offered for sale.
2. A statement of the location of such goods by street or number, and
whether on the premises from which it is sold or in warehouse.
3. To the application must be appended, in the discretion of the
township clerk, the bills or invoices of purchase for such goods.
c. For Transient Merchant-Peddler Licenses. In addition to the foregoing
information, the application shall show:
1. The names and addresses of each peddler acting for the merchant.
2. Three personal references for each peddler.
3. For each peddler the number either of arrests or convictions for
misdemeanors or crimes and the nature of the offenses for which
arrested or convicted.
a. All licenses shall be issued on forms drawn in accordance with this
section. They shall be printed in book form, with corresponding stubs,
and shall be consecutively numbered. The license shall contain suitable
§ 4-11.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-11.6
1:152
§ 4-11.7. License in Possession. [Ord. #891, A7]
§ 4-11.8. License Fees. [Ord. #891, A8; Ord. #2861-12, § 2; Ord.
#2872-12, § 2]
License fees shall be as follows:
blank spaces for writing in the name, the class of license granted, the
location of the business and the amount of fee paid.
b. There shall be kept in the office of the township clerk the necessary
books for recording the time the application for license is received,
showing its class, whether new or renewal, name of licensee, regular
number of blank form, when the application was approved by the chief
of police and the township clerk, the amount of fee received therefor,
and the date when the license was issued.
c. The township clerk shall monthly file a report with the board of
commissioners showing the number of licenses granted by classes and
the amounts of fees received therefor. Each report shall state the
number and class of licenses revoked and the reasons for such
revocation. The monthly report shall be cumulative during the course of
the year so that each report summarizes the action of all preceding
months of the current years.
a. Every person holding a license, under this section, shall be required to
carry the license with him or at his business premises while engaged in
the business licensed. He shall produce the license at the request of any
township official.
b. To every peddler granted a license, the township clerk shall issue a
metal plate bearing the words "Licensed Peddler, Township of
Lyndhurst," together with the number of the license and the year for
which it is issued. All automobiles, wagons, carts, or other vehicles used
for peddling shall have affixed thereon the metal plate. A transient
merchant and a transient merchant-peddler shall post a license
certificate in a prominent place on his business premises. To the
vendors of all other classes shall be issued a license button which shall
be affixed on the lapel of his or her coat or garment while engaged in
business.
a. Auctioneers, a license fee each of $25 annually.
b. Distribution of handbills, circulars and all other advertising matter and
samples of goods, wares and merchandise, a license fee of $5 per diem.
c. Bakery retail delivery wagons or vehicles, a license fee each of $20.
d. Book and soliciting agents selling books and magazines by
subscriptions, a license fee of $5 annually.
e. Circuses, a license fee of $150 each.
§ 4-11.6 GENERAL § 4-11.8
1:153
f. Circus parades, a license fee each of $25.
g. Cleaners and dyers for each vehicle $25 per annum.
h. Fireworks, retail establishment, a license fee of $25.
i. Fruit and vegetable dealers doing business from vehicles, a license fee
of $15 annually.
j. Grinders of knives, scissors and saw filers, a license fee of $5.
k. Ice cream wagons or other vehicles selling ice cream retail in any form,
a license fee each of $15.
l. Ice wagons drawn by horses or automobile ice truck, a license fee each
$5.
m. Ice stands, stores or depots, selling at retail, a license fee each of $25.
n. Ice factories or manufacturing plants, selling wholesale only, a license
fee for each plant or factory of $250.
o. Junk dealers, other than motor vehicle junk, a license fee of $250.
p. Junk wagons or other vehicles, soliciting and selling junk other than
motor vehicle junk, a license fee of $250.
q. Laundry delivery wagons, a license fee each of $25.
r. Lunch counters or rooms, a license fee each of $10.
s. Milk wagons or automobiles, a license fee each of $10.
t. Motion picture theaters, a license fee each of $100.
u. Organ grinders, a license fee of $5.
v. Parades, other than fraternal, patriotic or religious and political
parades, and any parade sponsored by the Township of Lyndhurst, a
license fee of $10.
w. Peddlers of:
1. Candy, a license fee each of $25.
2. Cheese, salami, spaghetti or groceries, a license fee for each wagon
or automobile vehicle of $25.
3. Meats, each wagon or automobile vehicle, a license fee of $25.
4. Seafood with wheelbarrow, pushcart or vehicle, a license fee of
$100.
5. Farm produce with wheelbarrow, pushcart or vehicle, a license fee
for each vehicle of $100.
§ 4-11.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-11.8
1:154
§ 4-11.9. Revocation of License. [Ord. #891, A9]
A license may be revoked by the mayor and board of commissioners by
reason of the violation of the terms of the license, the violation of any
municipal ordinance, state or federal statute or falsification in applying for a
license. Before revocation, the licensed person may be granted a hearing by
the mayor and board of commissioners, after five days' notice thereof and
furnishing the person with a written statement of the charges against him.
§ 4-11.10. Eligibility. [Ord. #891, A10]
No license shall be issued or renewed unless the applicant therefor shall be
a citizen of the United States and a person of good moral character.
§ 4-11.11. Location of Sale. [Ord. #2117, § I]
The retail sale of goods or merchandise of any kind shall take place within
a permanent structure constructed in accordance with the Building Code of
the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 4-12. DEALERS OF SECONDHAND GOODS.
6. House furnishing goods and clothing, a license fee of $25.
7. Pies, cakes and bread with wagon, pushcart, basket or automobile,
a license fee of $25.
8. Produce hucksters, fruit and vegetables, each vehicle, a license fee
of $25.
9. Peddlers of other goods, wares and merchandise not enumerated
above, a license fee of $15.
x. Pony tracks, a license fee of $5.
y. Restaurants, a license fee each of $25.
z. Public swimming pools, a license fee of $100.
aa. Traveling shows, a license fee of $25 a day.
bb. Transient merchants and transient merchant-peddlers, a sum equal to
2% of the fair cash value of goods, wares or merchandise to be offered
for sale, provided however, that the transient merchant shall be entitled
to apply for and receive a license upon paying to the township clerk the
sum of $200 which license shall continue in favor of the person to whom
it is issued for the period of 30 days, from the date the same is issued,
and for each peddler employed by any transient merchant-peddler, a
license fee of $15 annually.
cc. Wagons or vehicles used exclusively for advertising purposes, a license
fee each of $10.
§ 4-11.8 GENERAL § 4-12.1
1:155
§ 4-12.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1772, § 1]
As used in this section:
DEALERS OF SECONDHAND GOODS — Shall mean and include all types of
business associations; natural person, partnership, corporation, association,
firm, club, society, joint venture, engaged in business of the buying of
secondhand goods for the purpose of resale or processing for their metallic
content.
SECONDHAND GOODS — Shall mean articles that have been owned by
persons other than the manufacturer or dealer whose business it is to sell
such articles; which may or may not still possess utility in their present
state for the purpose for which they were originally intended; such as, but
not limited to, jewelry, small appliances, stamps, coins, and other items
commonly stolen.
§ 4-12.1A. License Required. [Ord. #1772, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct, engage in or carry on
activities of a dealer of secondhand goods as enumerated in this section
within the township; or, in using any stand, store, or other place or thing for
which a license is required under this section, without having first complied
with the provisions of this section.
§ 4-12.2. Application for License. [Ord. #1772, § 3; Ord. #2872-12,
§ 2; Ord. #2880-13]
Applications for all licenses required by this section shall be made in
writing to the township clerk. Each application shall contain the following
information:
a. The name under which the business is to be conducted.
b. The name of the applicant (if a corporation give the names and
addresses of the members of board of directors; if a partnership, give
the names and addresses of all partners).
c. The present address of the applicant(s).
d. The address and location of the business.
e. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever had a business license
revoked or denied and the reason therefor.
f. Details of criminal convictions, including the nature of the offense, date
and place of such conviction.
g. The business telephone number of the applicant.
h. A statement by the applicant that the information supplied in the
application to induce the township to issue the license is true and
correct and that the applicant agrees to comply with all laws and
§ 4-12.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-12.2
1:156
§ 4-12.3. Fee. [Ord. #1772, § 3; Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
Each new application must be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $50
and each renewal application must be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee
of $10. If an application is rejected and resubmitted within 30 days of the
original revocation date there shall be no additional fee required.
§ 4-12.4. Records. [Ord. #1772, § 4]
All licenses, permits and applications therefor shall be prepared, kept on
file, and shall bear the signature of the township clerk, together with the
date of issuance.
§ 4-12.5. Investigations. [Ord. #1772, § 5]
Upon receipt of an application for a license, the board of commissioners
shall refer such application to the proper officials or officers for making
of the necessary investigation or inspection. The officials shall make a
report thereon, favorable or otherwise, within 15 days after receiving the
application or a copy thereof. The health official shall make or cause to
be made the appropriate health inspections; the building official and
construction officials shall make or cause to be made any such inspections
relative to the construction of the buildings or other structures; the zoning
official shall make the appropriate zoning inspections; and the fire official
shall make the appropriate fire inspections. All other investigations, except
where otherwise provided, shall be made by the chief of police or his
designee. Before the chief of police shall recommend a license, he shall first
make a determination that the applicant does not have a criminal record
or is not presently indicted for a crime in this state or any other state
which would reasonably relate to the nature of the business to be conducted
by the applicant; that the proposed business would not be detrimental to
the public health, safety or welfare of the community; that the applicant
had not conducted any business in violation of any local ordinances or
state statutes; that the applicant has not permitted persons to conduct
illegal activities on the premises of a business previously maintained in the
township; and that the proposed business would not be a public nuisance.
§ 4-12.6. Issuance. [Ord. #1772, § 6]
All licenses shall be approved by resolution of the township board of
commissioners, upon payment of the license fee, based upon the
qualifications of the applicant and the recommendations and reports of the
investigating officials. The total number of licenses issued shall not exceed
ordinances of the State of New Jersey and the Township of Lyndhurst
applicable to the subject matter thereof.
i. Fingerprints taken of the applicant, which must be retaken at least once
every two years.
j. Two passport size photographs.
§ 4-12.2 GENERAL § 4-12.6
1:157
10. The license shall run from the date of its issuance to the end of the
calendar year and shall be renewed each year thereafter. The license shall
not be assignable.
§ 4-12.7. Change of Location. [Ord. #1772, § 7]
The location of any licensed business or occupation of any permitted activity
may be changed, provided that 10 days' notice thereof is given to the chief
of police and the approval is granted by the governing body, and provided
that the requirements of all regulatory ordinances are complied with.
§ 4-12.8. Inspections. [Ord. #1772, § 8]
§ 4-12.9. Revocation of License. [Ord. #1772, § 9]
The board of commissioners shall have the right to suspend or revoke
any license or permit whenever the holder thereof or any of the licensee's
agents or servants violate any provision of this section, the laws of the State
of New Jersey or any rules or regulations promulgated as herein provided.
Prior to the revocation of a license, a written notice of the contemplated
action of the board of commissioners shall be served upon said licensee,
setting forth each charge as may be the reason for the proposed revocation
and the place, date and hour when the board of commissioners of the
Township of Lyndhurst will hear the matter. The licensee may be
represented by counsel at such hearing.
§ 4-12.10. Posting of License. [Ord. #1772, § 10]
Licenses so issued shall be conspicuously posted at the place of business
shown on the license.
§ 4-12.11. Purpose of Fees. [Ord. #1772, § 11]
The fees hereby imposed are revenue producing in nature, but such fees
are used primarily to cover the cost of administration and inspection of
such businesses, to assure compliance with the laws of the State of New
Jersey and the ordinance of the Township of Lyndhurst. These fees provide
a reasonable relationship to the cost of regulation and administration.
a. The chief of police or his designee may at any time, and shall at least
once a year, investigate the business of all licensees for the purpose of
effectuating this section. It shall be the duty of the licensee or person in
charge of the premises to grant free access to the licensee's place of
business, to the books, papers, records, secondhand articles of the
licensee wherever located, and shall also have the authority to examine,
under oath, any person whose testimony he may require relative to such
business.
b. It shall be the duty of the licensee or person in charge of the premises to
cooperate with the Lyndhurst police and other law enforcement
agencies for the recovery and restoration of stolen property.
§ 4-12.6 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-12.12
1:158
§ 4-12.12. Weekly Report to the Chief of Police. [Ord. #1772, § 12]
All dealers in secondhand goods shall deliver to the chief of police or
his designee, before 12:00 noon on the first day of the business week, a
legible record of all purchases of secondhand goods of the previous week.
This record must include a detailed description of each article or thing
purchased by the dealer; the customer's name, address, phone number,
signature, date of birth, sex, race, height, weight, eye and hair color, social
security number, and type of identification presented. It shall be the duty of
the licensee or person in charge of the premises to grant free access to the
chief of police or his designee to these records at any time.
§ 4-12.13. Prohibit Purchase From Minors. [Ord. #1772, § 13]
A dealer of secondhand goods shall not purchase a secondhand article from
any person who is under the age of 18 years.
§ 4-12.14. Marking Secondhand Goods. [Ord. #1772, § 14]
All secondhand goods offered for sale or exchange, exposed for sale or
exchange, possessed with the intent to sell or exchange, or displayed with
the intent to sell or exchange, shall keep affixed to the same a tag with the
word "secondhand" clearly and legibly written or printed thereon, and the
tag shall be so placed that the word "secondhand" shall be in plain sight at
all times.
§ 4-12.15. Exemptions. [Ord. #1772, § 15]
The township clerk may authorize the issuance of special licenses without
payment of any license fee to any public, charitable, educational, literary,
fraternal or religious organization having its location in the township for
the conduct or operation of a temporary nonprofit enterprise for a public,
charitable, educational, literary, fraternal or religious purpose. The
applicant, however, shall submit the usual application form in the manner as
hereinbefore required and shall operate, if granted a license, in accordance
with the requirements of this section.
§ 4-12.16. Additional Restrictions. [Ord. #1772, § 16]
No person shall conduct, engage in, operate or otherwise carry on a
business, licensed or not, which may constitute a danger, menace or
otherwise be detrimental to the general public health, safety and welfare
or make any fraudulent or false statements or misrepresentations in
connection with the provisions of this section. In addition, any applicant
who shall have made any false, fraudulent or misleading statements in his
application for license may be denied a license or be subject to having his
license revoked.
§ 4-12.12 GENERAL § 4-12.17
1:159
§ 4-12.17. Enforcement. [Ord. #1772, § 17]
The proper enforcement of the provisions of this section dealing with
dealers of secondhand goods shall be within the jurisdiction of the
Lyndhurst police department, and those officials charged with providing the
necessary inspections and regulations.
§ 4-12.18. Penalties. [Ord. #1772, § 18]
§ 4-13. TOW TRUCK OPERATIONS.14
§ 4-13.1. Compliance. [Ord. #2129, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to engage in the
business of supplying emergency towing or wrecker service, or removing
wrecked or disabled vehicles within the township without complying with
the provisions of this section.
§ 4-13.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2129, § II]
As used in this section, the following terms will have the following
meanings:
ACCIDENT — Shall mean any occurrence which renders a vehicle wrecked
or disabled.
DISABLED VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle which has been rendered
unsafe to be driven as the result of some occurrence other than a wreck,
including, but not limited to, mechanical failures or breakdowns, fire,
vandalism, or a vehicle which is in a safe driving condition, but the owner is
not present, able or permitted to drive, so as to reasonably necessitate that
the vehicle be removed by a wrecker.
a. Pursuant to the laws of the State of New Jersey any person, firm,
association or corporation violating any section of this section shall,
upon conviction in the municipal court having jurisdiction, be subject to
a fine not exceeding $250 or imprisonment in the county jail, or in any
place provided by the municipality for the detention of prisoners, for
any term not exceeding 90 days, or both.
b. Any person convicted of a second violation of this section shall, in the
discretion of the court, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or
imprisonment in the county jail, or in any place provided by the
municipality for the detention of prisoners or both.
c. Any person convicted of a third violation of this section shall
immediately be subject to revocation of his license pursuant to
subsection 4-12.9, Revocation of License.
14.Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 2129, contained herein, repeals Ordinance Nos. 2061 and
2108.
§ 4-12.17 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-13.2
1:160
DISPATCHER — Shall mean the person in the police department assigned
by the chief of police to handle calls for wrecker service.
EMERGENCY WRECKER SERVICE — Shall mean the business of towing or
removing wrecked or disabled vehicles from the streets upon request of the
police department.
OWNER — Shall mean a person who holds legal title to a vehicle, or who has
legal right of possession of a vehicle, or legal right of control of a vehicle.
PERSON — Shall mean an individual, assumed name entity, partnership,
joint-venture, association, corporation, or other legal entity.
STREET — Shall mean any street, alley, avenue, lane, square or highway
within the corporate limits of the township.
VEHICLE — Shall mean every device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street, except devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
WRECKED VEHICLE — Shall mean a vehicle that has been damaged as the
result of overturning or colliding with another vehicle or object so as to
reasonably necessitate that the vehicle be removed by a wrecker.
WRECKER — Shall mean a vehicle designed to be used primarily for
removing wrecked or disabled vehicles.
§ 4-13.3. Driving Wrecker to Scene of Accident Prohibited. [Ord.
#2129, § III]
No person may drive a wrecker to the scene of an accident on the streets
of the township unless the person has been called to the scene by the
police dispatcher or has received the permission of the police pursuant to
subsection 4-13.5.
§ 4-13.4. Soliciting Wrecker Business at Scene of Accident
Prohibited; Presence at Scene as Evidence of Violation. [Ord.
#2129, § IV]
No person may solicit in any manner, directly or indirectly at the location
of a wrecked or disabled vehicle, the business of towing that wrecked or
disabled vehicle regardless of whether the solicitation is for the purpose
of soliciting the business of towing, removing or storing the vehicle. Proof
of the presence of a person in the wrecker business or the presence of a
wrecker stopped at the scene of an accident which was not involved in the
said accident and whose driver or occupants were not witnesses to the said
accident and which was not called to the scene of said accident by the police
dispatcher within one hour after the happening of said accident, is prima
facie evidence of a solicitation in violation of this section.
§ 4-13.5. Intent of Section. [Ord. #2129, § V]
It is the intent of the board of commissioners to enter into a separate one
year contract with a single emergency wrecker service contractor to do
§ 4-13.2 GENERAL § 4-13.5
1:161
the towing work and/or vehicle removal and/or impoundment of vehicle
with four wheels or less (e.g. cars, vans, motorcycles or three-wheeled
vehicles) when determined necessary by the Township of Lyndhurst Police
Department; and to enter into a second separate contract with a single
emergency wrecker services contractor to perform identical services for
vehicles with more than four wheels. When a vehicle has been involved in
an accident or is disabled the vehicle operator shall be advised of his or her
right to select an emergency wrecker service of his or her choice so long as
that emergency wrecker service can respond to the scene and perform the
necessary services within a reasonable time frame to be determined by the
police officer at the scene.
§ 4-13.6. Specifications. [Ord. #2129, § VI]
The board of commissioners shall by resolution adopt specifications for each
of the separate contracts and advertise for the receipt of sealed bids.
§ 4-13.7. Contract Awards. [Ord. #2129, § VII]
The award of each contract shall be determined by sealed bidding.
§ 4-14. FEES FOR SERVICES. [Ord. #1865, § I; Ord. #2135, § I; Ord.
#2214, § I; Ord. #2248, § II; Ord. #2323, § II; Ord. #2327, § II; Ord.
#2343, § II; Ord. #2470, § I; Ord. #2516, § I; Ord. #2524; Ord.
#2560, § 1; Ord. #2808-11; Ord. #2836-12, § 2; Ord. #2849-12; Ord.
#2861-12, § II]
§ 4-14.1. Recreation Fees. [Ord. #2836-12; Ord. #2849-12]
The fees to be charged by the Township of Lyndhurst to the resident
and nonresident users and participants for certain recreation services, for
the purpose of reimbursing the township for the cost of providing those
services, and thereby reducing the reliance on the general taxpayer for
paying for such services, shall be as follows:
a. Parks Department.
1. Summer camp registration (Effective April 1, 2012):
(a) First child: $300.
(b) Second child: $250.
(c) Each additional child: $200.
2. Lyndhurst community pool membership fees. [Amended
4-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2993-18]
(a) Seasonal (four-month membership).
§ 4-13.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-14.1
1:162
Lyndhurst
Residents Nonresidents
Adults $95 $120
Children under 17 $75 $95
Seniors 60+ $60 $75
Family of 4 $280 $310
(b) Annual (one-year membership).
Lyndhurst
Residents Nonresidents
Adults $250 $325
Children under 17 $200 $235
Seniors 60+ $150 $175
Family of 4 $725 $735
(c) In addition to the above membership fees, the Township of
Lyndhurst Recreation Department may charge residents a pool
membership fee of $50 per individual and $100 per family of
four for any two-month period between March 1 and October
31 of any year.
3. Town Hall Park. [Amended 4-10-2018 by Ord. No. 2993-18]
(a) Town Hall Spray Park: The previously charged $1 daily fee to
use the spray park is hereby authorized and shall be $2 per day
effective May 1, 2018.
(b) Town Hall Park table reservations for parties or groups of three
or more persons are hereby authorized. The maximum amount
of time that a table (commonly referred to as a "picnic table")
located in Town Hall Park may be reserved shall be four hours,
unless extended by the Recreation Department. In order to
accommodate these table reservations, the Recreation
Department is authorized to issue a permit and charge a
permit fee of $25 for each table reservation.
(c) The Town Hall Park concession stand has historically provided
food and beverages to the paying public during the summer
months, as may be allowed by the Recreation Department. The
payment for the food and beverages and the collection of funds
(to reimburse the Township for the cost of the food and
beverages as well as any staffing expense) is hereby authorized
to be established by the Recreation Department each year not
later than July 1 of the pertinent year. The schedule of charges
for the food and beverages shall be posted in a prominent area
§ 4-14.1 GENERAL § 4-14.1
1:163
§ 4-14.2. Public Affairs Department. [Ord. #2861-12; Ord.
#2872-12, § 2]
§ 4-14.3. Police Department. [Ord. #2861-12; Ord. # 2872-12, § 2;
Ord. #2880-13]
of the Town Hall Park concession stand and shall be posted on
the bulletin board in Town Hall.
a. Blood screening: Cost of test.
b. Certified Copy of Birth: $10.
c. Certified Copy of Marriage: $10.
d. Certified Copy of Death: $10.
e. One year search with one (1) certified copy, if on file, of a Vital Statistic
Record:
Birth: $10.
Marriage: $10.
Death: $10.
f. One year search, no record found:
Birth: $5.
Marriage: $5.
Death: $5.
g. Each additional year search at the same time: $5.
h. Correction of Vital Statistic Record, one fee for first correction, no
charge for additional copies: $10.
i. Ear piercing establishments and practitioners that comply with the
requirements of the State Department of Health pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:1A-7, et seq., and the regulations promulgated thereunder, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 8:27-1 et seq., annually:
1. Original application: $500.
2. Renewal: $250.
a. Fingerprinting (check or money order only).
1. Liquor license ownership, bartenders, barmaids (annually): $25.
2. All other - miscellaneous (must supply own cards): $20.
b. Photographing: $10.
§ 4-14.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-14.3
1:164
§ 4-14.4. Municipal Court Discovery.
(Unless another fee is established by law.)
§ 4-15. CONTRACTORS.
c. Annual Canvassing Permits (Commercial only): $10.
d. Record checks: $10 per request
e. Police Department Application/Testing Fee: $50.
f. Liquor license owner, bartenders/barmaids Annual Permit: $25.
1. License must be renewed every two years with two passport size
photographs.
2. Applicants shall submit license card to the police records bureau at
time of renewal.
a. All requests for discovery in matters pending in the Township of
Lyndhurst Municipal Court shall be submitted through the Municipal
Prosecutor.
b. The following fees shall be payable by the requestor to the Township of
Lyndhurst for the discovery provided:
1. $0.75 per page for each of the first 10 pages photocopied.
2. $0.50 per page for each of the next 10 pages photocopied.
3. $0.25 per page for each of the pages photocopied thereafter.
4. Actual postage for any discovery sent by mail.
5. $0.25 for the envelope for any discovery sent by mail
6. Photographs will be photocopied at the rates established herein. If
requests are made for duplicate photographs, the actual cost of
making the photographs shall be charged.
7. Duplication of videotapes constitute an extraordinary duplication
process and will be charged at the rate of $5 per videotape.
8. On any item that cannot be photocopied on the township copy
machine or not otherwise provided for in this schedule, the actual
cost incurred in making the copy shall be charged.
c. Where the discovery must be obtained from an entity other than
Township of Lyndhurst, e.g. another police department, the actual costs
paid to the other entity shall be paid by the requestor.
§ 4-14.3 GENERAL § 4-15.1
1:165
§ 4-15.1. Applicability. [Ord. #1872, § I]
This section shall apply to all persons, partnerships, corporations or other
entities who shall undertake any services in the Township of Lyndhurst
for a fee, the purpose of which is to add or remove rooms, dormers,
or other structures, or improve, modernize, or modify existing rooms or
structures, or install, resurface or improve driveways or sidewalks or any
improvement for which a building permit is required, provided such work
shall be accomplished upon any structure in the Township of Lyndhurst
where persons reside or will reside upon completion of the work and
further provided that the persons or firm offering the service shall not be
otherwise licensed by the State of New Jersey pursuant to the terms of law
and regulations promulgated pursuant to statute by state agencies having
control over such services.
§ 4-15.2. Application for License. [Ord. #1872, § II]
Any person or firm to whom this section applies, as set forth in subsection
4-15.1 above, shall, prior to commencing any work or service in the
Township of Lyndhurst, make application to the construction code official
for a local contractor's license. The failure to obtain such license prior
to commencement to work or services shall constitute a violation of this
section.
§ 4-15.3. Contents of the Application for Local Contractor's License.
All applications shall be submitted in writing upon the following form15 to
be provided by the construction code official.
§ 4-15.4. Term of License. [Ord. #1872, § IV]
All licenses issued pursuant to this section shall expire one year after
the date of issue provided, however, that such licenses may be renewed
annually upon payment of a fee hereinafter set forth.
§ 4-15.5. Fees. [Ord. #1872, § V]
The initial fee for a local contractor's license shall be $25 and thereafter
renewals of such license shall be given upon payment of a fee of $5 per year.
§ 4-15.6. Grounds for Revocation of License or Denial of Renewal.
[Ord. #1872, § VI]
The following shall constitute the sole grounds for which the construction
code official may revoke a license, or deny the issuance of an initial license
or the renewal thereof:
a. Failure to carry worker's compensation insurance; or
15.Editor's Note: said form is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 4-15.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-15.6
1:166
§ 4-15.7. Right of Appeal for Denial of License. [Ord. #1872, § VII]
In the event that the construction code official has revoked or denied
a license to an applicant or has refused to renew such license upon
submission of the required fee, the aggrieved contractor may appeal such
denial, in writing, to the board of commissioners. Upon such appeal, the
following steps shall be taken:
b. Failure to comply with construction standards required by state law or
regulations or local ordinance or codes after having been given a notice
to cure such noncompliance and after the contractor having failed to
effect compliance without just cause; or
c. Failure to comply with the lawful instructions of the construction code
official regarding:
1. Site safety; or
2. Altering plans submitted for the obtaining of the building permit
without first receiving the approval of the construction code
official; or
3. Failure to obtain a building permit where required; or
4. One owner/resident complaint against the contractor for
unworkmanlike or unsafe services, which complaint has been
personally verified by the construction code official or his deputy;
or
d. Licensee or applicant has had any local contractor's license revoked by
any municipality in the State of New Jersey for any cause other than
failure to pay licensing fees.
a. Upon receipt of the written appeal, the township clerk shall set a date
for the board of commissioners to hear such appeal. This date may be
adjourned for a reasonable time at the request of the board of
commissioners or the contractor.
b. At the time, date and place set for the hearing, the board of
commissioners shall conduct an inquiry into the reasons for the denial
by the construction code official and shall hear the contractor as to why
such denial was unreasonable or improper. At the hearing, the
contractor shall be entitled to call witnesses and to be represented by
counsel.
c. At the conclusion of the hearing the board of commissioners shall
determine whether or not the denial of the license was proper under the
circumstances and, if determined to be improper, the board of
commissioners shall direct the construction code official to issue the
license. If the board of commissioners determine that the license denial
was proper, it shall, in its discretion, take one of the following actions:
1. Uphold the denial without further action;
§ 4-15.6 GENERAL § 4-15.7
1:167
§ 4-15.8. Duties of the Construction Code Official. [Ord. #1872,
§ VIII]
In addition to the enforcement of this section, the construction code official
shall insure the following:
§ 4-15.9. Penalty. [Ord. #1872, § IX]
Any person or firm which fails to obtain a local contractor's license when
required to do so by this section, shall, if any work is commenced on any
project covered by this section, be subject to a penalty of up to a $500 fine
or imprisonment for not more than six months or both.
§ 4-16. CANVASSERS, PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS.
§ 4-16.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2222, § I; Ord. #2676, § 1]
The following terms in this section shall have the meaning indicated:
PEDDLER — Shall mean any person who goes from place to place by
traveling on the streets from house to house and carries with him goods,
wares, and merchandise of any description for the purpose of selling and
delivering them to purchasers.
SOLICITOR or CANVASSER — Shall mean any individual, whether a
resident of the township or not, traveling by foot or by any other
conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to
2. If circumstances warrant, issue the license conditioned upon the
contractor's adherence to steps imposed by the board of
commissioners which are designed to reasonably insure
compliance by the contractor with this section;
3. If circumstances warrant, direct the issuance of the license at such
time as any deficiencies, which were the grounds for the denial,
have been cured by the contractor. The board of commissioners
shall set forth the deficiencies in its ruling.
d. Within 10 business days of the hearing date, the board of
commissioners shall notify the construction code official and the
contractor in writing of its determination and any conditions which
have been placed upon the issuance of the license by the board of
commissioners.
a. That the information contained in the application for local contractor's
license is current;
b. That the applications for local contractor's license are public
documents and made available for inspection and copying by any
interested person;
c. He shall notify the owner of the property on which work is to be done by
the contractor if the contractor does not carry public liability insurance.
§ 4-15.7 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-16.1
1:168
street, asking for donations for any cause, publicizing any cause, or taking
or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods for future delivery or for
services to be performed in the future, whether or not a sample is carried or
displayed and whether or not advanced payments are collected; provided,
however, that this provision shall not apply to wholesale salesmen calling on
retail merchants.
§ 4-16.2. Permit Required; Exception. [Ord. #2222, § II; Ord. #2676,
§ 1]
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of solicitor, peddler or
canvasser without first obtaining a permit therefor from the Lyndhurst
Police Department provided, however, that persons under 17 years of age,
are allowed to solicit only when under the supervision of an adult, and said
adult shall be required to obtain a permit as a solicitor, peddler or canvasser
in the township.
§ 4-16.3. Application for Permit. [Ord. #2222, § III; Ord. #2676, § 1;
Ord. #2872-12, § 2; Ord. #2880-13]
An applicant for a permit to engage in sales or solicitation in the township
shall file an application with the chief of police at least two weeks prior to
the date of solicitation. The information shall be set forth on forms furnished
by the police records bureau and shall be signed by the applicant. The
following information shall be provided:
§ 4-16.4. Investigation of Applicant. [Ord. #2222, § IV; Ord. #2230,
§ IV; Ord. #2676, § 1]
a. Applicant's name, business name and business address;
b. The residence address or addresses of the applicant for the preceding
three years;
c. Whether the applicant has ever been arrested or convicted of a crime
and, if so, the date of arrest; the crime or charge involved and
disposition thereof;
d. The required permit pursuant to this article shall be valid for the
calendar year in which the permit is issued and may be renewed for
additional one year periods in January.
e. The nature of merchandise to be sold or offered for sale.
f. Fingerprints taken of the applicant, which must be retaken at least once
every two years.
g. Two passport size photographs.
a. After due investigation and upon being satisfied that the applicant has
not been convicted of a crime (and is not subject to any outstanding
criminal warrants or indictments) relating to fraud, deception, theft,
§ 4-16.1 GENERAL § 4-16.4
1:169
§ 4-16.5. Fees. [Ord. #2222, § V; Ord. #2230, § V; Ord. #2676, § 1]
Upon the filing of the application a fee of $15 shall be paid to the township
to defray the cost of investigating, processing and issuing said permit. An
additional fee will be charged for State Police fingerprinting, fee made
payable to New Jersey State Bureau of Investigation. Renewal fee for one
year shall be $10.
§ 4-16.6. General Requirements. [Ord. #2676, § 1]
assault, or sex offense as defined by subsection b of section 2 of the
New Jersey Code of Criminal Justice § 2C:7-2, and that he is selling or
soliciting for a project free from fraud, the chief of police is hereby
authorized to grant a permit to canvass or solicit upon the payment by
the applicant of the applicable fees.
b. Each permit shall specify the period during which it shall be effective,
and a copy of the permittee's photograph shall be attached to his
permit. The permittee shall carry said permit and shall exhibit the
permit to any police officer or other resident of the Township of
Lyndhurst upon request. To the extent possible, the permittee shall
advise the police department weekly of the specific location and/or
locations he or she intends to canvass. The person giving this
information shall do so by providing to the police department, his or her
name, permit number, name of organization, if any, and specific location
and/or locations he or she or others shall canvass.
c. Any canvass or solicitation involving the sale of food and/or beverages
shall require an investigation by the health department with reference
to the compliance or noncompliance of the proposed applicant with all
municipal and state rules, regulations, statutes and ordinances relating
to the sale and/or handling of food and/or beverages. Upon completion
of investigation, the health department shall submit to the police
records bureau a copy of the approval. The police records bureau shall
proceed with the said investigation of applicant.
a. Every person to whom a permit is issued under the terms of this
chapter, shall be governed by the following rules and regulations: All
circulars, samples, merchandise or other matters shall be handed to an
occupant of a/the property or be left in a secure place on the premises.
b. No persons subject to the provisions of this section shall canvass, solicit
or peddle, door to door except during the hours between 10:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m., unless by express invitation of the resident.
c. No person subject to the provisions of this section shall enter or attempt
to enter the house or apartment of any resident of the township without
an express invitation from the occupant of said house or apartment.
§ 4-16.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-16.6
1:170
§ 4-16.7. Exceptions. [Ord. #2222, § VI; Ord. #2676, § 1]
The requirements of this section shall not apply to the following:
§ 4-16.8. Nonsolicitation Sticker. [Ord. #2676, § 1]
d. No person subject to the terms of this section shall have exclusive
rights to any location in the public streets or operate in any congested
area where his operation might impede the public.
e. No person subject to the terms of this section shall make any
solicitation within the township limits where solicitors are notified by
sign that soliciting is prohibited.
f. No person subject to the terms of this section shall litter the streets,
public places or property within the township with any merchandise or
printed materials.
g. No person soliciting or canvassing within the township by the authority
of a permit granted under this section shall be deemed to have
permission or enter upon the traveled portion of any street or public
right of way for purposes of approaching any motor vehicle within said
street or right-of-way, and no soliciting or canvassing may be conducted
of or from persons within motor vehicles traveling or stopped within the
normal and usual travel lanes or streets or public rights of way.
a. Any person engaged in the delivery of goods, wares, or merchandise or
other articles or things in the regular course of business to the premises
of persons ordering or entitled to receive same.
b. Any charitable campaign to be conducted within the township and
approved by the board of commissioners.
c. Any person holding a license, permit or certificate issued by any
department, board, commission or other agency of the county or of this
state to engage in pursuit of his business in the township; provided,
however, that such employee shall carry and display, upon request, such
identification or badge or card issued by his employer.
d. Any nonprofit political organization whose purpose is to actively
support or oppose a particular social, economic, political or legislative
issue.
e. Any person honorably discharged from the military service of the
United States or an exempt fireman of a volunteer fire department
possessing a peddler's license issued in conformity with N.J.S.A. 45:24-9
and 24-10.
f. Any person canvassing or soliciting on behalf of a religious
organization.
§ 4-16.6 GENERAL § 4-16.8
1:171
§ 4-16.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #2222, § VII; Ord. #2676,
§ 1]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not exceeding $200 and in default
of payment thereof may be sentenced to imprisonment in the county jail for
a term not exceeding 30 days. Every day on which such violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 4-17. LIMOUSINES AND LIVERY SERVICE.
§ 4-17.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2690, § 1]
LIMOUSINE — Shall mean and include any automobile or motor car used
in the business of carrying passengers for hire to provide prearranged
passenger transportation at a premium fare on a dedicated, nonscheduled,
charter basis that is not conducted on a regular route and with a seating
capacity in no event of more than 14 passengers, not including the driver,
provided, that such a vehicle shall not have a seating capacity in excess of
four passengers, not including the driver, beyond the maximum passenger
seating capacity of the vehicle at the time of manufacture. Nothing in
this section shall be construed to include taxicabs, hotel buses or buses
employed solely in transporting school children or teachers or autobuses
which are subject to the jurisdiction of the New Jersey Department of
Transportation, or interstate autobuses required by federal or state law or
regulations of the Department of Transportation to carry insurance against
loss from liability imposed by law on account of bodily injury or death.
LIMOUSINE OR LIVERY SERVICE — Shall mean and include the business
of carrying passengers for hire by limousines.
PERSON — Shall mean and include any individual, business entity,
partnership, association, corporation or joint stock company, limited liability
company, their lessees, trustees or receivers appointed by any court
whatsoever.
STREET — Shall mean and include street, avenue, court, park, parkway,
highway, or other public place.
a. Notwithstanding any other part of this section, each resident of the
township may make an independent choice as to whether that resident
chooses to be canvassed or solicited.
b. The township clerk will make available to all residents a sticker which
will make reference to this section that will declare that this resident
has not chosen to be canvassed or solicited.
c. The sticker shall be placed on the premises of the resident in a place
that is visible to the public. Any person, partnership, firm, organization,
or business entity that canvasses or solicits a resident that has a sticker
on display shall be in violation of this section.
§ 4-16.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-17.2
1:172
§ 4-17.2. License Required. [Ord. #2690, § 1]
No person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability
company or other business entity shall operate or conduct the business
of limousine or livery service within the Township of Lyndhurst, without
having first obtained a license for said purpose, in accordance with this
section.
§ 4-17.3. Application Procedure; Information Required. [Ord.
#2690, § 1; Ord. No. 2913-15 § 1]
a. Every owner of a limousine or livery service having a principal place of
business within the Township of Lyndhurst shall make application to the
township clerk, on forms to be provided by the clerk, simultaneously
with the filing of the required insurance certificate and power of
attorney, as provided in N.J.S.A. 48:16-14, evidencing proof of insurance
in the amount of $1,500,000 against loss by reason of the liability
imposed by law upon every limousine owner for damages on account of
bodily injury or death suffered by any person as the result of an
accident occurring by reason of the ownership, maintenance or use of
the limousine upon any public street. Unless such application is
submitted, the clerk shall not accept for filing the certificate of
insurance and power of attorney, and shall not issue a certificate of
compliance as described in N.J.S.A. 48:16-17.
b. No limousine or livery service registered in another state or the District
of Columbia shall conduct wholly intrastate operations on the highways
of this state unless the owner of the limousine has proof of insurance in
the amount of $1,500,000 as provided for in N.J.S.A. 48:16-14 for
limousines registered in this state, and is licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A.
48:16-17 in a municipality in which it has a bona fide registered
business address.
c. No license shall be issued to an applicant who does not have a business
office in the B or M-1 commercial zone district, and who does not have a
minimum of one lawful off-street parking space available for each
limousine on the same lot upon which the business office is located,
when such limousine is not being operated upon the streets. Such
parking space shall not be located in the R-A, R-B, R-C or SHRC
residential zone districts, and must be owned, leased or rented by the
applicant, or used by the applicant with the written authorization or
consent of the owner. Such parking space shall not violate any
provisions or regulations contained in the Township's zoning ordinance,
Section 21-1, et seq. Limousines shall not be parked on the street
except for the pick up or discharge of passengers.
d. Each application shall set forth the following information, and shall be
sworn to or affirmed by the applicant:
1. The year, make, model, vehicle identification number, license plate
number, and color of each vehicle;
§ 4-17.2 GENERAL § 4-17.3
1:173
§ 4-17.4. Fee. [Ord. #2690, § 1]
The application for a license shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of
$25.
§ 4-17.5. Approval of the Board of Commissioners. [Ord. #2690, § 1]
Upon receipt of a completed application, together with payment of the
requisite fee, and filing of the insurance certificate and power of attorney
required under N.J.S.A. 48:16-14 and 16, the clerk shall present the
application for approval of the board of commissioners of the Township of
Lyndhurst at the next regularly scheduled meeting.
§ 4-17.6. Certificate of Compliance. [Ord. #2690, § 1]
Upon approval of the board of commissioners, the clerk shall issue a
certificate of compliance, which shall remain in effect only for the period
that the insurance described in the certificate filed with the clerk remains
in full force and effect, the limousine service license and registration issued
by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission remains valid, and the vehicle
or vehicles covered by said application are operated by duly licensed motor
vehicle operators with appropriate licenses issued by the New Jersey Motor
Vehicle Commission.
2. Name and address of insurance company and policy number;
3. Name and address of each employed driver, and New Jersey
operator's license number;
4. The principal location of each vehicle when not being operated
upon the streets as a limousine, which shall include the following
information:
(a) A description and designation of each parking space and the
property upon which it is located;
(b) Written documentation that the applicant has the right to use
the designated parking space for each limousine, including but
not limited to, a deed, lease, rental or use agreement, or
authorization or consent of the owner of the property;
5. The home and business address of the owner of the vehicle;
6. A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of
a crime, and if the applicant has been convicted of a crime, a
complete statement concerning the dates and disposition thereof.
In case of a corporate or business entity applicant, the statement
shall be completed as to each officer, director and owner of more
than 10% of stock or interest in the corporation or business entity.
§ 4-17.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-17.7
1:174
§ 4-17.7. Issuance of License. [Ord. #2690, § 1]
Upon approval of the board of commissioners, the clerk shall be directed
to issue, in duplicate, a license to operate showing that the owner of
the limousine has complied with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 48:16, which
shall recite the name of the insurance company, the number and date of
expiration of the policy, a description of every limousine insured thereunder
and the registration number of same. The original license shall be retained
within the limousine and available for inspection at all times. The duplicate
license shall be filed with the Motor Vehicle Commission before any such
car is registered as a limousine.
§ 4-17.8. Revocation. [Ord. #2690, § 1]
The approval of the board of commissioners may be revoked, after notice
and hearing, whenever it shall appear that the person to whom the approval
was granted has failed to furnish or keep in force the insurance policy
required by this section, or to comply with the terms or conditions imposed
by the board of commissioners, or any law of this state.
§ 4-17.9. Registration of Limousines Which Do Not Have a Principal
Place of Business in the Township of Lyndhurst. [Ord. #2690, § 1]
The registration of a limousine with the New Jersey Motor Vehicle
Commission may be obtained from the township clerk for all business
entities or residents of the Township of Lyndhurst which do not have the
principal place of business for a limousine or livery service in the township,
but reside or are located in the township; own a limousine which is parked
or stored in the township; and demonstrate the appropriate insurance
requirements for the limousine. The applicant for such registration shall
comply with the requirements set forth in subsection 4-17.3c of this section.
Such registration shall in no way be interpreted as granting permission
to operate a limousine business within the township. The fee for such
registration shall be $25.
§ 4-17.10. Expiration Date. [Ord. #2690, § 1]
All licenses and registrations issued pursuant to this section shall be and
remain valid for a period of one year, commencing on the first day of the
month in which the board of commissioners shall have granted approval.
§ 4-17.11. Restrictions in Residential Zone. [Ord. #2690, § 1]
No more than one vehicle shall be permitted in connection with any
limousine or livery service operated in a residential zone. Such vehicle shall
be parked off street in the driveway of the lot in which the business is
operated in a residential zone. No portion of such vehicle shall extend over
the sidewalk of such lot.
§ 4-17.7 GENERAL § 4-17.12
1:175
§ 4-17.12. Cancellation of Insurance. [Ord. #2690, § 1]
In the event that the clerk is notified that the required insurance for the
limousine vehicle has been cancelled, the license or registration holder shall
be required to pay a fee to the township in the amount of $25 for the
administrative costs in connection with the clerk's notification to the Motor
Vehicle Commission that the insurance has been cancelled.
§ 4-17.13. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #2690, § 1]
Any person who violates any provision of this ordinance shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not in excess of $1,000, or imprisonment for
not more than 90 days, or both.
§ 4-18. DONATION CLOTHING BINS.
§ 4-18.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2684, § 1]
The purpose of this section is to establish regulations for donation clothing
bins, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.60, et seq.
§ 4-18.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2684, § 1]
The following terms in this section shall have the meaning indicated:
SOLICITATION or SOLICIT — Shall mean the request, directly or indirectly,
for money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of any kind
or value. Solicitation shall include, but not be limited to, the use or
employment of canisters, cards, receptacles or similar devices for the
collection of money or other thing of value. A solicitation shall take place
whether or not the person making the solicitation receives any contribution.
§ 4-18.3. Requirements. [Ord. #2684, § 1]
Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no person shall
place, use, or empty a donation clothing bin, for solicitation purposes,
unless all of the following requirements are met:
a. The person has obtained a permit, valid for a twelve-month period of
time, from the Land Use Administrator of the Township of Lyndhurst, in
accordance with the following:
1. In applying for such a permit, the person shall include:
(a) The location where the bin would be situated, as precisely as
possible;
(b) The manner in which the person anticipates any clothing or
other donations collected via the bin would be used, sold, or
dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of collected
donations would be allocated or spent;
§ 4-17.12 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-18.3
1:176
(c) The name, and telephone number of the bona fide office
required pursuant to subsection b of this section, of any entity
which may share or profit from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin; and
(d) Written consent from the property owner to place the bin on
his or her property.
2. The Land Use Administrator shall not grant an application for a
permit to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin if he or she
determines that the placement of the bin could constitute a safety
hazard. Such hazards shall include, but not be limited to, the
placement of a donation clothing bin within 100 yards of any place
which stores large amounts of, or sells, fuel or other flammable
liquids or gases.
3. The Land Use Administrator shall impose a fee for such application,
not to exceed $25, to offset the costs involved in enforcing this
section.
4. An expiring permit for a donation clothing bin may be renewed
upon application for renewal and payment of any fee imposed by
the Land Use Administrator for such renewal, not to exceed $25
annually, to offset the costs involved in enforcing this section. Such
application shall include:
(a) The location where the bin is situated, as precisely as possible,
and, if the person intends to move it, the new location where
the bin would be situated after the renewal is granted and
written consent from the property owner to place the bin on his
or her property;
(b) The manner in which the person has used, sold, or dispersed
any clothing or other donations collected via the bin, the
method by which the proceeds of collected donations have
been allocated or spent, and any changes the person
anticipates it may make in these processes during the period
covered by the renewal; and
(c) The name, and telephone number of the bona fide office
required pursuant to paragraph b of this section, of any entity
which shared or profited from any clothing or other donations
collected via the bin, and of any entities which may do so
during the period covered by the renewal; and
5. The permit number and its date of expiration shall be clearly and
conspicuously displayed on the exterior of the donation clothing
bin, in addition to the information required pursuant to paragraph c
of this section;
b. The person, and any other entity which may share or profit from any
clothing or other donations collected via the bin, maintains a bona fide
§ 4-18.3 GENERAL § 4-18.3
1:177
§ 4-18.4. Investigation for Complaints Relating to Donation
Clothing Bins. [Ord. #2684, § 1]
office where a representative of the person or other entity, respectively,
can be reached at a telephone information line during normal business
hours for the purpose of offering information concerning the person or
other entity. For the purposes of this paragraph, an answering machine
or service unrelated to the person does not constitute a bona fide office;
and
c. The following information is clearly and conspicuously displayed on the
exterior of the donation clothing bin:
1. The name and address of the registered person that owns the bin,
and of any other entity which may share or profit from any clothing
or other donations collected via the bin;
2. The telephone number of the person's bona fide office and, if
applicable, the telephone number of the bona fide office of any
other entity which may share or profit from any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin;
3. In cases when any entity other than the person who owns the bin
may share or profit from any clothing or other donations collected
via the bin, a notice, written in a clear and easily understandable
manner, indicating that clothing or other donations collected via
the bin, their proceeds, or both, may be shared, or given entirely to,
an entity other than the person who owns the bin, and identifying
all such entities which may share or profit from such donations; and
4. A statement, consistent with the information provided to the Land
Use Administrator in the most recent permit or renewal
application, indicating the manner in which the person anticipates
any clothing or other donations collected via the bin would be used,
sold, or dispersed, and the method by which the proceeds of
collected donations would be allocated or spent.
5. A statement that no items other than clothing shall be placed in the
bin.
d. No more than three bins shall be placed on any parcel of property in the
Township.
a. The Land Use Administrator shall receive and investigate, within 30
days, any complaints from the public about the bin. Whenever it
appears to the Land Use Administrator that a person has engaged in, or
is engaging in any act or practice in violation of paragraph b hereof, the
person who placed the bin shall be issued a warning, stating that if the
violation is not rectified or a hearing with the Land Use Administrator is
not requested within 45 days, the bin will be seized or removed at the
expense of the person who placed the bin, and any clothing or other
donations collected via the bin will be sold at public auction or
§ 4-18.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-18.4
1:178
§ 4-18.5. Additional Penalties, Remedies. [Ord. #2684, § 1]
In addition to any other penalties or remedies authorized by the laws of New
Jersey, any person who violates any provision of this section which results
in seizure of the donation clothing bin shall be:
§ 4-19. LICENSING AND USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
§ 4-19.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2777]
The purpose of this section is to establish the administrative requirements
for the general licensing and use of public property.
§ 4-19.2. Legislative Intent. [Ord. #2777]
The purpose of the licenses and permits issued under this section is to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare and provide for the occupancy
and use of public property in the interest of the Township of Lyndhurst and
its citizens.
otherwise disposed of. In addition to any other means used to notify the
person who placed the bin, such warning shall be affixed to the exterior
of the bin itself.
b. In the event that the person who placed the bin does not rectify the
violation or request a hearing within 45 days of the posting of the
warning, the Land Use Administrator may seize the bin, remove it, or
have it removed, at the expense of the person who placed the bin, and
sell at public auction or otherwise dispose of any clothing for other
donations collected via the bin. Any proceeds from the sale of the
donations collected via the bin shall be paid to the chief financial officer
of the Township.
a. Subject to a penalty of up to $20,000 for each violation. The Land Use
Administrator may bring this action in the Municipal Court or Superior
Court as a summary proceeding under the "Penalty Enforcement Law of
1999," P.L. 1999, c. 274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.), and any penalty
monies collected shall be paid to the chief financial officer of the
Township; and
b. Deemed ineligible to place, use, or employ a donation clothing bin for
solicitation purposes pursuant to subsection 4-18.3 hereof. A person
disqualified from placing, using, or employing a donation clothing bin
by violating the provisions of this section may apply to the Land Use
Administrator to have that person's eligibility restored. The Land Use
Administrator may restore the eligibility of a person who:
1. Acts within the public interest; and
2. Demonstrates that he or she made a good faith effort to comply
with the provisions of this section and all other applicable laws and
regulations, or had no fraudulent intentions.
§ 4-18.4 GENERAL § 4-19.3
1:179
§ 4-19.3. License of Use of Township Real Property. [Ord. #2777;
Ord. #2787-11; Ord. #2797-11]
§ 4-19.4. Clerk to Issue Licenses. [Ord. #2777]
Upon granting of a license by the board of commissioners and receiving the
license fee, the clerk shall prepare, sign, and issue a license containing the
purpose of the license, the name and address of the licensee, the date of
expiration and the official township seal.
a. The board of commissioners may grant the use of any township real
property for a term not to exceed 20 years only after approval by
resolution of an application properly made.
b. The license applicant must be the adjoining property owner or legal
leaseholder or tenant of the adjoining property. If the licensee is a
leaseholder or tenant, permission must be obtained from the owner of
the property in writing.
c. The real property comprising the licensed area shall not be needed for
public use.
d. A licensee must permit the township to perform a police criminal check
before the application may be considered by the board of
commissioners.
e. The licensee may place removable furniture and structures in the
licensed area. The proposed structure shall be either freestanding or an
attachment to the main structure and temporary in nature. Footings
and foundations shall be provided only as required by the building code.
f. The fee for a license shall be paid annually, with the fee established by
calculating the square foot area of the licensed area multiplied by the
square foot tax ratable for the adjoining land (without structures).
g. At the end of the term of the license, or any renewal term thereof, the
licensee shall remove all structures and facilities from the licensed area
and return the licensed area to the same or similar condition in which it
existed at the beginning of the term of the license.
h. The licensee shall be responsible for all improvements that the licensee
or township deems necessary or appropriate in connection with the
license, including but not limited to streets, roadways, grading,
pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks, street lighting, shade trees, traffic
control devices, municipal signage, surveyor's monuments, water
mains, culverts, storm sewers or other means of sewage disposal,
drainage structures, erosion control and sedimentation control devices,
public improvements of open space, on-site improvements,
landscaping, and public works and facilities. The licensee shall be
required to furnish performance and maintenance guarantees as
required by the township engineer, pursuant to the provisions of the
Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 et seq.
§ 4-19.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-19.5
1:180
§ 4-19.5. Term of Licenses; Renewal; Fees. [Ord. #2777]
§ 4-19.6. Transferability of Licenses. [Ord. #2777]
No license issued under this section may be transferred or assigned, and
no license is valid as to any person other than the person named thereon,
unless such transfer or assignment is approved by resolution of the board
of commissioners.
§ 4-19.7. Posting of License. [Ord. #2777]
Unless otherwise provided by this section, each licensee licensed under this
section shall post the license on the primary business premises to which the
license relates prominently in public view.
§ 4-19.8. Refund Where License Is Not Issued. [Ord. #2777]
If an applicant for a license has paid the required license fee but no license
is issued, the board of commissioners shall cause the fee to be returned
forthwith upon request by the applicant for the refund.
§ 4-19.9. Clerk to Keep License Register. [Ord. #2777]
The clerk of the Township of Lyndhurst shall keep a register of all licenses
and permits issued under this section that includes the name and address
a. Unless otherwise provided by this section or an ordinance of the
township, the term of each license issued under this section shall not to
exceed 20 years with the renewal date on December 31 of the year of its
first issue. Unless otherwise provided by this section or an ordinance of
the township, no license fee shall be prorated.
b. Notwithstanding the term of the license, each license must be renewed
annually by submitting proof of continued ownership, leasehold or
tenancy of the adjoining property and insurance as required in this
section.
c. Each license issued under this section shall contain on its face its dates
of issue and expiration.
d. A licensee seeking an annual renewal of an existing license issued
under this section shall apply for renewal no less than 30 days before
the license expiration date.
e. A licensee seeking to continue a license issued under this section
beyond the term stated shall apply no less than 60 days before the
license expiration date.
f. The fee for a license shall be paid annually, with the fee established by
calculating the square foot area of the licensed area multiplied times
the square foot tax ratable for the adjoining land (without structures).
§ 4-19.5 GENERAL § 4-19.9
1:181
of the licensee; the purpose of the license, the number of the license; the
amount paid therefor; and the license expiration date.
§ 4-19.10. Insurance Required. [Ord. #2777]
The licensee shall comply with the following insurance requirements:
§ 4-19.11. Authority to Deny Issuance of Licenses. [Ord. #2777]
a. At all times maintain workers' compensation insurance, comprehensive
general liability insurance with minimum limits of $1,000,000 for any
one person and $1,000,000 for any one accident, and public property
damage insurance with a minimum limit of $500,000 for any one
accident.
b. File with the township clerk a certificate signed by a qualified agent of
an insurance company evidencing the existence of valid and effective
policies of workers' compensation and comprehensive general liability
and property damage insurance naming the township and its officers
and employees as an additional named insured on the liability policy at
least to the limits required by paragraph a of this subsection, the limits
of each policy, the policy number, the name of the insurer, the effective
date and expiration date of each policy, and a copy of an endorsement
placed on each policy requiring 10 days' notice by mail to the township
clerk before the insurer may cancel the policy for any reason.
a. Board of commissioners may deny an application for a license under
this section upon a determination that:
1. The applicant has failed to supply any of the information required
on the application;
2. The applicant has failed to obtain the required insurance;
3. The applicant has failed to pay the required license fee;
4. The applicant has failed to obtain approval from the appropriate
township or other governmental agency or authority to permit the
business operation or activity to be conducted at the property,
including but not limited to, the health department, construction
department, or police department.
5. The applicant is not qualified by experience, training, or education
to engage in the activity authorized by the license; or the applicant
has been convicted of a criminal or disorderly persons offense and
would create a danger to the public health, safety or welfare of the
Township of Lyndhurst if the applicant were to engage in such
offensive conduct after the license were issued.
b. If the board of commissioners denies a license application under this
section, the township clerk shall notify the applicant in writing stating
the specific grounds for the denial. The applicant may thereafter appeal
§ 4-19.9 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-19.11
1:182
§ 4-19.12. Legal Description of Licensed Area. [Ord. #2777; Ord.
#2797-11]
The licensee shall submit a plot plan or survey and legal description in
connection therewith, prepared by a New Jersey licensed surveyor,
identifying the proposed licensed area with the application for license.
§ 4-19.13. Limitations on Purpose and Use of a License. [Ord.
#2777]
§ 4-19.14. Prohibitions on Purpose and Use of a License. [Ord.
#2777]
The following are prohibited within the licensed area:
the denial of the application at a hearing. The hearing officer shall be
an attorney-at-law licensed to practice law in the State of New Jersey
and shall not be a member of the board of commissioners.
a. The uses to be permitted in the licensed area by the licensee and
occupants of the licensed property is limited to legal activities and
those set forth in the resolution of approval issued by the board of
commissioners after reviewing the application for the license.
b. The authority delegated by the license shall be subject to the township's
police power, the provisions of the license application, the resolution of
approval of the license application and the other provisions of this
section, and shall not be construed in derogation of the constitutional or
statutory rights of any person.
a. Animals, unless used for the purpose of assisting the visually or aurally
impaired;
b. Vending, advertising, entertainment, special events or other
commercial activities unless conducted within an enclosure;
c. Parades;
d. Unicycles, bicycles and other types of cycles, skateboards, roller skates,
in-line skates and shopping carts;
e. Sleeping or camping;
f. Littering;
g. Sexually oriented businesses as described in the township ordinances;
h. Installation of signs in violation of the township ordinances;
i. Conducting any activity prohibited by law;
j. Feeding birds; and/or
k. Solicitation, as prohibited in township ordinances.
§ 4-19.11 GENERAL § 4-19.15
1:183
§ 4-19.15. Revocation of Licenses. [Ord. #2777]
a. In addition to any other provisions of this section or other ordinances of
the township, the board of commissioners may suspend or revoke a
license or permit issued under this section if:
1. The licensee fails to meet the qualifications required of an
applicant;
2. The licensee violates any provision of this section or other
ordinance of the township governing the activities permitted by the
license;
3. The licensee obtained the license by fraud or misrepresentation; or
4. The licensee is convicted of a criminal or disorderly persons offense
and would create a danger to the public health, safety and welfare
if the licensee were to engage in such offensive conduct after the
license was issued.
b. If the board of commissioners finds one of the grounds in paragraph a of
this subsection or any other ground for suspension or revocation in the
township ordinances, the board of commissioners shall determine
whether to revoke the license for the remainder of its term or suspend it
for any shorter period according to severity of the disqualification, its
effect on public health, safety, and welfare, and the time during which
the disqualification can be remedied, if at all.
c. Before the hearing required by paragraph d of this subsection, the
board of commissioners may suspend a license for up to 30 days, if the
board of commissioners determines that the suspension is in the
interest of public health, safety and welfare. The board of
commissioners may include in the temporary suspension reasonable
orders or conditions with which the licensee shall comply to protect any
work in progress and the public health and safety. Any breach of such
condition or orders shall be an independent ground for suspension of
revocation of the license.
d. Except for such emergency suspension authorized by paragraph c of
this subsection, no such suspension or revocation is final until the
licensee has been given the opportunity for a hearing to contest the
suspension or revocation.
e. If, after a hearing, the suspension or revocation is upheld, the board of
commissioners may include reasonable orders or conditions with which
the person whose license has been suspended or revoked shall comply
to protect any work in progress and the public health, safety, and
welfare.
f. No person whose license is revoked under this section may receive a
refund of any part of the license fee paid for the license.
§ 4-19.15 LYNDHURST CODE § 4-19.15
1:184
§ 4-19.16. Motorized Vehicles Prohibited. [Ord. #2777]
The surface of all areas designated in the license shall be limited to the
use of pedestrians. Except for wheelchairs used to transport the physically
disabled, emergency vehicles, or maintenance vehicles, no motorized
vehicle shall be permitted in the area designated in the license.
§ 4-19.17. Revocation Not Exclusive Penalty. [Ord. #2777]
Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the board of
commissioners from imposing other penalties authorized by section,
chapter or other ordinance of the township, including filing a complaint
in the municipal court for a violation of this section, chapter or other
ordinance of the township.
§ 4-19.18. Additional Regulations. [Ord. #2777]
The board of commissioners may issue rules and regulations deemed
necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this section,
including, without limitation, prescribing forms for license applications,
information that applicants and licensees shall provide, and books and
records that licensees shall keep.
§ 4-19.19. Penalties for Violation of this Section. [Ord. #2777]
Chapter 5
g. No person who has had a license suspended or revoked under this
section shall be entitled to obtain the same or any similar license under
this section during the period of suspension or revocation, either in the
person's own name or as a principal in another business that applies for
a license.
a. The Lyndhurst Police Department shall have the authority to police and
issue citations for violations of any provisions of this section.
b. It shall be unlawful to occupy public property without a license to do so,
and it shall be unlawful to occupy or use a licensed property in manner
that is different from the license issued or in a manner contrary to the
ordinances of the township or the criminal code of the State of New
Jersey.
c. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall upon
conviction thereof, be subject to the following penalties:
1. First violation — A fine of $250;
2. Second violation — A fine of $500, or up to 30 days imprisonment,
or both;
3. Third and each subsequent violation — A fine of $1,000, or up to 60
days imprisonment, or both.
§ 4-19.15 GENERAL § 4-19.19
1:185
PERSONNEL POLICIES, PRACTICES AND REGULATIONS
§ 5-1. TITLE. [Ord. #1467; Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
This chapter shall be known as the "Personnel Policy, Practices and
Regulations of the Township of Lyndhurst."
§ 5-2. DECLARATION OF POLICY. [Ord. #1467; Ord. #2271, § I; Ord.
#2306, § XIV; Ord. #2510, § I]
It is the policy of the Township of Lyndhurst to treat employees and
prospective employees in a manner consistent with all applicable
employment laws and regulations. The personnel policies and procedures of
the township shall apply to all employees, volunteers, (elected or) appointed
officials and independent contractors. In the event there is a conflict
between these rules and any collective bargaining agreement, personnel
services contract, or federal or state law, including the attorney general's
guidelines with respect to police department personnel the terms and
conditions of that contract or law shall prevail. In all other cases, these
policies and procedures shall prevail.
The commissioner and all managerial/supervisory personnel are authorized
and responsible for personnel policies and procedures. The Township of
Lyndhurst has appointed the personnel administrator to assist the
commissioner implement personnel practices. The commissioner and
personnel administrator shall also have access to the township attorney
appointed by the board of commissioners for guidance in personnel matters.
As a general principle, the township has a "no tolerance" policy towards
workplace wrongdoing. Township officials, employees and independent
contractors are to report anything perceived to be improper. The township
believes strongly in an Open Door Policy and encourages employees to
talk with their supervisor, department head, commissioner, the personnel
administrator or the township attorney concerning any problem.
The Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual adopted by the board of
commissioners is intended to provide guidelines covering public service by
township employees and is not a contract. This manual contains many, but
not necessarily all of the rules, regulations, and conditions of employment
for township personnel. The provisions of this manual may be amended and
supplemented from time to time without notice and at the sole discretion of
the township.
Note: To the maximum extent permitted by law, the employment practices of
the township shall operate under the legal doctrine known as "employment
at will." Within federal and state law and any applicable bargaining unit
agreement, the township shall have the right to terminate an employee at
any time and for any reason, with or without notice, except the township
shall comply with all federal and state legal requirements requiring notice
and an opportunity to be heard in the event of discipline or dismissal.
§ 4-19.19 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-3
1:186
§ 5-3. APPLICABILITY. [Ord. #2920-15 §§ 1, 2]
This chapter is applicable to and establishes the salaries, benefits, and
other terms and conditions of employment provided to township employees
hereinafter described. However, this chapter shall only be applicable to the
extent any provision of Chapter 5 of the Township of Lyndhurst Code is not
included in a duly executed employment agreement, defined as a collective
bargaining agreement or individual employment agreement applicable to
managerial and executive employees or police superior officers. Where
a conflict or inconsistent language exists between this chapter and the
collective bargaining agreement or individual employment agreement the
provisions of the pertinent agreement shall control and be in force unless no
provision of a specific benefit, term or condition of employment is included
in the subject agreement whereupon this chapter shall control and be in
force. Should a provision of an executed employment agreement provide
a benefit, term or condition of employment which is less than, or more
restrictive than, a similar provision included in this chapter then in that
event the agreement shall also control.
§ 5-4. (RESERVED)
§ 5-5. EMPLOYMENT.
§ 5-5.1. Appointments. [Ord. #1467; Ord. #1842; Ord. #2271, § I;
Ord. #2510, § I]
All employees, officers and department heads of the township shall be
appointed and promoted by the director of the department to which the
office or position is assigned except where the power to appoint has been
retained by the board of commissioners, or delegated to a subordinate
board by the board of commissioners or by operation of law. No person shall
be employed under the provisions of this chapter unless there shall exist
an office or position created by statute or ordinance, and further provided
that the necessary budget appropriation for the office or positions has been
adopted by the board of commissioners in the municipal budget and is
specified in the salary ordinance.
§ 5-5.2. Application for Employment. [Ord. #1467; Ord. #1842; Ord.
#2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
An applicant for employment by the township shall be approved by the
board of commissioners. The application shall be filed with the personnel
administrator. The personnel administrator shall retain the original
application and forward the copy to the appropriate appointing authority.
The application shall become a part of the personnel file of the applicant
upon employment by the township. The application is a confidential
document and will not be available to anyone who is not directly involved in
the hiring process.
§ 5-3 GENERAL § 5-5.3
1:187
§ 5-5.3. Physical Examination. [Ord. #1467; Ord. #1483; Ord.
#1842; Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2306, § XII; Ord. #2510, § I]
The commissioner may require applicants, prior to employment, to
successfully pass a physical examination consistent with the Americans with
Disabilities Act to assure that the work required by the position will not
cause injury to the employee or co-employees and that the person is fit
to meet the requirements of the position. The commissioner may require
periodic physical examinations to determine the employee's continued
ability to perform the duties of the position. All physical examinations must
be performed by a physician chosen by the township at the expense of the
township. All medical records of employees and prospective employees are
confidential and are to be maintained by the personnel administrator title
separate from the employee's official personnel file.
§ 5-5.4. Notification of Job Openings. [Ord. #1842; Ord. #2196; Ord.
#2244, § I; Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2306, § XV; Ord. #2510, § I; Ord.
#2601, § 1]
Whenever a new position is created or whenever a vacancy occurs which
necessitates the hiring of a new employee the commissioner of the
department shall supply the township personnel administrator with a
written job description. The township personnel administrator shall
advertise the job opening at least once on the official website of the
township. The personnel administrator shall also have the authority to
advertise the job opening in any other periodical or media he or she believes
is most likely to attract qualified applicants. The appointment shall be made
to the best qualified applicant. Photocopies of all job applications shall be
kept on file with the township personnel administrator.
In making decisions with respect to employment matters, the township:
§ 5-5.5. Criminal History Record Background Checks for All
Prospective Employees. [Ord. #2409, § I; Ord. #2510, § I; Ord.
#2843-12]
a. Shall not discriminate against an otherwise qualified individual with a
disability.
b. Shall make reasonable accommodations to allow an otherwise qualified
individual to perform the essential function of the job.
c. Shall not make improper inquiry regarding medical matters during the
application process.
Applications from candidates from diverse backgrounds are
encouraged and any advertisement shall prominently state that the
township of Lyndhurst is an equal opportunity employer.
a. For purposes of this section, a criminal history record background
check means a determination of whether a person has a criminal record
by cross-referencing that person's name and fingerprints with those on
§ 5-5.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-5.5
1:188
file with the New Jersey State Bureau of Identification in the Division of
State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation and/or any other
relevant state and/or federal agency.
b. The township requires that, as a condition of obtaining employment
with the township, as set forth below, all prospective employees,
including, but not limited to, permanent, provisional, temporary and
seasonal employees, shall submit to being fingerprinted in accordance
with applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations, as a
condition of employment with the township.
c. As a further condition of employment with the township, all prospective
employees, including, but not limited to, permanent, provisional,
temporary and seasonal employees, shall authorize the township, by its
duly authorized representative, to exchange fingerprint data with and
receive criminal history record information from the New Jersey State
Bureau of Identification in the Division of State Police and the Federal
Bureau of Investigation and/or any other federal and/or state agency.
d. In order to obtain criminal history record information pursuant to this
section and N.J.S.A. 40:48-1.4, the township shall submit the fingerprint
data for prospective employees to the New Jersey State Bureau of
Identification in the Division of State Police. The State Bureau shall
receive all criminal history record information from the Federal Bureau
of Investigation and shall disseminate that information to the township.
e. The township shall conduct a criminal history record background check
of a prospective employee only upon receipt of the written
authorization and consent to the criminal history background check
from the prospective employee. A form for the authorization and
consent to said background check shall be provided to each prospective
employee upon a conditional offer of employment. Failure to submit a
fully signed and witnessed written authorization and consent form shall
be grounds to rescind a conditional offer of employment.
f. The township shall bear the costs associated with conducting criminal
history record background checks.
g. An individual shall be disqualified from serving as an employee of the
township if that prospective employee's criminal history record
background check reveals a record of conviction of any of the following
crimes and/or offenses:
1. In New Jersey, any crime or disorderly persons offense or petty
disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, including, but not limited to
those crimes, disorderly persons offenses and petty disorderly
offenses set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et seq.; N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et
seq.; N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1 et seq.; N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et seq.; and/or,
N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq.;
§ 5-5.5 GENERAL § 5-5.5
1:189
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, including, but not
limited to those crimes and disorderly persons offenses set
forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:24-1 et seq.;
(c) Involving arson, burglary or theft as set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:17-1 et seq.; N.J.S.A. 2C:18-1 et seq., and/or N.J.S.A. 2C:
20-1 et seq.;
(d) Involving offenses against public administration, perjury and
other falsification in official matters, obstructing governmental
operations, misconduct in office and/or abuse of office as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:27-1 et seq; N.J.S.A. 2C:28-1 et seq.; N.J.S.A.
2C:29-1 et seq.; and/or, N.J.S.A. 2C:30-1 et seq.;
(e) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 35 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statues; and/or,
(f) Involving operation of a motor vehicle while intoxicated in
violation of Chapter 4 of Title 39 of the New Jersey Statutes.
2. In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes, disorderly persons
offenses and/or petty disorderly persons offenses described herein.
h. All prospective employees, upon receiving a conditional offer of
employment, shall submit their name, address, fingerprints and written
consent to the township for the criminal history record background
check to be performed. All conditional offers of employment shall be
specifically subject to the prospective employee passing the criminal
history record background check, along with any other requirements as
provided by law and/or requested by the township.
i. Access to criminal history record background information of
prospective employees obtained under this section for employment
purposes is restricted to authorized personnel of the township on a
need to know basis, as may be authorized by federal and/or state
statute, rule or regulation, executive order, administrative code, this
section and/or resolution regarding obtaining and dissemination of
criminal history record background information. Said employees are
the township administrator, township personnel officer, police chief,
mayor, applicable township commissioner, township attorney and
township labor counsel and those other employees designated in
writing by the mayor.
j. Criminal history record background information shall not be
disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the
records for authorized purposes. Use of this record shall be limited
solely to the authorized purpose for which it was given and it shall not
be disseminated to any unauthorized persons. Said records are not
public records under the Open Public Records Act.
§ 5-5.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-5.6
1:190
§ 5-5.6. Interviews. [Ord. #2510, § I]
The commissioner or department head will coordinate the interview process
including the scheduling of applicants, development of interview questions
and standards to measure candidate responses. All questions must be in
accordance with the New Jersey Division of Civil Rights Guidelines for
Preemployment Inquiries. Reasonable accommodations must be made for
disabled applicants.
§ 5-5.7. Job Offers. [Ord. #2510, § I]
The final decision will be made by the director of the department after
all references and other information has been verified. Every effort shall
be made to offer reasonable accommodations pursuant to Americans with
Disabilities Act. The employment offer must be made in a letter to the
candidate outlining all terms and conditions of the offer. The letter will also
establish a deadline for acceptance.
§ 5-5.8. Acceptance and Rejections. [Ord. #2510, § I]
If the first offer is rejected, the director of the department will decide to
hire another candidate or reopen the position. Once a candidate accepts the
employment offer, all other candidates will be notified in writing that they
were not accepted for the position.
§ 5-5.9. Record Retention. [Ord. #2510, § I]
All applications, notes made during interviews and reference checks, job
offers and other documents created during hiring process must be returned
to the personnel administrator. Documents related to the successful
candidate will be placed in the employee's official personnel file except
medical records including physical examinations must be maintained in a
separate file. All records documents related to other candidates must be
retained for at least one year. Records and documents created during the
hiring process are confidential and must be retained in a locked cabinet.
§ 5-6. INITIAL EMPLOYMENT PROCEDURE AND TENURE.
§ 5-6.1. Orientation. [Ord. #2510, § I]
All new regular full-time and regular part-time employees will be scheduled
to meet with personnel administrator and department head on their first
day for a general orientation. Copies of all forms and acknowledgments
must be returned to the personnel administrator for inclusion in the
employee's official personnel file. The orientation will include:
a. A tour of the appropriate facilities to acquaint the new employee with
overall operations as they relate to the specific position;
b. The completion of all pertinent personnel, payroll, insurance and
pension forms;
§ 5-5.6 GENERAL § 5-6.1
1:191
§ 5-6.2. Probationary Period. [Ord. #2510, § I]
Except where state requirements direct otherwise, new employee shall be
hired subject to an initial employment period of three months.
During this initial employment period, the new employee will be provided
with training and guidance from the supervisor. At the end of the initial
employment period, the supervisor will conduct an employee evaluation
- see Performance Evaluation Procedure.16 New employees may be
discharged at any time during this period if the director of the department
concludes that the employee is not progressing or performing satisfactorily.
Under appropriate circumstances, the director may extend the initial
employment period.
§ 5-6.3. Tenure. [Ord. #1467; Ord. #1843; Ord. #1988, § I; Ord.
#2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I; Ord. #2548, § 4]
Any new employee of the township (i.e., any employee hired after the
adoption of Ordinance No. 2548, codified herein,17) shall neither be entitled
to nor eligible for tenure of office or position during his or her employment
unless the office or position shall have a term of office fixed by statute or
ordinance. An employee currently in the service of the township shall be
granted tenure only if the employee has been employed by the township for
a period of two years or longer. Thereafter, no current employee who has
been employed by the township for a period of two years or longer shall be
removed from office or position except for cause resulting in disciplinary
proceedings. This paragraph shall not apply to the township clerk, tax
collector, tax assessor, and municipal court judge or to any township
employee, officer and/or official whose tenure is regulated by state statute.
§ 5-6.4. Job Description Policy. [Ord. #2510, § I]
A job description including qualifications shall be maintained for each
position. All job descriptions must be approved by the commissioner. The
personnel administrator will make copies available upon request.
c. A review of the Employee Handbook and acknowledgment of receipt;
d. A review of the Personnel Policies and Procedures Manual if the
employee is a manager or supervisor and acknowledgment of receipt;
e. The Employee Complaint Policy letter and acknowledgment;
f. A safety orientation and acknowledgment; and
g. Arrangements for the new employee to complete required PEOSHA
safety training.
16.Editor's Note: The Performance Evaluation Procedure, referred to herein, may be found in
Section 5-48.
17.Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 2548, codified herein, was adopted December 13, 2005.
§ 5-6.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-7
1:192
§ 5-7. RETIREMENT. [Ord. #1467; Ord. #1843; Ord. #2271, § I; Ord.
#2385, § I; Ord. #2408, § I; Ord. #2471; Ord. #2510 § I; Ord. #2655,
§ 1]
a. Employees subject to the provisions of this chapter may be required to
retire at age 70. Employees performing duties involving manual
physical exertion or fatigue shall be required upon attaining the age of
65 to submit to semiannual physical examination by a physician to
determine the employee's ability to perform duties assigned to the
employee, the physician to be one of a list to be designated by the board
of commissioners. An employee failing to pass the physical examination
may be retired by the department director of inability to perform the
duties assigned to the employee.
b. Anyone retiring shall give written notice of said retirement to the
personnel administrator in the budget year prior to said retirement.
Failure to do so will mean that the retiree will not be paid for his or her
compensable accumulated sick days and/or vacation days until the
budget year following the retirement year.
c. Continued Medical Benefits.
1. Any full time employee who (a) has been employed by the township
for 25 consecutive years; (b) has attained the age of 55 at the time
of his or her retirement; and (c) has been receiving medical
benefits during said period of employment shall continue to receive
single coverage medical benefits only from the township until
becoming eligible to receive Medicare benefits, and upon
retirement of employees who have worked at least 25 years in the
township who have reached the age of 55 or older at the time of
their retirement, said employees' spouse will be entitled to receive
medical benefits until such time as the employee's spouse becomes
eligible for Social Security Benefits provided that the spouse is not
eligible to receive health benefits from any other source (i.e.,
employee's future employer, spouse's employer).
2. Any appointed stipend professional as defined in the salary
ordinance who (a) has been on the salaried payroll for 20
consecutive years; (b) has attained the age of 55 at the time of his
or her separation from the township; and (c) has been receiving
medical benefits during said period of appointment, shall continue
to receive single coverage medical benefits during said period of
appointment, shall continue to receive single coverage medical
benefits only from the date of his or her separation from the
township until becoming eligible to receive Medicare benefits.
d. Retired Officers Prohibited from Returning to Active Duty. Once a police
officer of any rank has elected to take his or her retirement and to
accept any of the benefits, including but not limited to, terminal leave,
accumulated sick time or personal days, then and in that event, said
§ 5-7 GENERAL § 5-7
1:193
officer cannot change his or her mind and seek to return to active duty
nor can said officer withdraw his or her application for retirement.
e. Positions Eligible for the Defined Contribution Retirement Program.
1. Purpose. It is the purpose of this paragraph e to implement the
provisions of Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1, et
seq.), which requires the governing body of a municipality to adopt
an ordinance to determine the positions that are substantially
similar in nature to the advice and consent of the Senate for
appointments by the Governor of the state, pursuant to guidelines
or policies that shall be established by the Local Finance Board in
the Department of Community Affairs, and for which officials
appointed to such positions shall be eligible for and shall
participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement Program
(DCRP), subject to the provisions of law.
2. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed
to be eligible for and shall participate in the DCRP:
(a) Positions which are appointed under the authority of state
statute or township ordinance, including the following:
coordinator of general services, purchasing associate,
planning and development associate, special projects
associate, and environmental coordinator;
(b) Department heads and confidential aides;
(c) Township attorney;
(d) Township engineer;
(e) Municipal court judge;
(f) Municipal prosecutor and public defender.
3. Individuals serving the following positions are exempt from DCRP
membership pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2:
(a) Certified health officer;
(b) Tax collector;
(c) Chief financial officer;
(d) Construction code official;
(e) Qualified purchasing agent;
(f) Tax assessor;
(g) Municipal planner;
(h) Registered municipal clerk;
§ 5-7 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-7
1:194
§ 5-8. SALARY AND BENEFITS. [Ord. #1619; Ord. #1843; Ord.
#1875, § I; Ord. #1914, § I; Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2457, § I; Ord.
#2469, § I; Ord. #2471; Ord. #2510, § I; Ord. #2889-13, § 6; Ord.
#2910-14 §§ 1 — 3]
(i) Licensed uniform subcode inspector;
(j) Public works superintendent.
4. This paragraph shall be implemented, construed and subject to the
aforesaid Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007 (N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1, et
seq.), as amended from time to time, and any regulations or
guidance documents from the Local Finance Board or the Division
of Pensions and Benefits.
a. The board of commissioners shall determine the salary of every
employee subject to the provisions of this chapter by the adoption of a
salary ordinance annually. The board of commissioners shall fix the
method of payment of salary in the salary ordinance to be adopted.
Employees performing duties involving manual physical exertion or
fatigue shall be compensated at the rate of 1 1/2 times the hourly rate
of pay for services performed beyond 40 hours in the work week unless
the employee performing additional hours is covered under a collective
bargaining agreement which specifies a different method of payment of
overtime hours which may include payment for overtime beyond the
required hours of weekly employment, except that employment
required on Sundays or legal federal holidays shall be compensated at
two times the hourly rate of pay. Employees performing duties not
involving manual physical exertion or fatigue may in the discretion of
the director of the department be compensated by being granted time
off from normal working hours on the basis of 1 1/2 times the overtime
hours worked in excess of 40 hours in the work week, or be paid on the
basis set forth above. Said compensation time must be utilized within
six months of earning the compensatory time off. This section will be
effective January 1, 2016. [Ord. #2910-14 § 1]
b. Notwithstanding paragraph a above, the township clerk, construction
official, building inspector, health officer, tax collector, tax assessor,
chief of police, court administrator, chemical control inspector,
superintendent of DPW, DPW office manager, DPW recycling
coordinator, grants administrator and superintendent of parks and
public property shall not be entitled to compensation for performing
services beyond the required hours of weekly employment as holders of
these offices and positions and designated as supervisors and
administrators of the township.
c. The annual salary shall be considered part of this personnel chapter.
[Ord. #2910-14 § 2]
d. Longevity benefits will be provided as follows: 1% of base wages shall
be paid after four years of completed service and an additional one-
§ 5-7 GENERAL § 5-8
1:195
quarter of 1% shall be paid for each additional year thereafter.
Longevity benefits shall be awarded on an employment anniversary
basis and shall not be made until the last salary payment of the fiscal
year. The maximum percentage to be received by any employee,
effective January 1, 2015 shall be 6%. [Ord. #2889-13 § 6]
e. Health Care Benefits.
1. Dual Coverage. Employees who have dependent family members
also employed by the township will receive paid health care
benefits for such employee or the dependent employee, not both.
However, the employee who is not receiving paid health care
benefits shall be reimbursed by the township on an annual basis for
coordinated benefits, co-payments and deductible charges incurred
by said employee up to $1,000. In addition, the township will pay
said employee an annual amount equal to 20% of the premium
savings realized for not paying health care benefits for the
employee and dependent annually, not to exceed $3,000 per year.
Said amount will be paid semiannually. The employee or dependent
employee, as the case may be, may individually re-enroll into the
township's health plan coverage if the status of dual enrollment
changes and eliminates coverage for either employee.
2. Optional Waiver of Health Benefits. An employee shall have the
option to waive health care benefits from the township providing
that proof of coverage from another carrier is submitted to the
township and the employee signs a waiver form. If an employee
waives health care benefits, he or she will receive an annual
amount equal to 20% of the premium savings realized by the
township for not paying for the coverage, not to exceed $3,000 per
year. Said amount will be paid semiannually. The employee shall
have the right to re-enroll into the township's health plan in
January or July of any year during open enrollment.
f. Salary Payment Withholding.
1. New Employees. Effective July 1, 2002 any new full-time employee
hired will be paid the pay period following one full week of
employment.
2. Employees as of the Date of this Paragraph. All persons employed
with the township as of the effective date of this paragraph shall
continue to receive salary payments as they are currently being
made. However, in the event that an employee's accrued sick time
and accrued vacation time together falls below ten days, the
employee shall be given the following notice:
NOTICE TO EMPLOYEE: The total number of sick days and
vacation days that you have accrued is less than 10 days.
PLEASE TAKE NOTICE that in the event that an employee's
accrued sick time and vacation time together falls below five days,
§ 5-8 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-8
1:196
§ 5-9. ABOLITION OF OFFICE OR POSITION. [Ord. #1467; Ord.
#1842; Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I; Ord. #2895-13]
The board of commissioners may abolish an office or position and reduce
the number of personnel employed by the township for reasons of economy
or efficiency. In the event that the office or position of an employee with
tenure is abolished, said employee may be reassigned to a position which
said employee is qualified to perform. If an employee is not qualified to
perform an available position, then said employee may be dismissed from
the service of the township, but the employee shall have the right to
be reinstated in the first available position that said employee shall be
qualified to perform, subject to the requirements of an applicant for original
employment.
The following positions have been abolished as of January 1, 2014. The
positions of general services coordinator, health administrator, deputy
registrar, information technology, part-time clerical in the assessor's office,
garbage inspector, chemical inspector, parking enforcement officer/bailiff,
special officer/maintenance, assistant DPW superintendent, youth center
chaperone and purchasing agent are not re-authorized to be paid. The
purchasing agent position is included in a shared services agreement,
incorporating the provisions of a licensed "qualified purchasing agent"
(QPA).
§ 5-10. HOURS OF EMPLOYMENT. [Ord. #1467; Ord. #1842; Ord.
#2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I; Ord. #2600, § 1; Ord. #2902-14; Ord.
#2910-14 § 5; Ord. No. 2923-15]
the employee's salary will be withheld for one pay period. The
withheld salary shall be released to the employee upon termination
of employment with the Township. The personnel administrator
or payroll processor shall require such employee(s) to execute a
voucher so as to be compensated for any time worked when such
time balance falls below five days.
The township shall withhold one pay period in the event that an
employee's accrued sick time and vacation time together falls
below five days. The withheld salary shall be released to the
employee upon termination of employment.
a. Employees of the township shall be required to work five days a week
from Monday to Friday. All full-time employees of the township
governed by this chapter shall work between 32 1/2 and 40 hours per
week, which hours of employment shall be determined by departmental
directive when not specified in the salary ordinance. The commissioner
of each department shall schedule the lunch period for each regular
full-time employee of the department by a written directive filed with
the personnel administrator and distributed to each employee of the
department. The commissioner of any department may delegate this
task to a supervisor. An employee's lunch period shall not exceed one
§ 5-8 GENERAL § 5-10
1:197
§ 5-11. HOLIDAYS. [Ord. #1643; Ord. #1842; Ord. #2271, § I; Ord.
#2510, § I]
hour and shall begin no earlier than 11:00 a.m. and shall begin no later
than 2:00 p.m. Regular part-time employees, as defined in § 5-10e, and
all other employees who are not regular full-time employees shall not
receive a paid lunch hour. Further the work schedule shall be arranged
in a manner that will require every office of the township to be opened
to the public continuously from 9:00 a.m. or earlier until 4:30 p.m.,
except the finance office and municipal court may close at 4:00 p.m. to
close the daily financial records. It is recognized that the construction
code office may need to be open at 8:00 a.m., subject to the discretion
of the department commissioner, notwithstanding this the construction
code office must be open for business until 4:30 p.m. daily.
b. All employees shall "punch in" when coming on duty including after
lunch and when called back for overtime; and "punch out" when going
off duty including before lunch and after overtime. (Lunch-time and
overtime requirements will not apply to superintendents.) Employees
will not be entitled to accrue "comp time" for working through lunch
hour.
c. All time cards of nonsupervisory personnel shall be approved by their
supervisors and all supervisors' and administrators' cards shall be
approved by the commissioner of the department. Supervisors and
administrators are listed in Section 5-8, paragraph b.
d. No employee may "punch in" or "punch out" another employee's time
card.
e. Those employees identified in subsection 5-6.1 as regular part-time
employees shall work a minimum of 25 hours per week for a minimum
of 12 consecutive months on the payroll. Consecutive months on the
payroll shall not include time on unemployment compensation or a
leave of absence for any reason greater than five work days. Upon
completion of 13 consecutive months of employment regular part-time
employees shall receive one paid sick day per month up to a maximum
accumulation of 24 paid sick days and three paid days of vacation to be
taken within the respective calendar year. The amount of vacation days
shall increase to five days after 60 consecutive months of employment
and shall not accumulate from year to year and shall be used within the
calendar year or lost. Any regular part-time employee on the payroll for
less than 60 consecutive months who is absent from work for greater
than three consecutive work days shall submit to their supervisor a
physician's certification as to the medical necessity for the absence.
Any regular part-time employee who has been on the payroll for greater
than 60 consecutive months shall submit said physician's certification
after six consecutive days being absent. All other part-time employees
shall be considered hourly and all regular and hourly part-time
employees shall not be paid more than $20 per hour. [Ord. #2910-14
§ 5]
§ 5-10 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-11
1:198
§ 5-12. VACATIONS. [Ord. #1619; Ord. #1842; Ord. #1914, § I; Ord.
#2271, § I; Ord. #2471; Ord. #2510, § I]
a. Employees subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be entitled to
12 paid holidays per year. The following official holidays with pay shall
be observed by the township: New Year's Day, President's Day, Good
Friday, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day,
General Election Day, Veterans' Day, Thanksgiving Day, the Friday after
Thanksgiving Day (in lieu of Lincoln's Birthday) and Christmas Day.
b. The board of commissioners may by resolution grant such additional
holidays as deemed appropriate and may substitute any of the days in
the year in place of official holidays above listed. In the event that a
holiday occurs on Sunday, it shall be observed on the following Monday.
In the event that a holiday occurs on a Saturday, it shall be observed on
the preceding Friday except when New Year's Day occurs on a Saturday
it shall be observed the following Monday. If an employee is required to
perform services for the township on a holiday, the employee shall be
compensated as set forth in Section 5-8. A holiday occurring during an
employee's vacation shall entitle the employee to an additional vacation
day. An employee on sick leave shall not have a holiday charged against
the sick leave period.
a. Employees subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be entitled to
an annual vacation, which annual vacation shall be determined on an
anniversary basis from the commencement of the employment on the
basis of the following schedule:
1. Six months to less than one year of service - five working days.
2. One year to less than five years of service - ten working days
(inclusive of the five days received for service between six months
and one year above).
3. Five years to less than 10 years of service - 15 working days.
4. 11th year - 16 working days.
5. 12th year - 17 working days.
6. 13th year - 18 working days.
7. 14th year - 19 working days.
8. Fifteen years to less than 20 years - 20 working days.
9. Twenty years to less than 25 years - 25 working days.
10. Twenty-five years or more - 30 working days.
b. Employees, subject to the approval of the director of the department,
may take vacation leave from time to time during the fiscal year in half
days, provided that the director of the department shall advise the
§ 5-11 GENERAL § 5-12
1:199
§ 5-13. SICK LEAVE. [Ord. #1603; Ord. #1843; Ord. #2271, § I; Ord.
#2471; Ord. #2510, § I; Ord. #2796-11; Ord. #2844-12]
personnel administrator by written memorandum of said vacation
arrangement prior to the employee taking said vacation. Employees
shall be required to take the annual vacation allotted to each employee
during the fiscal year; except that for extenuating circumstances a
maximum of five days may be carried over with consent of the board of
commissioners.
c. The director of each department shall annually arrange a vacation
schedule for each employee of the department. The director shall file
vacation schedule with the personnel administrator. The director may
alter the vacation schedule during the fiscal year, if necessary for the
efficient operation of the department. The director shall file the altered
vacation schedule with the municipal administrator. An employee,
subject to the provision of this chapter, shall be entitled to credit for all
full-time service in computing the years of service, if said service had
been interrupted.
a. Sick leave with pay may be granted to a township employee who,
because of sickness or injury, becomes disabled to a degree that makes
it impossible for him or her to perform the duties of his or her position
or who is quarantined by a physician because he or she has been
exposed to a contagious disease.
b. (1) An employee shall be entitled to one day of sick pay leave for every
month of service. Unused sick leave shall be cumulative during an
employee's period of service. Any sick leave accumulated on or after
January 1, 2012 will not be compensable at retirement or for any other
reason (death, termination (voluntary or involuntary), resignation,
layoff, etc.). (2) An employee absent on sick leave for three consecutive
working days shall be required to file a certificate from the employee's
physician with the personnel administrator before being allowed to
return to work. An employee absent on sick leave for a period of ten
consecutive working days shall submit to an examination by a physician
designated by the board of commissioners at the expense of the
township. (3) An employee shall be entitled to credit for unused sick
leave time for prior service, if the employee's service to the township
has been interrupted. (4) Any sick leave accumulated on or after
January 1, 2012 will not be compensable at retirement or for any other
reason (death, termination (voluntary or involuntary), resignation,
layoff, etc.). Sick leave accumulated before January 1, 2012 shall be
compensable at retirement only at one-half the daily rate of pay the
employee was earning as of December 31, 2011. However, under no
circumstances shall any employee be paid more than $15,000 for
accumulated sick leave at time of retirement. There shall be no
payment for any accumulated sick leave time due to the employee's
death, layoff, termination (voluntary or involuntary) resignation, etc.
§ 5-12 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-13
1:200
§ 5-14. LEAVE OF ABSENCE AS A RESULT OF INJURY IN LINE OF
DUTY. [Ord. #1467; Ord. #1842; Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I;
Ord. #2796]
§ 5-15. FAMILY LEAVE REGULATION. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510,
§ I]
c. While on sick and/or injury leave from the township, no township
employee shall be employed or engaged in any outside work or
employment. Violation of this provision shall result in disciplinary
action up to and including termination.
d. Annual buy back plan: Twenty allotted sick days each year may be
bought out at the contract rate of pay for the corresponding year
providing none of the earned 12 days are used, also that 10 days remain
banked. The township has the option to buy back up to 20 days sick time
provided that 50 days remain banked.
a. When a full-time township employee is injured in the line of duty, the
board of commissioners shall, pursuant to the R.S. 40A:9-7, pass a
resolution giving the employee up to one year's leave of absence with
pay. When such action is taken, the employee shall not be charged any
sick time for time lost due to such particular injury.
b. Prior to the passage of the resolution referred to in paragraph a hereof,
a contract shall be executed between the employee and the township
setting forth that the employee shall reimburse the township from
monies he or she may receive as workman's compensation, temporary
benefits, or from possible legal settlement from, or judgment against
the person or persons responsible for the injury.
c. While out on a leave of absence as a result of an injury in the line of
duty, no township employee shall be employed or engaged in any
outside work or employment. Violation of this provision shall result in
disciplinary action up to and including termination.
a. Provisions. Employees who have been employed for at least 12
continuous months and have worked at least 1,000 base hours,
excluding overtime, in the preceding twelve-month period, are eligible
for family and medical leave with no loss of position or pay rate.
However, employees on such leave will not continue to accrue vacation
days, sick days, personal days or longevity. Employees taking family or
medical leave under this section continue to be eligible for paid health
insurance coverage under the township policy. Upon written notice,
eligible employees are entitled to a family or medical leave for up to 12
weeks to care for a newly born or adopted child or a seriously ill
immediate family member or for the employee's own serious health
condition that makes the employee unable to perform the functions of
the employee's position. Eligible employees who take leave under this
policy must use all accrued available vacation and personal days during
the leave. The use of accrued time will not extend the leave period.
§ 5-13 GENERAL § 5-15
1:201
After exhausting accrued time, the employee will no longer be paid for
the remainder of the leave. The period of leave must be supported by
a physician's certificate. An extension past 12 weeks can be requested,
but medical verification of the need must be submitted prior to the
expiration of the leave. The township reserves the right to deny any
request for extended leave. Additional information concerning the
Family Leave Policy and eligibility requirements are available from the
personnel administrator.
b. Procedure.
1. The employee shall be required to submit to the personnel
administrator a written notice that leave will be taken, indicating
the amount of leave to be taken and the reason for the leave. If the
leave involves illness, a medical certification shall be submitted
along with the leave notice. Said certification shall include:
(a) The date on which the serious health condition commenced;
(b) The probable duration of the condition;
(c) The appropriate medical facts within the knowledge of the
health care provider regarding the condition;
(d) Where applicable, a statement that the employee is needed to
care for a covered relation and the amount of time needed to
care for said person.
c. Intermittent or reduced medical leave certifications shall state:
1. The dates on which treatment is expected to be given and the
duration of such treatment;
2. A statement of the medical necessity for the intermittent or
reduced leave schedule and expected duration;
3. Where applicable, a statement that an intermittent or reduced
leave schedule is necessary to care for a covered relation or will
assist in the recovery and the expected duration and schedule of
the leave.
d. Recertification. The township may require subsequent recertification
on a reasonable basis. Failure to provide any certification is grounds for
denial of the leave. If the township has doubt as to the validity of the
certification provided, the township may require, at its expense, that
the employee obtain a second opinion from a health care provider
selected by the township. If the second opinion differs from the first, a
third mutually agreeable health care provider shall be selected, whose
opinion shall be binding.
e. Notice of Leave. If the leave is foreseeable, the employee shall be
required to provide at least 30 days' notice prior to leave beginning.
§ 5-15 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-15
1:202
§ 5-16. MILITARY LEAVE AND JURY DUTY. [Ord. #1467; Ord.
#1842; Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
f. Use of Accrued Time. The township has the option of requiring that an
employee utilize accrued vacation, sick and personal leave time for
leaves under the FMLA.
a. Any full-time employee who is a member of the National Guard, Naval
Militia, Air National Guard, or a reserve component of any of the Armed
Forces of the United States and is required to engage in field training
shall be granted a military leave of absence with pay for the period of
such training as is authorized by law. The paid leave of absence shall be
in addition to his vacation.
b. When an employee, after one year's service with the Township, has
been called to active duty or inducted into the military or naval forces of
the United States, he shall automatically be granted an indefinite leave
of absence without pay for the duration of such active military service.
Each employee may be reinstated without loss of privileges or seniority
provided he reports for duty with the township within 60 days following
his honorable discharge from military service.
c. An employee required to render service as a juror in either state or
federal courts shall be entitled to be absent from employment on the
days that said employee is required to serve and shall be paid his salary
for said absent days provided that monies received for said service by
the employee shall be deducted from the regular salary received from
the Township.
d. During the period of active military duty, the employee shall be paid the
difference between military salary and the employee's regular salary for
a period not to exceed one year. The employee shall be paid the
employee's regular salary provided that the employee shall reimburse
the Township the full amount of the employee's military salary unless
the employee's military salary exceeds the employee's regular
Township salary. [Amended 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2996-18]
e. Employees on active service shall elect to receive military health care
benefits and shall not continue to receive paid health insurance
coverage during the one-year period. The employee shall submit proof
of military health care benefits and coverage to the Township and shall
execute a waiver form. The employee will receive an annual amount
equal to 20% of the premium savings realized by the Township for not
paying for the coverage, not to exceed $3,000 for the year. If there is a
gap in coverage between the employee being honorably discharged
from military service and reporting for duty with the Township, the
employee may continue coverage for themselves or their dependents
under the Township of Lyndhurst group plan by taking advantage of the
COBRA provision. [Added 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2996-18]
§ 5-15 GENERAL § 5-16
1:203
§ 5-17. LEAVE BECAUSE OF DEATH IN IMMEDIATE FAMILY. [Ord.
#1467; Ord. #1842; Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
In the event of death of a spouse or children, the employee shall be entitled
to seven days leave which shall commence with the day of death. In the
event of death of parents, brothers or sisters of the employee or spouse,
the employee shall be entitled to three days leave. In the event of a death
of grandparents of the employee or spouse, the employee shall be entitled
to one day leave to attend the funeral services. In the event of a death of
a family member of the employee or spouse not provided for above, the
employee shall be entitled to one day leave.
§ 5-18. LEAVE WITHOUT PAY. [Ord. #1467; Ord. #1842; Ord.
#2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
Leave without pay shall be granted to an employee only upon request. It
shall be granted only when the employee has used his accumulated sick
leave in the case of illness, or his vacation leave if leave without pay is
requested for reasons other than illness. Written request for leave without
pay must be initiated by the employee, favorably endorsed by the director
of the department and approved by the board of commissioners before
becoming effective. Such leave, except for military leave without pay, shall
not be approved for a period longer than six months at one time. The board
of commissioners may extend such leave for an additional six months or any
portion thereof.
A request for any type of leave except sick leave or death leave, shall be
made on a form prescribed by the personnel administrator. Such request,
whenever possible, shall be made far enough in advance to permit approval,
and, at the same time, to permit coverage for the particular employment
so that municipal services shall not suffer. In the case of sick leave, the
employee shall notify his department supervisor immediately if he is unable
to report for work.
§ 5-19. PERSONAL DAYS. [Ord. #1842; Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2436,
§ I; Ord. #2510, § I]
Each employee shall be entitled to six personal days off per fiscal year with
pay after one full year of employment provided that no employee shall take
a personal day on the day before or the day after any vacation or any holiday
as set forth in this chapter and further provided that the employee shall give
24 hours' notice prior to taking any personal day. Personal days cannot be
carried over to next fiscal year.
§ 5-20. SEXUAL HARASSMENT. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
f. Members of the state-administered retirement systems (PERS and
PFRS) will continue accruing service and salary credit in the system
during the one-year period. [Added 6-12-2018 by Ord. No. 2996-18]
§ 5-16 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-20
1:204
§ 5-21. DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY.
Part I. Introduction.
a. As a part of the Anti-Harassment Policy, the Township of Lyndhurst also
strictly prohibits sexual harassment including, but not limited to:
1. Making unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors a
condition of employment;
2. Making submission to or rejection of such conduct the basis for
employment decisions affecting the employee;
3. Creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment
by such conduct;
4. Making unwelcome, offensive remarks or engaging in physical
contact with a subordinate or fellow employee that would not have
been made but for the employee's sex, or which is sexually oriented
to the extent that it would not occur but for the fact of the
employee's gender; or
5. Harassment based solely on gender, which creates a hostile and
offensive work environment.
b. Sexual harassment may take different forms. One specific form is a
demand for sexual favors. Other forms of harassment include, but are
not limited to:
1. Sexual innuendoes, suggestive comments, jokes of a sexual nature,
sexual propositions or threats;
2. Suggestive objects or pictures, graphic commentaries, e-mails,
suggestive or insulting sounds, leering, whistling, obscene
gestures;
3. Unwanted physical contact, including touching, pinching, brushing
the body, pushing; or
4. Nonsexual conduct such as intimidation and hostility based solely
upon gender.
c. Employees who feel they have been subject to sexual harassment must
report the harassment to their supervisor, or if they prefer to the
department head, commissioner, personnel administrator title or the
township attorney. See Employee Complaint Policy.18
18.Editor's Note: The Employee Complaint Policy, referred to herein may be found in Section
5-37.
§ 5-20 GENERAL § 5-21.1
1:205
§ 5-21.1. Statement of Intent. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
In keeping with the township's philosophy of maintaining the highest
standards of professionalism in government, the township believes that
it is in the best interest of its employees and the public in general to
publicly acknowledge and state its position in support of an alcohol-free and
drug-free workplace environment. The use of alcohol and drugs can create
serious and debilitating effects on an employee in the performance of his/
her duties with direct correlation in serving the needs of the public.
§ 5-21.2. Statement of Policy. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
The board of commissioners approves and adopts the following regulations
regarding alcohol, narcotic drugs and/or other controlled dangerous
substances:
§ 5-21.3. Nature, Frequency, and Type of Drug Testing to Be
Instituted. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
a. No alcoholic beverages, narcotic drugs and/or other controlled
dangerous substances shall be brought onto, consumed, distributed,
dispensed or manufactured within the confines of any of the township's
municipal buildings, including its parks and recreational facilities.
b. The consumption and/or use of alcoholic beverages, narcotic drugs or
any other controlled dangerous substances by any employee of the
township during either regular or overtime hours and lunch hours is
strictly forbidden.
c. No alcoholic beverages, narcotic drugs and/or other controlled
dangerous substances shall be carried, transported, consumed within
any vehicle, truck or on any equipment under the jurisdiction of the
township.
d. The operation and/or maintenance of any vehicles and/or equipment by
any employee who may be under the influence of alcohol, narcotic
drugs and/or other controlled dangerous substances to any degree
whatsoever is expressly forbidden. This prohibition covers any
employee who may report to work in an intoxicated fashion or is found
to be under the influence of narcotic drugs and/or any other controlled
dangerous substances. The operation and use of vehicles and
equipment includes but shall not be limited to any automobiles, trucks
of whatever size or character, snowplow and spreader equipment,
chainsaws, power tools, lawn mowers, recycling equipment and any
other equipment used and operated by the department of public works
or parks departments.
a. The Township of Lyndhurst plan includes the following types of drug
testing: (1) Applicant testing; (2) Random testing of those employees in
sensitive positions that have been designated as testing designated
positions; (3) Reasonable suspicion testing; (4) Accident or unsafe
§ 5-21.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-21.3
1:206
§ 5-21.4. Drugs for Which Individuals Are Tested. [Ord. #2271, § I;
Ord. #2510, § I]
The Township of Lyndhurst will test for the following drugs: marijuana,
cocaine, amphetamines, opiates and phencyclidine (PCP), as well as alcohol.
§ 5-21.5. Scope. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
This order shall be effective immediately for all Township of Lyndhurst
employees.
§ 5-21.6. Union Cooperation. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
The active participation and support of labor organizations can contribute
to the success of this program. The board of commissioners will seek
ways in which recognized bargaining unit representatives might assist
in program implementation, such as in acquainting employees with
rehabilitation facilities and by enhancing employee confidence in the
program. The board of commissioners will continue to observe agreements
already reached, and will include union representatives in general
orientation programs.
Part II. Definitions.
§ 5-21.7. Terms Defined. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
APPLICANT — Shall mean any individual tentatively selected:
EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM (EAP) — Shall mean the Township
of Lyndhurst based counseling program that offers assessment, short-term
counseling, and referral services to employees for a wide range of drug,
alcohol, and mental health problems, and monitors the progress of
employees while in treatment.
EMPLOYEES IN SENSITIVE POSITIONS — Shall mean:
practice testing; (5) Voluntary testing, and (6) Testing as part of or as a
follow-up to counseling or rehabilitation.
b. The frequency of testing, random testing, voluntary testing, and follow
up testing is specified in Part XV, Part XI, subsection 5-21.47, and Part
VII, subsection 5-21.26 respectively. The board of commissioners
reserves the right to increase or decrease the frequency of testing
based on the Township of Lyndhurst's mission, need, availability of
resources, and experience in the program, consistent with the duty to
achieve a drug-free workplace under the executive order.
a. For employment with the Township of Lyndhurst; or
For a testing designated position, and who has not, immediately prior
to the selection, been subject to random testing.
b.
§ 5-21.3 GENERAL § 5-21.7
1:207
EMPLOYEES' ASSISTANCE PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR — Shall mean
the individual designated by the board of commissioners to be responsible
for ensuring the development, implementation and review of the township
EAP.
ILLEGAL DRUGS — Shall mean a controlled substance included in Schedule
I or II, as defined by section 802(6) of Title 21 of the United States Code,
the possession of which is unlawful under Chapter 13 of that Title. The term
"illegal drugs" does not mean the use of a controlled substance pursuant to
a valid prescription or other uses authorized by law. For the purposes of this
section, illegal drugs shall include alcohol.
MEDICAL REVIEW OFFICER — Shall mean the individual responsible for
receiving laboratory results generated from the Township of Lyndhurst
drug-free workplace program who is a licensed physician with knowledge of
substance abuse disorders and the appropriate medical training to interpret
and evaluate all positive test results together with an individual's medical
history and any other relevant biomedical information.
RANDOM TESTING — Shall mean a system of drug testing imposed without
individualized suspicion that a particular individual is using illegal drugs,
and may either be:
SUPERVISOR — Shall mean an employee having authority to hire, direct,
assign, promote, reward, transfer, furlough, layoff, recall, suspend,
discipline, or remove other employees, to adjust their grievances, or to
effectively recommend such action, if the exercise of the authority is not
merely routine or clerical in nature, but requires the consistent exercise of
independent judgment. 5 U.S.C. § 7103 (a) (10).
Employees in positions designated by the board of commissioners as
special sensitive, critical sensitive, or noncritical sensitive under
Chapter 7631 of the Federal Personnel manual, or employees in
positions designated by the board of commissioners as sensitive in
accordance with Executive Order No. 10450, as amended;
a.
Employees granted access to classified information or who may be
granted access to classified information pursuant to a determination
of trustworthiness by the board of commissioners under Section 4 of
Executive Order No. 12356;
b.
c. Law enforcement officers;
Other positions that the board of commissioners determines involve law
enforcement, the protection of life and property, public health or safety,
or other functions requiring a high degree of trust and confidence.
d.
Uniform-unannounced testing of designated testing employees
occupying a specified area, element or position; or
a.
A statistically random sampling of such employees based on a neutral
criterion, such as social security numbers.
b.
§ 5-21.7 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-21.7
1:208
TESTING DESIGNATED POSITIONS (TDPs) — Shall mean employment
positions within the Township of Lyndhurst which have been designated for
random testing under subsection 5-21.33 of this plan.
VERIFIED POSITIVE TEST RESULT — Shall mean a test result that was
positive on an initial FDA-approved immunoassay test, confirmed by a gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry assay (or other confirmatory tests
approved by the Department of Health and Human Services), and reviewed
and verified by the medical review officer in accordance with this plan and
the Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug Testing Programs.
Part III. Employee Assistance Programs.
§ 5-21.8. Function. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
The Township of Lyndhurst's EAP plays an important role in preventing and
resolving employee alcohol and drug use by: demonstrating the township's
commitment to eliminating alcohol and illegal drug use; providing
employees an opportunity, with appropriate assistance, to discontinue their
alcohol or drug use; providing educational materials to supervisors and
employees on drug use issues; assisting supervisors in confronting
employees who have performance and/or conduct problems and making
referrals to appropriate treatment and rehabilitative facilities; and followup
with individuals during the rehabilitation period to track their progress
and encourage successful completion of the program. The EAP, however,
shall not be involved in the collection of urine samples or the initial
reporting of test results. Specifically, the EAP shall:
§ 5-21.9. Referral and Availability. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
Any employee found to be using alcohol or drugs shall be referred to the
EAP. The EAP shall be administered separately from the testing program,
and shall be available to all employees without regard to a finding of drug
use. The EAP shall provide counseling or rehabilitation for all referrals, as
well as education and training regarding alcohol and illegal drug use. The
EAP is available not only to township employees, but, when feasible, to the
a. Provide counseling and assistance to employees who self-refer for
treatment or whose alcohol or drug tests have been verified positive,
and monitor employees' progress through treatment and rehabilitation;
b. Provide needed education and training to all levels of the township on
types and effects of alcohol and drugs, symptoms of drug use and its
impact on performance and conduct, relationship of the EAP to drug
testing, and related treatment, rehabilitation, and confidentiality
issues;
c. Ensure that confidentiality of test results and related medical treatment
and rehabilitation records is maintained in accordance with Part XIV.
§ 5-21.7 GENERAL § 5-21.9
1:209
families of employees with drug problems, and to employees with family
members who have drug problems.
In the event that the employee is not satisfied with the program of treatment
or rehabilitation, such employee may seek review of prior completion of
the program. The decision of the EAP administrator shall be final and shall
not be subject to further administrative review. Regardless of the treatment
program chosen, the employee remains responsible for successful
completion of the treatment, and assertions that the counselor failed to
consider one or more of the factors in subsection 5-21.20e in making a
referral shall not constitute either an excuse for continuing to use illegal
drugs or a defense to disciplinary action if the employee does not complete
treatment.
§ 5-21.10. Leave Allowance. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
Employees shall be allowed up to one hour (or more as necessitated by
travel time) of excused absence for each counseling session, up to a
maximum of four hours, during the assessment/referral phase of
rehabilitation. Absences during duty hours for rehabilitation treatment
must be charged to the appropriate leave category in accordance with law
and leave regulations.
§ 5-21.11. Records and Confidentiality. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord.
#2510, § I]
All EAP operations shall be confidential in accordance with Part XIV of this
plan relating to records and confidentiality.
§ 5-21.12. Structure. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
The personnel administrator shall be responsible for oversight and
implementation of the township EAP, and will provide, with the support of
the board of commissioners, high level direction and promotion of the EAP.
Part IV. Supervisory Training.
§ 5-21.13. Objectives. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § 1]
As supervisors have a key role in establishing and monitoring an alcohol
and drug-free workplace, the Township of Lyndhurst shall provide training
to assist supervisors in recognizing and addressing illegal drug use by
township employees. The purpose of supervisory training is to understand:
a. Agency policies relevant to work performance problems, alcohol or
drug use, and the township EAP;
b. The responsibilities of offering EAP services;
§ 5-21.9 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-21.13
1:210
§ 5-21.14. Implementation. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
The personnel administrator shall be responsible for implementing
supervisory training, and shall develop a training package to ensure that all
employees and supervisors are fully informed of the township's Alcohol and
Drug-Free Workplace Plan.
§ 5-21.15. Training Package. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
Supervisory training shall be required of all supervisors and may be
presented as a separate course, or be included as part of an ongoing
supervisory training program. Training shall be provided as soon as possible
after a person assumes supervisory responsibility. Training courses should
include:
c. How employee performance and behavioral changes should be
recognized and documented;
d. The roles of the medical review officer, medical staff, supervisors,
personnel, and EAP personnel;
e. The ways to use the township EAP;
f. How the EAP is linked to the performance appraisal and the disciplinary
process; and
g. The process of reintegrating employees into the workplace.
a. Overall agency policy;
b. The prevalence of various employee problems with respect to drugs and
alcohol;
c. The EAP approach to handling problems including the supervisors role
and relationship to EAP;
d. How to recognize employees with possible problems;
e. Documentation of employee performance or behavior;
f. Skills in confronting employees with possible problems;
g. Agency procedures for referring employees to EAP;
h. Disciplinary action, and removals from sensitive positions as required
by Section 5 (c) of the Executive Order;
i. Reintegration of employees into the workforce; and
j. Written materials which the supervisor can use at the work site.
Part V. Employee Education.
§ 5-21.13 GENERAL § 5-21.16
1:211
§ 5-21.16. Objectives. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
The EAP administrator shall offer alcohol and drug education to all township
employees. Drug education should include education and training to all
levels of the Township of Lyndhurst on:
§ 5-21.17. Means of Education. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
Drug education activities may include:
§ 5-21.18. Alcohol and Drug Program Coordinator. [Ord. #2271, § I;
Ord. #2510, § I]
The Township of Lyndhurst shall have an alcohol and drug program
coordinator assigned to carry out the purposes of this plan. The alcohol and
drug program coordinator shall be responsible for implementing, directing,
administering, and managing the alcohol and drug program within the
township. The drug program coordinator shall serve as the principal contact
with the laboratory and for collection activities in assuring the effective
operation of the testing portion of the program. In carrying out his or her
responsibilities, the alcohol and drug program coordinator shall, among
other duties:
a. Types and effects of drugs;
b. Symptoms of alcohol and drug use, and the effects on performance and
conduct;
c. The relationship of the EAP to drug testing; and
d. Other relevant treatment, rehabilitation, and confidentiality issues.
a. Distribution of written materials;
b. Videotapes;
c. Lunchtime employee forums; and
d. Employee alcohol and drug awareness days.
Part VI. Special Duties and Responsibilities.
a. Arrange for all testing authorized under this order;
b. Ensure that all employees subject to random testing receive individual
notice as described in subsection 5-21.26 of this plan, prior to
implementation of the program, and that such employees return a
signed acknowledgment of receipt form;
c. Document, through written inspection reports, all results of laboratory
inspections conducted;
§ 5-21.16 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-21.18
1:212
§ 5-21.19. Employee Assistance Program Administrator. [Ord.
#2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
The EAP coordinator shall:
d. Coordinate with and report to the board of commissioners on alcohol
and drug program coordinator activities and findings that may affect
the reliability or accuracy of laboratory results;
e. In coordination with the EAP administrator, publicize and disseminate
drug program educational materials, and oversee training and
education sessions regarding drug use and rehabilitation; and
f. Coordinate all alcohol and drug program coordinator duties in field
offices wherever possible to conserve resources and to efficiently and
speedily accomplish reliable and accurate testing objectives.
a. Implement and operate the EAP within the township component
assigned to the coordinator;
b. Provide counseling and treatment services to all employees referred to
the EAP by their supervisors or on self-referral, and otherwise offer
employees the opportunity for counseling and rehabilitation;
c. Coordinate with the board of commissioners, the medical review officer
and supervisors, as appropriate;
d. Work with the drug program coordinator to provide educational
materials and training to managers, supervisors, and employees on
illegal drugs in the workplace;
e. Assist supervisors with performance and/or personnel problems that
may be related to illegal drug use;
f. Monitor the progress of referred employees during and after the
rehabilitation period, and provide feedback to supervisors in
accordance with 42 CFR Part 2, Confidentiality of Alcohol and Drug
Abuse Patient Records;
g. Ensure that the training is provided to assist supervisors in the
recognition and documentation of facts and circumstances that support
a reasonable suspicion that an employee may be using illegal drugs;
h. Maintain a list of rehabilitation or treatment organizations which
provide counseling and rehabilitative programs, and include the
following information on each organization:
1. Name, address, and phone number;
2. Types of services provided;
3. Hours of operation, including emergency hours;
4. The contact person's name and phone number;
§ 5-21.18 GENERAL § 5-21.19
1:213
§ 5-21.20. Employee Assistance Counselors. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord.
#2510, § I]
The employee assistance counselors shall:
§ 5-21.21. Medical Review Officer. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
The Township of Lyndhurst shall have a medical review officer assigned to
carry out the purposes of this order. The medical review officer shall, among
other duties:
5. Fee structure, including insurance coverage;
6. Client specialization; and
7. Other pertinent information; and
i. Periodically visit rehabilitative or treatment organizations to meet
administrative and staff members, tour the site, and ascertain the
experience, certification and educational level of staff, and the
organization's policy concerning progress reports on clients and posttreatment
follow-up.
a. Serve as the initial point of contact for employees who ask or are
referred for counseling;
b. Be familiar with all applicable law and regulation, including drug
treatment and rehabilitation insurance coverage available to employees
through the Federal Employee Health Benefits Program;
c. Meet the qualifications as determined by the EAP administrator and be
trained in counseling employees in the occupational setting, and in
identifying drug use;
d. Document and sign the treatment plan prescribed for all employees
referred for treatment, after obtaining the employee's signature on this
document; and
e. In making referrals, consider the:
1. Nature and severity of the problem;
2. Location of the treatment;
3. Cost of the treatment;
4. Intensity of the treatment environment;
5. Availability of the inpatient/outpatient care;
6. Other special needs, such as transportation and child care; and
7. The preferences of the employee.
a. Receive all laboratory test results;
§ 5-21.19 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-21.21
1:214
§ 5-21.22. Supervisors. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
Supervisors will be trained to recognize and address alcohol and illegal
drug use by employees, and will be provided information regarding referral
of employees to the EAP, procedures and requirements for drug testing,
and behavioral patterns that give rise to a reasonable suspicion that an
employee may be using illegal drugs. Except as modified by the board
of commissioners to suit specific program responsibilities, first-line
supervisors shall:
§ 5-21.23. Implementation. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
Each department shall implement the drug-free workplace plan and ensure
that the plan is efficiently and effectively accomplished in accordance with
this order and all other applicable regulation.
b. Assure that an individual who has tested positive has been afforded an
opportunity to discuss the test result in accordance with subsection
5-21.52 of this plan;
c. Consistent with confidentiality requirements, refer written
determinations regarding all verified positive test results to the EAP
administrator, including a positive drug test result form indicating that
the positive result has been verified, together with all the relevant
documentation and a summary of findings;
d. Confirm with the appropriate personnel official whether an individual
who has been tentatively selected for employment with the township
has obtained a verified positive test result;
e. Coordinate with and report to the board of commissioners on all
activities and findings on a regular basis.
a. Attend training sessions on alcohol and illegal drug use in the
workplace;
b. Initiate a drug test based on reasonable suspicion as described in Part
X;
c. Refer employees to the EAP for assistance in obtaining counseling and
rehabilitation, upon a finding of illegal drug use;
d. Initiate appropriate disciplinary action upon a finding of illegal drug
use; and
e. In conjunction with personnel specialists, assist higher-level
supervisors and the EAP administrator in evaluating employee
performance and/or personnel problems that may be related to illegal
drug use.
A higher-level supervisor shall review and concur, in advance, with all
tests ordered on the basis of a reasonable suspicion in accordance with
Part X.
§ 5-21.21 GENERAL § 5-21.24
1:215
§ 5-21.24. Government Contractors. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510,
§ I]
Wherever existing facilities are inadequate to implement this order, the
medical review officer shall ensure that contract laboratories chosen to
perform the drug screening tests are duly certified according to subpart C
of the Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug Testing Programs
and that any other contracts to implement this order conform to the
technical specifications of the Mandatory Guidelines.
Part VII. Notice.
§ 5-21.25. General Notice. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
A general notice from the board of commissioners announcing the testing
program, as required by the Executive Order Section 4(a), will be provided
to all employees no later than 60 days prior to the implementation date of
the plan.
a. The purpose of the alcohol and drug-free workplace plan;
b. That the plan will include both voluntary and mandatory testing;
c. That those who hold positions selected for random testing will also
receive an individual notice, prior to the commencement of the testing,
indicating that their position has been designated a testing designated
position;
d. The availability and procedures necessary to obtain counseling and
rehabilitation through the EAP;
e. The circumstances under which testing may occur;
f. That opportunity will be afforded to submit medical documentation of
lawful use of an otherwise illegal drug;
g. That the laboratory assessment is a series of tests which are highly
accurate and reliable, and that, as an added safeguard, laboratory
results are reviewed by the medical review officer;
h. That positive test results verified by the medical review officer may only
be disclosed to the employee, the appropriate EAP administrator, the
appropriate management officials necessary to process an adverse
action against the employee, or a court of law or administrative tribunal
in any adverse personnel action;
i. That all medical and rehabilitation records in an EAP will be deemed
confidential "patient" records and may not be disclosed without the
prior written consent of the patient, and authorizing court order, or
otherwise as permitted by federal law implemented at 42 CFR Part 2.
§ 5-21.24 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-21.26
1:216
§ 5-21.26. Individual Notice. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
In addition to the information provided in the general practice, an individual
notice will be distributed to all employees in testing designated positions
explaining:
§ 5-21.27. Signed Acknowledgment. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510,
§ I]
Each employee in a testing designated position shall be asked to
acknowledge in writing that the employee has received and read the notice
which states that the employee's position has been designated for random
drug testing, and that refusal to submit to testing shall result in initiation
of disciplinary action, up to and including dismissal. If the employee refuses
to sign the acknowledgment, the employee's supervisor shall note on the
acknowledgment form that the employee received the notice. This
acknowledgment, which is advisory only, shall be centrally collected for
easy retrieval by the supervisor. An employee's failure to sign the notice
shall not preclude testing of that employee, or otherwise affect the
implementation of this order since the general sixty-day notice will
previously have notified all agency employees of the requirement to be
drug-free.
§ 5-21.28. Administrative Relief. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
If an employee believes his or her position has been wrongly designated
a testing designated position, that employee may file an administrative
appeal to the board of commissioners which has authority to remove the
employee from the testing designated position list. The appeal must be
submitted by the employee, in writing, to the board of commissioners within
15 days of notification, setting forth all relevant information. The board
of commissioners shall review the appeal based upon the criteria applied
in designating that employee's position as a testing designated position.
The board of commissioner's decision is final and is not subject to further
administrative review.
Part VIII. Finding of Alcohol or Drug Use and Disciplinary
Consequences.
a. That the employee's position has been designated a "testing designated
position";
b. That the employee will have the opportunity to voluntarily admit to
being a user of illegal drugs and to receive counseling or rehabilitation;
c. That the employee's position will be subject to random testing no
sooner that 30 days following the notice.
§ 5-21.26 GENERAL § 5-21.29
1:217
§ 5-21.29. Determination. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
An employee may be found to use alcohol or illegal drugs on the basis of any
appropriate evidence including, but not limited to:
§ 5-21.30. Mandatory Administrative Actions. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord.
#2510, § I]
The Township of Lyndhurst shall refer an employee found to use alcohol or
illegal drugs to the EAP, and, if the employee occupies a sensitive position,
immediately remove the employee from that position without regard to
whether it is a testing designated position. At the discretion of the board of
commissioners, however, and as part of an EAP, an employee's return would
not endanger public health or safety or national security.
§ 5-21.31. Range of Consequences. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510,
§ I]
a. Direct observation;
b. Evidence obtained from an arrest or criminal conviction;
c. A verified positive test result; or
d. An employee's voluntary admission.
a. Disciplinary action taken against an employee found to use alcohol or
illegal drugs may include the full range of disciplinary actions,
including removal. The severity of the action chosen will depend on the
circumstances of each case, and will be consistent with the executive
order. The Township of Lyndhurst shall initiate disciplinary action
against any employee found to use illegal drugs but shall not discipline
an employee who voluntarily admits to illegal drug use in accordance
with subsection 5-21.34 of the plan.
b. Such disciplinary action, consistent with the requirements of any
governing collective bargaining agreement and other ordinances and
regulations, may include any of the following measures but some
disciplinary actions must be initiated:
1. Reprimanding the employee in writing;
2. Placing the employee in an enforced leave status;
3. Suspending the employee for 14 days or less;
4. Suspending the employee for 15 days or more;
5. Suspending the employee until the employee successfully
completes the EAP or until the Township of Lyndhurst determines
that action other than suspension is more appropriate;
6. Terminating the employee from employment.
§ 5-21.29 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-21.32
1:218
§ 5-21.32. Initiation of Mandatory Removal from Service. [Ord.
#2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
The Township of Lyndhurst shall initiate action to remove an employee for:
§ 5-21.33. Refusal to Take an Alcohol or Drug Test When Required.
[Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
An employee who refuses to be tested when so required will be subject to
the full range of disciplinary action, including dismissal. No applicant who
refuses to be tested shall be extended an offer of employment. Attempts to
alter or substitute the specimen provided will be deemed a refusal to take
the drug test when required.
§ 5-21.34. Voluntary Referral. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
Under Executive Order 12564, the township is required to initiate action
to discipline any employee found to use illegal drugs in every circumstance
except that such discipline is not required for an employee who (1)
voluntarily admits his or her drug use; (2) completes counseling or an EAP;
and (3) thereafter refrains from drug use.
a. Refusing to obtain counseling or rehabilitation through an EAP as
required by the executive order after having been found to use illegal
drugs.
b. Not refraining from illegal drug use after a first finding of such use.
All letters to propose and decide on a separation action should be
worked out in consultation with the personnel administrator.
a. Because the order permits an agency to create a "safe harbor" for an
employee who meets all three of these conditions, the township has
decided to create such a "safe harbor" and will not initiate disciplinary
action against employees who satisfy the provisions of this subsection.
b. A fundamental purpose of the Township of Lyndhurst's drug-free
workplace plan is to assist employees who themselves are seeking
treatment for drug use. For this reason, the Township of Lyndhurst will
not initiate disciplinary action against any employee who meets all
three of these conditions:
1. Voluntarily identifies him/herself as a user of illegal drugs prior to
being identified by other means;
2. Obtains counseling or rehabilitation through an EAP; and
3. Thereafter refrains from using illegal drugs.
c. This self-referral option allows any employee to step forward and
identify him/herself as an illegal drug user for the purpose of entering a
drug treatment program under the EAP. In stepping forward, and
consistent with Part XII, subsection 5-21.50, an employee may
§ 5-21.32 GENERAL § 5-21.34
1:219
§ 5-21.35. Sensitive Positions Designated for Random Testing. [Ord.
#2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
The Executive Order requires random testing for employees in sensitive
positions, subject to township criteria. As specified in Part XV of this plan,
the board of commissioners has determined that some of these sensitive
positions are testing designated positions subject to random testing. The
position titles designated for random drug testing are listed in Part XV,
along with the criteria and procedures applied in designating such positions
for drug testing, including the justification for such criteria and procedures.
§ 5-21.36. Determining the Testing Designated Position. [Ord.
#2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
volunteer for a drug test as a means of identification. Although this selfidentification
test may yield a verified positive test result, such result
shall not subject an employee to discipline assuming the three safe
harbor requirements are met.
d. Since the key to this provision's rehabilitative effectiveness is an
employee's willingness to admit his or her problem, this provision is not
available to an employee who requests protection under this provision
after:
1. Being asked to provide a urine sample in accordance with this plan;
or
2. Having been found to have used illegal drugs pursuant to
subsection 5-21.29.
Part IX. Random Testing.
a. Among the factors the board of commissioners has considered in
designating a testing designated position, are the extent to which the
Township of Lyndhurst has positions which:
1. Authorize employees to carry firearms;
2. Give employees access to sensitive information;
3. Authorize employees to engage in law enforcement;
4. Require employees to engage in activities affecting public health or
safety.
b. These positions are characterized by critical safety or security
responsibilities. The job functions associated with the positions protect
life and property, or law enforcement. These positions are identified for
random testing because they require the highest degree of trust and
confidence. The board of commissioners reserves the right to add or
delete positions determined to be testing designated positions pursuant
§ 5-21.34 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-21.36
1:220
§ 5-21.37. Implementing Random Testing. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord.
#2510, § I]
In implementing the program of random testing the drug program
coordinator shall:
§ 5-21.38. Notification of Selection. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510,
§ I]
An individual selected for random testing, and the individual's first-line
supervisor, shall be notified the same day the test is scheduled, preferably
within two hours of the scheduled testing. The supervisor shall explain to
the employee that the employee is under no suspicion of taking drugs and
that the employee's name was selected randomly.
§ 5-21.39. Deferral of Testing. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
An employee selected for random drug testing may obtain a deferral of
testing if the employee's first-line and higher-level supervisors concur that
a compelling need necessitates a deferral on the grounds that the employee
is:
to the criteria established in the Executive Order and this plan.
Moreover, the board of commissioners has determined, pursuant to
42 U.S.C. § 290ee-1(b) (2) (B), that all positions which have been or
will be designated as testing designated positions under this plan are
"sensitive positions" and are therefore exempted from coverage under
42 U.S.C. § 290ee-1(b).
a. Ensure that the means of random selection remains confidential; and
b. Evaluate periodically whether the numbers of employees tested and the
frequency with which those tests will be administered satisfy the
Township of Lyndhurst's duty to achieve a drug-free work force.
The number of sensitive employees occupying testing designated
positions and the frequency with which random tests will be
administered are specified in Part XV.
a. In a leave status (sick, administrative or leave without pay); or
b. In official travel status away from the test site or is about to embark on
official travel scheduled prior to testing notification.
An employee whose random drug test is deferred will be subject to an
unannounced test within the following 60 days.
Part X. Reasonable Suspicion Testing.
§ 5-21.36 GENERAL § 5-21.40
1:221
§ 5-21.40. Grounds. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
Reasonable suspicion testing may be based upon, among other things:
§ 5-21.41. Procedures. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
If an employee is suspected of using illegal drugs, the appropriate
supervisor will gather all information, facts, and circumstances leading
to and supporting this suspicion and report same to that supervisor's
immediate supervisor.
When higher-level concurrence of a reasonable suspicion determination has
been made, the appropriate supervisor will promptly prepare a written
report detailing the circumstances which formed the basis to warrant the
testing. This report should include the appropriate dates and times of
reported drug related incidents, reliable/credible sources of information,
rationale leading to the test, and the action taken.
§ 5-21.42. Obtaining the Sample. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
The employee may be asked to provide the urine sample under observation
in accordance with the criteria in subsection 5-21.53.
§ 5-21.43. Supervisory Training. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
In accordance with Part IV, supervisors will be trained to address illegal
drug use by employees, to recognize facts that give rise to reasonable
suspicion, and to document facts and circumstances to support a finding of
reasonable suspicion. Failure to receive such training, however, shall not
invalidate otherwise proper reasonable suspicion testing.
Part XI. Applicant Testing.
a. Observable phenomena, such as direct observation of drug use or
possession and/or the physical symptoms of being under the influence
of a drug;
b. A pattern of abnormal conduct or erratic behavior;
c. Arrest or conviction for a drug-related offense, or the identification of
an employee as the focus of a criminal investigation into illegal drug
possession, use, or trafficking;
d. Information provided either by reliable and credible sources or
independently corroborated; or
e. Newly discovered evidence that the employee has tampered with a
previous drug test.
Although reasonable suspicion testing does not require certainty, mere
"hunches" are not sufficient to meet this standard.
§ 5-21.40 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-21.44
1:222
§ 5-21.44. Objectives. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
To maintain the high professional standards of the Township of Lyndhurst
workforce, it is imperative that individuals who use illegal drugs be
screened out during the initial employment process before they are placed
on the employment rolls of the township. This procedure will have a positive
effect on reducing instances of illegal drug use by employees working
within the Township of Lyndhurst, and will provide for a safer working
environment. For these reasons, drug testing shall be required of all
applicants as defined in Part II.
§ 5-21.45. Vacancy Announcements. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510,
§ I]
Every vacancy announcement for positions designated for applicant testing
shall state:
"All applicants tentatively selected for this position will be required to
submit to urinalysis to screen for illegal drug use prior to appointment."
In addition, each applicant will be notified that appointment to the position
will be contingent upon a negative drug test result. Failure of the vacancy
announcement to contain this statement notice will not preclude applicant
testing if advance written notice is provided applicants in some other
manner.
§ 5-21.46. Procedures. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
§ 5-21.47. Personnel Officials. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
Upon notification that an individual has been tentatively selected for
employment with the Township of Lyndhurst, the personnel administrator
shall assure, after consultation with the medical review officer, that a drug
test has been conducted on that individual and determine whether the test
result is a verified positive result.
§ 5-21.48. Consequences. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
The Township of Lyndhurst will decline to extend a final offer of employment
to any applicant with a verified positive test result, and such applicant
a. The drug program coordinator shall direct applicants to an appropriate
collection facility. The drug test must be undertaken as soon after
notification as possible, and no later than 48 hours after notice to the
applicant. Where appropriate, applicants may be reimbursed for
reasonable travel expenses.
b. Applicants shall be advised of the opportunity to submit medical
documentation that may support a legitimate use for a specific drug and
that such information will be reviewed only by the medical review
officer to determine whether the individual is licitly using an otherwise
illegal drug.
§ 5-21.44 GENERAL § 5-21.48
1:223
may not reapply to the Township of Lyndhurst for a period of six months.
The personnel administrator working on the applicant's certificate shall
be directed to object to the applicant on the basis of failure to pass the
physical, a lack of personal characteristics necessary to relate to public
employment or failure to support the goals of the Township of Lyndhurst.
The Township of Lyndhurst shall inform such applicant that a confirmed
presence of an illegal drug in the applicant's urine precludes the Township
of Lyndhurst from hiring the applicant.
Part XII. Additional Types of Drug Testing.
§ 5-21.49. Accident or Unsafe Practice Testing. [Ord. #2271, § I;
Ord. #2510, § I]
The Township of Lyndhurst is committed to providing a safe and secure
work environment. Employees involved in on-the-job accidents or who
engage in unsafe on-duty job-related activities that pose a danger to others
or the overall operation of the Township of Lyndhurst, may be subject to
testing. Based on the circumstances of the accident or unsafe act, the
department head may initiate testing when such circumstances involve:
§ 5-21.50. Voluntary Testing. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
In order to demonstrate their commitment to the Township of Lyndhurst's
goal of a drug-free workplace and to set an example for other Federal
employees, employees not in testing designated positions may volunteer for
unannounced random testing by notifying the drug program coordinator.
These employees will then be included in the pool of testing designated
positions subject to random testing, and be subject to the same conditions
and procedures, including the provisions of subsection 5-21.34. Volunteers
shall remain in the testing designated positions pool until they withdraw
from participation by notifying the drug program coordinator of such intent
at least 48 hours prior to a scheduled test.
§ 5-21.51. Follow-up Testing. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
All employees referred through administrative channels who undergo a
counseling or rehabilitation program for illegal drug use through the EAP
will be subject to unannounced testing following completion of such a
program for a period of one-year. Such employees shall be tested at the
frequency stipulated in the abeyance contract, or, in the alternative, at an
increased frequency of once a month. Such testing is distinct from testing
which may be imposed as a component of the EAP.
a. Death or personal injury requiring immediate hospitalization, or
b. Damage to government or private property in excess of $1,000.
§ 5-21.48 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-21.51
1:224
Part XIII. Test Procedures in General.
§ 5-21.52. Mandatory Guidelines for Federal Workplace Drug
Testing. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
The Township of Lyndhurst shall adhere to the mandatory Guidelines for
Federal Workplace Drug Testing Programs promulgated by the Department
of Health and Human Services consistent with the authority granted by
Executive Order 12564, and to the requirements of Section 503 of the
Act. The Township of Lyndhurst's drug testing component shall have
professionally trained collection personnel, quality assurance requirements
for urinalysis procedures, and strict confidentiality requirements.
§ 5-21.53. Privacy Assured. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
Any individual subject to testing under this plan, shall be permitted to
provide urine specimens in private, and in a rest room stall or similar
enclosure so that the employee is not observed while providing the sample.
Collection site personnel of the same gender as the individual tested,
however, may observe the individual provide the urine specimen when such
personnel have reason to believe the individual may alter or substitute
the specimen to be provided. Collection site personnel may have reason to
believe that a particular individual may alter or substitute the specimen to
be provided when:
a. The individual:
1. Is being tested pursuant to Part X relating to reasonable suspicion
testing;
2. Has previously been found by the Township of Lyndhurst to be an
illegal drug user; or
3. Has previously tampered with a sample; or
b. Facts and circumstances suggest that the individual:
1. Is an illegal drug user;
2. Is under the influence of drugs at the time of the test; or
3. Has equipment or implements capable of tampering with or
altering urine samples; or
c. The specimen:
1. Has a temperature outside the range of 32.5 - 37.7 degrees C/90.5 -
99.8° F; or
2. Shows signs of contaminants.
§ 5-21.51 GENERAL § 5-21.54
1:225
§ 5-21.54. Failure to Appear for Testing. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord.
#2510, § I]
Failure to appear for testing without deferral will be considered refusal
to participate in testing, and will subject an employee to the range of
disciplinary actions, including dismissal, and an applicant to the
cancellation of an offer of employment. If an individual fails to appear at
the collection site at the assigned time, the collector shall contact the drug
program coordinator to obtain guidance on action to be taken.
§ 5-21.55. Opportunity to Justify a Positive Test Result. [Ord.
#2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
§ 5-21.56. Employee Counseling and Assistance. [Ord. #2271, § I;
Ord. #2510, § I]
While participating in a counseling or rehabilitation program, and at the
request of the program, the employee may be exempted from the random
testing designated positions pool for a period not to exceed 60 days, or
for a time period specified in an abeyance contract or rehabilitation plan
approved by the board of commissioners. Upon completion of the program,
the employee immediately shall be subject to follow-up testing pursuant to
subsection 5-21.51.
a. When a confirmed positive result has been returned by the laboratory,
the medical review officer shall perform the duties set forth in the
mandatory guidelines. For example, the medical review officer may
choose to conduct employee medical interviews, review employee
medical history, or review any other relevant biomedical factors. The
medical review officer must review all medical records made available
by the tested employee when a confirmed positive test could have
resulted from legally prescribed medication. Evidence to justify a
positive test result may include, but is not limited to:
1. A valid prescription; or
2. A verification from the individual's physician verifying a valid
prescription.
b. Individuals are not entitled, however, to present evidence to the
medical review officer in a trial-type administrative proceeding,
although the medical review officer has the discretion to accept
evidence in any manner the medical review officer determines there is
no justification for the positive result, such result will then be
considered a verified test result. The medical review officer shall
immediately contact the EAP administrator and appropriate
management official upon obtaining a verified positive test result.
§ 5-21.54 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-21.57
1:226
§ 5-21.57. Savings Clause. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
To the extent that any of the procedures specified in this section are
inconsistent with any of those specified in the Mandatory Guidelines for
Federal Workplace Drug Testing Programs promulgated by the Department
of Health and Human Services, or any subsequent amendment thereto,
such mandatory guidelines or amendment shall supersede the procedures
specified in this section, but only to the extent of the inconsistency.
Part XIV. Records and Reports.
§ 5-21.58. Confidentiality of Test Results. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord.
#2510, § I]
a. The laboratory may disclose laboratory test results only to the medical
review officer or the staff of the medical review officer. Any positive test
result which the medical review officer justifies by acceptable and
appropriate medical or scientific documentation to account for the
result as other than the intentional ingestion of an illegal drug will be
treated as a negative test result and may not be released for purposes
of identifying illegal drug use. Test results will be protected under the
provisions of the Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552a, et seq., and Section
503(e) of the Act, and may not be released in violation of either act. The
medical review officer may maintain only those records necessary for
compliance with this order. Any records of the medical review officer,
including drug test results, may be released to any management official
for purposes of auditing the activities of the medical review officer,
except that the disclosure of the results of any audit may not include
personal identifying information on any employee.
b. In order to comply with Section 503(e) of the Act, the results of a drug
test of a township employee may not be disclosed without the prior
written consent of such employee, unless the disclosure would be:
1. To the medical review officer;
2. To the EAP administrator in which the employee is receiving
counseling or treatment or is otherwise participating;
3. To any supervisory or management official within the Township of
Lyndhurst having authority to take adverse personnel action
against such employee; or
4. Pursuant to the order of a court of competent jurisdiction or where
required by the United States Government to defend against any
adverse personnel action.
c. For purposes of this section, "management official" includes any
management, government, security or personnel official whose duties
necessitate review of the test results in order to process adverse
§ 5-21.57 GENERAL § 5-21.58
1:227
§ 5-21.59. Employee Access to Records. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord.
#2510, § I]
§ 5-21.60. Confidentiality of Records in General. [Ord. #2271, § I;
Ord. #2510, § I]
§ 5-21.61. Employee Assistance Program Records. [Ord. #2271, § I;
Ord. #2510, § I]
The EAP administrator shall maintain only those records necessary to
comply with this order. After an employee is referred to an EAP, the EAP
will maintain all records necessary to carry out its duties. All medical and/or
rehabilitation records concerning the employee's drug abuse, including EAP
records of the identity, diagnosis, prognosis, or treatment are confidential
and may be disclosed only as authorized by 42 CFR Part 2, including
the provision of written consent by the employee. With written consent,
the patient may authorize the disclosure of those records to the patient's
employer for verification of treatment or for a general evaluation of
personnel action against the employee. In addition, test results with
all identifying information removed shall also be made available to
the Township of Lyndhurst personnel, including the drug program
coordinator, for data collection and other activities necessary to comply
with Section 503(f) of the Act.
a. Any employee who is the subject of a drug test shall, upon written
request, have access to any records relating to:
1. Such employee's drug test; and
2. The results of any relevant certification, review, or revocation-ofcertification
proceedings, as referred to in Section 503(a)(1)(A)(ii)
(III) of the Act.
b. Except as authorized by law, an applicant who is the subject of a drug
test, however, shall not be entitled to this information.
a. All drug testing information specifically relating to individuals is
confidential and should be treated as such by anyone authorized to
review or compile program records. In order to efficiently implement
this order and to make information readily retrievable, the drug
program coordinator shall maintain all records relating to reasonable
suspicion testing, suspicion of tampering with evidence, and any other
authorized documentation necessary to implement this order.
b. All records and information of the personnel actions taken on
employees with verified positive test results should be forwarded to the
servicing personnel office. Such shall remain confidential, locked in a
combination safe, with only authorized individuals who have a "need-toknow"
having access to them.
§ 5-21.58 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-21.61
1:228
treatment progress. [42 CFR Subsection 2.1 et seq. (1986), revised
regulations promulgated at 52 FR 21796, June 9, 1987.]
§ 5-21.62. Maintenance of Records. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510,
§ I]
The Township of Lyndhurst shall establish or amend a record keeping
system to maintain the records of the Township of Lyndhurst drug-free
workplace program consistent with the Township of Lyndhurst privacy act
system of records and with all applicable federal laws, rules and regulations
regarding confidentiality of records including the Privacy Act (5 U.S.C.
Subsection 552a). If necessary, records may be maintained as required
by subsequent administrative or judicial proceedings, or at the discretion
of the Township of Lyndhurst. The record keeping system should capture
sufficient documents to meet the operational and statistical needs of this
order, and include:
§ 5-21.63. Records Maintained by Government Contractors. [Ord.
#2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
Any contractor hired to satisfy any part of this order shall comply with the
confidentiality requirements of this order, and all applicable federal laws,
rules, regulations and guidelines.
§ 5-21.64. Statistical Information. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
The drug program coordinator shall collect and compile anonymous
statistical data for reporting the number of:
a. Notices of verified positive test results referred by the medical review
officer;
b. Written material justifying reasonable suspicion testing or evidence
that an individual may have altered or tampered with a specimen;
c. Anonymous statistical reports; and
d. Other documents the drug program coordinator, medical review officer,
or EAP Administrator deems necessary for efficient compliance with
this order.
a. Random tests, reasonable suspicion tests, accident or unsafe practice
tests, follow-up tests, or applicant tests administered;
b. Verified positive tests results;
c. Voluntary drug counseling referrals;
d. Involuntary drug counseling referrals;
e. Terminations or denial of employment offers resulting from refusal to
submit to testing;
§ 5-21.61 GENERAL § 5-21.64
1:229
§ 5-21.65. Positions Enumerated. [Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
§ 5-22. DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
§ 5-22.1. Application. [Ord. #1483; Ord. #1842; Ord. #2271, § I;
Ord. #2510, § I]
All employees are expected to meet the township's work performance
standards. The intent of the Disciplinary Action Procedure is to formally
document problems and provide the employee with a reasonable time to
improve performance. The process should encourage development by
providing employees with guidance in areas that need improvement such
as poor work performance, attendance problems, personal conduct, general
compliance with the township's policies and procedures and other
disciplinary problems.
Should a supervisor believe that an employee is not conforming to the
township's policies and rules or to specific instructions, or has acted
improperly, the supervisor will first privately discuss the matter with the
employee to obtain the employee's view. If the supervisor determines that
the employee has acted improperly, the supervisor shall take one of the
following actions depending upon the gravity and the employee's past
record:
f. Terminations or denial of employment offers resulting from alteration of
specimens;
g. Terminations or denial of employment offers resulting from failure to
complete a drug abuse counseling program; and
h. Employees who successfully complete EAP.
Part XV. Position Titles Designated for Random Testing.
a. All members of the Lyndhurst Police Department;
b. All crossing marshals;
c. All employees authorized to drive municipal owned vehicles;
d. All employees authorized to drive their own vehicles on township
business.
a. Verbal Reprimand. Depending on the circumstances, the supervisor
may verbally notify the employee that the employee's actions have been
improper and warn the employee against further occurrences. The
supervisor will prepare a record of the verbal reprimand including the
date, time and what was discussed with the employee. This record must
be forwarded to the personnel administrator for the employee's official
personnel file.
§ 5-21.64 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-22.1
1:230
§ 5-22.2. Causes. [Ord. #1483; Ord. #1842; Ord. #2271, § I; Ord.
#2510, § 1]
b. Commissioner Review. Should the supervisor consider the offense
sufficiently serious to warrant consideration by the commissioner, the
employee will be so advised and a meeting arranged with the
commissioner at the earliest possible date. All facts should be detailed
at this meeting and, if possible, a determination will be made at that
time of disciplinary action, if any.
c. Written Reprimand. When a supervisor determines that a written
reprimand is appropriate, the situation must be discussed with the
commissioner. The reprimand should clearly identify the problem and
outline a course of corrective action within a specific time frame. The
employee should clearly understand both the corrective action and the
consequence (i.e., termination) if the problem is not corrected or
reoccurs. The employee should acknowledge receipt of the warning and
may include additional comments. A copy of the written reprimand with
the signed acknowledgment and comments must be forwarded to the
personnel administrator for the employee's official personnel file.
d. Suspension. Whenever an employee is recommended for suspension,
the commissioner will make the decision and may seek the advice of the
township attorney if appropriate. Suspended employees may request a
hearing under the applicable grievance procedure.
e. Dismissal. Whenever an employee is recommended for dismissal, the
commissioner will make the decision only after seeking the advice of
the township attorney. There must be a complete review of the
employee's personnel file and all other facts to determine if there is
sufficient cause for the dismissal. Terminated employees may request a
hearing under the applicable grievance procedure.
a. The causes sufficient for disciplinary action shall include the following:
1. Incompetence, inefficiency or failure to perform duties;
2. Conviction of a crime;
3. Conduct unbecoming a public employee;
4. Violation of township policies, procedures and regulations;
5. Falsification of public records including personnel records;
6. Violation of federal, state or township regulations concerning drug
and alcohol use and possession;
7. Chronic or excessive absenteeism or lateness;
8. Misuse of public property, including motor vehicles; and
9. Other sufficient cause.
§ 5-22.1 GENERAL § 5-22.2
1:231
§ 5-22.3. Procedure. [Ord. #1483; Ord. #1842; Ord. #2271, § I; Ord.
#2510, § I]
b. An employee may be terminated depending upon the circumstances for
any of the following:
1. Incompetence, inefficiency or failure to perform duties;
2. Conviction of a crime;
3. Conduct unbecoming a public employee;
4. Violation of township policies, procedures and regulations;
5. Falsification of public records including personnel records;
6. Violation of federal, state or township regulations concerning drug
and alcohol use and possession;
7. Chronic or excessive absenteeism or lateness;
8. Misuse of public property, including motor vehicles; and
9. Other sufficient cause.
All discharges will be in accordance with federal and state as well
as applicable collective bargaining agreements.
a. Informal.
1. An employee charged with violation of any of the provisions set
forth in subsection 5-22.2 in the presence of his immediate
supervisor or superior may be suspended by the supervisor or
superior for a period not exceeding five days. The suspension shall
be a written order on a form to be provided by a supervisor or
superior and given directly to the employee by the supervisor or
superior. The supervisor or superior of the employee shall within 24
hours file a written memorandum with the director of the
department setting forth the facts pertaining to the offense
committed by the employee together with a record of the action
taken by the supervisor or superior for confirmation of said period
of suspension by the director of the department. The director of the
department shall either confirm, modify or reverse the action of the
supervisor or superior of the employee. An employee may request
an informal hearing by the director of the department to review the
actions of the supervisor or superior, but said hearing shall be
conducted in a summary manner by the director of the department
and the decision of the director of the department shall be final.
The period of suspension shall not in any event exceed five days
under the informal procedure.
b. Formal.
§ 5-22.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-22.3
1:232
§ 5-23. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE. [Ord. #1467; Ord. #1842; Ord.
#2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
A grievance is defined as any dispute concerning the interpretation,
application and/or enforcement of this personnel chapter.
1. Complaint. An employee charged with any of the violations set
forth in subsection 5-22.2 above shall be notified in writing of the
violation within 15 days of the awareness by the supervisor or
superior of the alleged violation, which charge shall state the
specific facts of the violation including dates and time of the
offense, and said charges shall be signed by the departmental
superior preferring the charge against an employee. An employee
may be suspended until disposition of the charge prepared against
him in a formal complaint.
2. Hearing. An employee shall be entitled to a full hearing on all
charges, before the director of the department to which employee
is assigned. The hearing shall be a formal proceeding. The
employee shall receive notice by certified mail of the date, time and
place of hearing. The director of the department shall fix a date,
time and place of said hearing within 30 days after the filing of
formal charges against said employee.
All charges shall be heard by the director of the department sitting
as the authority to make a determination of said charges.
Testimony of all witnesses shall be taken under oath. The township
attorney shall prosecute the charges against the employee, and
the employee may be represented by counsel at the hearing at
his own expense. The director of the department may order that a
stenographic record be made of the proceedings or the employee
may request in writing that a stenographic record be made, at the
employee's expense, provided he or his counsel shall inform the
director in writing at least one week prior to the date set for the
hearing.
3. Determination. The director of the department shall, after
completion of the hearing make a determination in writing within
30 days after the completion of the hearing. The action taken by the
director of the department shall be in accordance with the
provisions of subsection 5-22.1 above and the director of the
department shall notify the employee in writing of said action. The
director shall inform the personnel administrator of the
determination and instruct the personnel administrator of the
action to be taken against said employee.
a. A grievance arises on the date the employee affected becomes or is
made aware of the existence of the grievance. In the event of a
settlement or ruling which results in a determination of monetary
liability on the part of the township such liability shall not extend for
§ 5-22.3 GENERAL § 5-23
1:233
§ 5-24. CLASSIFICATION OF POSITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT. [Ord.
#1467; Ord. #1843; Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
more than 30 working days prior to the date the grievance was first
presented in writing.
b. All grievance must be presented within five working days after arising
and failure to report a grievance within such time shall be deemed a
settlement thereof.
STEP 1
Any employee or anyone of a group of employees having a grievance
shall submit the same orally to his immediate supervisor as designated
by the township. A union employee shall elect whether to have the
steward present or not at any oral presentation. Within two working
days the immediate supervisor shall inform the grievant and the
steward having jurisdiction of his decision.
STEP 2
a. If the grievance is not adjusted satisfactorily to the employee, it
shall be reduced to writing by the employee on a form supplied
by the township. The facts of the grievance shall be detailed
clearly and concisely, and the relief requested shall be set forth.
The complete form shall be signed by the employee aggrieved.
Within five working days after the Step 1 decision, the employee
shall deliver the written grievance to the employee's department
commissioner. Failure by the employee to deliver the written
grievance within the five working days specified shall be deemed a
settlement of the grievance. The commissioner handling the Step
2 grievance shall give his or her decision in writing within five
working days after the grievance is presented.
b. A grievance not disposed of to the satisfaction of the employee in
Step 2 must be taken up at the first regular Step 3 conference
held after the township's Step 2 decision. The decision reached in
Step 2 shall be final and binding unless the particular grievance is
presented by the employee, and/or the union steward at a Step 3
conference.
STEP 3
When requested, a Step 3 conference shall be held within 30 days. At
such conference the township shall be represented by its labor relations
designees, namely, the township attorney and at least three members
of the board of commissioners, one of whom shall be the commissioner
of the department where the grievance originated. The employee may
be represented by legal counsel and/or the union grievance committee
as officially designated. Within seven calendar days after a grievance
conference the township designated labor relations committee will send
its written disposition of the grievance by certified mail to the grievant.
§ 5-23 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-24
1:234
a. Establishment. The personnel administrator shall make, or cause to
have made analysis of the duties and responsibilities of all full-time
positions in the township subject to this chapter. He or she shall
recommend to the board of commissioners a position-classification
plan. The board of commissioners shall approve said positionclassification
plan, subject to their right to amend the said plan by
ordinance. Within 30 days after the adoption of a position-classification
plan by ordinance of the board of commissioners the personnel
administrator shall assign each position to an appropriate class in
accordance with the approved position-classification plan.
b. Basis of Position Classification. Each position shall be assigned or
allocated to an appropriate job classification on the basis of the kind
and level of its duties and responsibilities to the end that all positions in
the same classification shall be sufficiently alike to permit the use of a
single descriptive title, the same tests of competence and the same
salary range, thus carrying out the basic principle of classification
which is equal pay for equal work. A job classification may contain one
position or a number of positions. The personnel administrator shall
from time to time review the job classifications and submit a report
thereof to the board of commissioners.
c. Change in Classification Plan.
1. The classification plan may be amended from time to time by the
board of commissioners. Such changes may result from the need of
creating new positions, changes in organization or changes in
assigned duties and responsibilities.
2. The personnel administrator shall review all requests for creation
of new positions, the abolition or consolidation of present positions,
reclassification of positions to different job classes or the real
location of positions to new salary ranges. In such review, he shall
study the current duties and responsibilities of the position
concerned and recommend to the board of commissioners
appropriate action necessary to insure the correct classification
and allocation of the position.
3. Each department director shall report to the personnel
administrator any changes on his organization or assignment of
duties and responsibilities to given employee which result in
changes in the position classification plan or in the classification of
any of the positions in his department.
4. An employee may submit a request in writing to the personnel
administrator at any time for a review of the duties and
responsibilities of his position. Such a request shall be submitted
through his department director and shall include the employee's
own description of his current duties and responsibilities. The
personnel administrator shall then make an investigation of the
position to determine its correct allocation. He shall report his
§ 5-24 GENERAL § 5-24
1:235
§ 5-25. ADMINISTRATION. [Ord. #1483; Ord. #1842; Ord. #2271,
§ I; Ord. #2306, §§ I — VII; Ord. #2510, § I]
findings in writing to the board of commissioners and furnish a
copy to the employee requesting the review and to his department
director.
a. This chapter shall be administered by a personnel administrator to be
appointed by the board of commissioners. On the adoption of this
chapter:
1. The personnel administrator shall prepare a personnel file for
every employee of the township subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
2. The personnel administrator shall prepare an application form to
be adopted by resolution of the board of commissioners.
3. The personnel administrator shall prepare a plan for classification
of positions of employment in accordance with the provision of
Section 5-24.
4. The personnel administrator shall cause an application form to be
completed by every present employee of the township.
5. It shall be the duty of the personnel administrator to file a quarterly
report with the board of commissioners and the director of the
department of the absences, sick leave and vacations of each
employee during the month.
6. The personnel administrator shall be responsible for promulgating
the rules and regulations for maintaining attendance records in the
township departments. All attendance records shall be reported to
the personnel administrator as set forth by the personnel
administrator.
7. The personnel administrator shall receive from the director of each
department an annual vacation schedule prior to May 1 of each
year. The personnel administrator shall thereafter prepare a report
to be filed with the board of commissioners showing the vacation
period for every township employee during said year. The
personnel administrator shall inform the director of each
department of any conflict in said vacation schedule.
8. The personnel administrator shall submit an annual report to the
board of commissioners pertaining to the attendance of every
employee.
9. The personnel administrator, may from time to time, subject to the
approval by resolution of the board of commissioners, promulgate
rules of the proper administration of this chapter.
§ 5-24 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-25
1:236
10. The personnel administrator shall cause this chapter to be
prepared in pamphlet form and distributed to each employee,
together with any amendments or rules to be promulgated by the
personnel administrator.
11. The personnel administrator shall cause every employee to sign a
statement acknowledging receipt of said chapter, together with
rules promulgated by the personnel administrator.
12. The personnel administrator shall cause a report to be submitted to
the board of commissioners of any potential or actual employment
liability complaint or claim.
13. The personnel administrator along with the labor attorney and risk
manager shall formally review the risk management/loss control
plan yearly and present said written review to the board of
commissioners each September.
14. The personnel administrator along with the labor attorney shall
review annually the Lyndhurst Personnel Ordinance and make
recommendation in writing each September for changes when
appropriate.
15. The administrator shall place bulletin boards in prominent, easily
accessible locations throughout all municipal buildings and work
areas which shall display official township information, required
regulatory and safety information and current employee/
employment information.
b. The board of commissioners shall retain the services of a labor attorney
to be available to the personnel administrator to assist in the review,
screening, and investigative process with regard to either informal or
formal complaints which have been identified by the personnel
administrator as potential or actual employment practice liability
claims.
c. Employee Evaluations. Employees are to be evaluated on their
performance in the accomplishment of their assigned duties and
responsibilities. This evaluation will be completed by the employee's
immediate supervisor and should cover the entire evaluation period.
Upon the completion of the report, there should be a discussion of its
contents with the employee and an opportunity for comments on both
sides. The original should be sent to the personnel administrator with a
copy maintained by the employee's department head. The following
terms will be evaluated: job knowledge, quality of work, quantity of
work, initiative, flexibility and cooperation, judgment and common
sense, public relations, leadership, absence and punctuality. After the
evaluation has been completed, the employer will give the employee an
opportunity to review the document and the employee shall write his/
her comments on the form. The supervisor and employee shall sign the
document. The employee's signature shall not be considered as
§ 5-25 GENERAL § 5-25
1:237
§ 5-26. IMPLEMENTATION BY RESOLUTION. [Ord. #1467; Ord.
#2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
The board of commissioners shall adopt by resolution all matters necessary
to properly administer this chapter provided that the resolution shall not be
in conflict with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 5-27. DEPARTMENTAL RULES, REGULATIONS AND DIRECTIVES.
[Ord. #1467; Ord. #1842; Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
§ 5-28. AMENDMENT. [Ord. #1467; Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510,
§ I]
The board of commissioners shall amend this chapter or any provision of
this chapter as may be necessary for the proper welfare and benefit of the
employees and the township as may be required.
§ 5-29. CODE OF ETHICS/CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
agreeing to the contents, but shall only be considered as evidence of its
completion.
d. Continuing education. It is the policy of the Township of Lyndhurst that
all employees shall keep themselves informed and educated on the
changes in their jobs. The township encourages, and wherever feasible,
shall support and provide an opportunity for the employees to attend
continuing education courses. Records of said attendance shall be kept
in the employees personnel file by the personnel administrator.
a. Directives.
1. The director of the department may establish, amend and
supplement rules, regulations and directives for governing the
internal operations of the department and the conduct and
decorum of its personnel. Such departmental rules, regulations and
directives shall not be inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions
of any statute of this state, this chapter or any other ordinance of
the township.
2. The rules, regulations and directives shall be in writing, signed by
the director of the department and shall be filed in the office of the
personnel administrator. They shall be binding on all persons
subject to the jurisdiction of the department. A written copy of said
rules, regulations and directives shall be distributed to the
personnel of the department affected thereby and shall be posted in
the headquarters of the department. Copies shall also be available
upon request.
§ 5-25 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-29.1
1:238
§ 5-29.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2106, § I; Ord. #2137, § I; Ord. #2271,
§ I; Ord. #2510, § I]
As used in this section, unless the context requires otherwise:
BUSINESS — Shall mean any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship,
firm, enterprise, franchise, association, organization, self-employed
individual, holding company, joint-stock company, receivership, trust or any
legal entity organized for profit.
BUSINESS WITH WHICH HE OR SHE IS ASSOCIATED — Shall mean any
business in which the person or a member of the person's immediate family
is a director, officer, owner, employee or holder of stock worth $10,000 or
more at fair market value or owns more than 10% of the stock issued or
10% of the total partnership interest.
CANDIDATE FOR PUBLIC OFFICE — Shall mean any person who has filed
a declaration of candidacy or petition to appear on the ballot for election as
a township official, and any person who has been nominated by a township
official or governmental body for appointment to serve as a public official.
FINANCIAL INTEREST — Shall mean any interest which shall yield, directly
or indirectly, a monetary or other material benefit (other than the duly
authorized salary or compensation for his or her services to the township) to
the official, employee or appointee or to any person employing or retaining
the services of the official, employee or appointee.
GIFT — Shall mean a payment, subscription, advance, forbearance,
rendering or deposit of money, services or anything of value. "Gift" shall not
include a political contribution otherwise reported as required by law.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY — Shall mean a spouse, parent, child or any relation
residing in your household.
INCOME — Shall mean any money or thing of value received or to be
received as a claim on future services, whether in the form of a fee, salary,
expense, allowance, forbearance, forgiveness, interest, dividend, royalty,
rent, capital gain or any other form of recompense or any combination
thereof.
OFFICIAL ACTION — Shall mean an action that a person performs in a
given state of facts in prescribed manner in obedience to the mandate
of legal authority, without regard to, or the exercise of, the person's own
judgment upon the propriety of the action being taken.
PERSON — Shall mean a business, individual, corporation, union,
association, firm, partnership, committee, club or other organization or
group of persons.
POLITICAL CONTRIBUTION — Shall mean any advance, conveyance,
deposit, distribution, transfer of funds, loan, payment, pledge, purchase
of a ticket to a testimonial or similar fund-raising affair or subscription
of money or anything of value, except volunteer services, in connection
with a political campaign, and any contract, agreement, promise or other
§ 5-29.1 GENERAL § 5-29.1
1:239
obligation, whether or not legally enforceable, to make a "political
contribution".
TOWNSHIP BODY — Shall mean any body, board, committee, department,
office or commission of the township, whose members are appointed,
elected or employed by any such body, board, committee, department, office
or commission of the township.
TOWNSHIP EMPLOYEE — Shall mean any individual who receives
compensation from the township or any political subdivision thereof.
TOWNSHIP OFFICIAL — Shall mean any elected or appointed official who
shall exercise the power of the township or any of its political subdivisions,
departments, boards or agencies regardless of whether he or she is paid for
their services and shall include:
§ 5-29.2. Candidates to Be Informed of Code. [Ord. #2106, § 2; Ord.
#2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
In order to conform to this code of ethics, candidates for the township board
of commissioners shall be informed of the contents of this section at the
time the petitions are filed.
§ 5-29.3. Restricted Activities. [Ord. #2106, § 3; Ord. #2137, § 2;
Ord. #2271, § I; Ord. #2510, § I]
a. Board of commissioners.
Township attorney, township auditor, township engineer, township
clerk, township tax collector, township tax assessor and department
heads.
b.
Members of the planning board, board of adjustment, and library board
whether paid or unpaid, full-time or part-time, whether created by the
governing body or appointed by any of its officials or administrators,
including the attorneys and secretaries appointed to these boards.
c.
Township inspectors, including the construction official, building
inspectors, health inspectors and zoning inspectors.
d.
a. No township official or employee of the township shall use his or her
public office or any confidential information received through his or her
holding public office to obtain financial gain, other than compensation
provided by law, for himself or herself, a member of his or her
immediate family or a business with which he or she is associated.
b. No township official or employee shall solicit, accept or agree to accept,
whether directly or indirectly, anything of value, including a gift, loan,
political contribution, reward or promise of future employment, based
on any understanding that the vote, official action or judgment of the
public official or public employee would be influenced thereby.
§ 5-29.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-29.3
1:240
§ 5-29.4. through § 5-29.9. (Reserved)
Subsections 5-29.4, 5-29.5, 5-29.6, 5-29.7, 5-29.8 and 5-29.9 containing
Ordinance Nos. 2106, 2271, 2306 and 2510 are hereby repealed inasmuch
as the State of New Jersey Local Finance Board has jurisdiction over such
matters. (Repealed by Ordinance No. 2889-13 § 7)
§ 5-30. SICK AND DISABLED EMPLOYEES - EMPLOYEES UNABLE
TO PERFORM DUTIES. [Ord. #2306, § VII; Ord. #2510, § I; Ord.
#2889-13, § 2]
c. No township official or employee shall solicit or accept any gift from any
person doing business with the township or from any person or
business regulated by the township in any way if the gift would not be
offered if he or she were not an official or employee except for
commemorative items of nominal value given at official functions.
d. No township official or employee or any business entity in which the
township official or township employee has a legal or beneficial
ownership in excess of 10% of the total stock or total legal and
beneficial ownership of such business entity shall enter into any
contract with the Township of Lyndhurst.
e. No township official or township employee shall represent a person or
act as an expert witness for compensation or other consideration before
any township body, provided that this shall not apply to a township
official or a public employee acting in an official capacity.
f. No township official or employee shall request, use or permit the use of
any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which is
the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large.
g. No township official or employee shall request, use or permit the use of
any publicly supported property, vehicle, equipment, material, labor or
service for the personal convenience or the private advantage of
himself or any other person. This rule shall not be deemed to prohibit
an official or employee from requesting, using, or permitting the use of
such publicly owned or publicly supplied property, vehicle, equipment,
material, labor or service which it is the general practice to make
available to the public at large or which are provided as a matter of
stated policy for the use of officials and employees in the conduct of
official business.
a. Permanent employees who are injured on the job shall receive full pay
for a period not to exceed 12 months (one-year) while certified by a
physician as being hurt on the job. Such employee shall have their
workers compensation pay turned over to the Township Finance Office
to be credited against the salary paid to the injured employee. Should
the injured employee be unable to work for a period of greater than
one-year, and provided the employee has submitted a petition for
permanent disability, or permanent partial disability, to the court (or
§ 5-29.3 GENERAL § 5-30
1:241
similar legal filing) then the employee shall receive an additional six
months of full salary (pay). However, in this event sick time shall
be deducted from the employee's sick time balances to cover any
difference between the workers compensation check and the regular
salary of the employee. In no event shall an employee who is injured
on the job and not having filed such a petition be entitled to full pay
beyond 12 months from the date of injury. [Ord. #2889-13 § 2]
b. Should the injured employee not return to work after one-year, and not
having filed such a petition, then the employee shall only receive the
workers compensation pay (check) until the workers compensation is
exhausted (fully paid). [Ord. #2889-13 § 2]
c. Any and all permanent employee(s) shall be considered unable to
perform their duties (or in the alternative: permanently disabled) by the
Township of Lyndhurst upon being out of work (unable or unwilling to
perform full duty) for a period of 200 work days, including holidays, in
any eighteen-month period or 260 days (including holidays) in any
twenty-four-month period. These time periods, or days of work missed,
need not be consecutively taken off. After being unable to work for the
above stated number of days, the employee shall not be entitled to any
salary or benefits; except the employee shall be entitled to any workers
compensation or disability benefits paid by a third party (or entity). The
employee shall be automatically terminated and shall be paid for any
applicable sick and vacation time balances. [Ord. #2889-13 § 2]
d. The provisions of paragraph c hereof shall include time not worked
when an employee is on sick, vacation, or other leave.
To be clear: Any employee who is out of work, for any reason, for
greater than 200 days in any eighteen-month period, or 260 days in any
twenty-four-month period, shall be deemed as unable to perform their
duties; and their employment shall be subject to termination. [Ord.
#2889-13 § 2]
e. An employee does not have to be sick or disabled to be subject to this
section of the Revised General Ordinances. In effect any employee not
capable of performing their duties within the above stated time-periods
may be considered "disabled" from doing work, or "unable" to perform
their duties, be it for any reason (or no reason). [Ord. #2889-13 § 2]
f. The Township of Lyndhurst shall continue to make reasonable
accommodations in accordance with legal requirements to allow
qualified employees with a severe and/or life-threatening illness to
perform the essential functions of their jobs, provided they are able to
meet acceptable performance standards. All medical information shall
be treated confidentially. The Township of Lyndhurst will take
reasonable precautions to protect such information from inappropriate
disclosure. [Ord. #2889-13 § 2]
§ 5-30 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-30
1:242
§ 5-31. NEW JERSEY CONSCIENTIOUS EMPLOYEE PROTECTION
ACT. [Ord. #2306, § IX; Ord. #2510, § I]
Employees have the right to complain of anything they perceive to be
improper. This right shall be communicated to all employees in a letter
outlining the specific employee complaint procedure. A written
acknowledgment that the employee received this letter will be included in
the employee's official personnel file. This right will also be communicated
in the Employee Handbook. All complaints will be taken seriously and
promptly investigated.
The Township of Lyndhurst shall not take any retaliatory action or tolerate
any reprisal against an employee for any of the following:
g. The Township of Lyndhurst may take disciplinary action against any
employee who does not report to work without a valid reason for three
consecutive work days, or five work days, in any twelve-month period.
[Ord. #2889-13 § 2]
The purpose of this Ordinance No. 2889-13 and the amendment to the
pertinent section of the Revised General Ordinances, is to provide a
firm basis and definition of the cause of disciplinary action relating
to "unable to perform duties" as previously established by the Board
of Commissioners and as currently indicated in Chapter 5, Subsection
5-22.2; Causes; a1, "Incompetence, inefficiency, or failure to perform
duties". The same being previously included as a cause for termination
of employment, Chapter 5, subsection 5-22.2b1, to wit: "failure to
perform duties". [Ord. #2889-13 § 3]
So as to be clear: Any employee shall be subject to termination of
employment if he/she is unable to perform their duties for any 200
work days (including holidays) in any eighteen-month period and any
260 work days (including holidays) in any twenty-four-month period
notwithstanding the reason for NOT working." [Ord. #2889-13 § 5]
a. Disclosing or threatening to disclose to a supervisor, department head,
the commissioner, other official or to a public body, as defined in the
Employment Protection Act (N.J.S.A. 34:19) an activity, policy or
practice that the employee reasonably believes is in violation of a law, a
rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to law;
b. Providing information to, or testifying before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, an inquiry into any violation of
law, or a rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to law; or
c. Objecting to, or refusing to participate in any activity, policy, or practice
that the employee reasonably believes is a violation of a law, rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant to law; is fraudulent or criminal; or is
incompatible with a clear public policy mandate concerning the public
health, safety, or welfare.
§ 5-30 GENERAL § 5-31
1:243
§ 5-32. AFFIRMATIVE ACTION POLICY. [Ord. #2306, § X; Ord.
#2510, § I]
The Township of Lyndhurst is dedicated to the principle that everyone
should be assured equal employment opportunity. It is our further belief
that equal opportunity should be assured not only in hiring practices, but
also in promotion, training and benefits.
These opportunities will be afforded everyone without regard to race,
religion, color, sex, national origin, political affiliation, physical disabilities,
marital status, affectional or sexual orientation, age or military service.
The Affirmative Action Policy is developed to include all phases of
recruiting, selection, hiring and dismissal, transfer, promotion, training,
upgrading, compensation and benefits and conditions of employment.
The Township of Lyndhurst implements its policy of providing equal
employment opportunity for all through an Affirmative Action Program.
To effectively insure compliance with this program, the personnel
administrator serves as the affirmative action officer for the Township of
Lyndhurst.
The township expects the cooperation of all municipal employees in
fulfilling these goals, which are moral, legal, social and economic
obligations.
§ 5-33. ANTIDISCRIMINATION POLICY. [Ord. #2510, § 1]
The township is committed to the principle of equal employment
opportunity pursuant to Title VII of the 1964 Civil Rights Act as amended
by the Equal Opportunity Act of 1972. Under no circumstances will the
township discriminate on the basis of sex, race, creed, color, religion,
national origin, ancestry, age, marital or political status, disability, or sexual
orientation. Decisions regarding the hiring, promotion, transfer, demotion
or termination are based solely on the qualifications and performance of
In accordance with the statute, the employee must bring the violation
to the attention of the township. However, disclosure is not required
where (1) the employee is reasonably certain that the violation is known
to one or more officials; (2) where the employee reasonably fears
physical harm; or (3) the situation is emergency in nature. Employees
are encouraged to complain in writing using the Employee Complaint
form, but may make a verbal complaint at their discretion. See
Employee Complaint Policy.19 Under the law, the employee must give
the township a reasonable opportunity to correct the activity, policy
or practice. The administration of whistle blower complaints is not
subject to the limitations in the Grievance Policy. In accordance with
the statute, a copy of this policy will be posted in all facilities.
19.Editor’s Note: The Employee Complaint Policy referred to herein, may be found in Section
5-37.
§ 5-31 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-33
1:244
the employee or prospective employee. If any employee or prospective
employee feels they have been treated unfairly, they have the right to
address their concern with their supervisor, or if they prefer their
department head, commissioner, the personnel administrator or the
township attorney.
§ 5-34. AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT POLICY. [Ord.
#2510, § 1]
In compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act and the New Jersey
Law Against Discrimination, the township does not discriminate based on
disability. The township will endeavor to make every work environment
handicap accessible and all future construction and renovation of facilities
will be in accordance with applicable barrier-free federal and state
regulations and the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines.
The commissioner shall initiate an interactive dialogue with disabled
employees and prospective employees to identify reasonable
accommodations that do not create a hardship. Accommodations include
modifications to facilities, equipment and work procedures, auxiliary aides,
services and permanent reassignment to vacant positions. Employees who
are reassigned to a different position shall receive the salary of their new
position. Accommodations shall not be unduly expensive, extensive and
disruptive or fundamentally alter the nature of the operation. The Act does
not require the township to offer permanent "light duty", relocate essential
functions or provide personal use items such as eyeglasses, hearing aids,
wheelchairs, etc. To be eligible for accommodations, individuals must (1)
be able to perform the essential function of the position, (2) not create a
real safety hazard to themselves, co-employees or the public, and (3) be
otherwise qualified for the position in that they possess the prerequisites
including education, experience, training, skills, licenses or certificates
and other job-related requirements. All decisions with respect to
accommodations shall be made by the commissioner or board of
commissioners as appropriate.
§ 5-35. WORKPLACE VIOLENCE POLICY. [Ord. #2510, § I]
The township will not tolerate workplace violence. Violent acts or threats
made by an employee against another person or property are cause for
immediate dismissal and will be fully prosecuted. This includes any violence
or threats made on township property, at township events or under other
circumstances that may negatively affect the township's ability to conduct
business.
Prohibited conduct includes:
a. Causing physical injury to another person;
b. Making threatening remarks;
§ 5-33 GENERAL § 5-35
1:245
§ 5-36. GENERAL ANTI-HARASSMENT POLICY. [Ord. #2510, § I]
The township will not tolerate harassment in the workplace including
harassment motivated by sex, race, creed, color, religion, national origin,
ancestry, age, nationality, marital or political status, disability or sexual
orientation. Township officials, appointees, managers, supervisors,
employees, volunteers and outside contractors alike must comply with this
policy and take appropriate measures to insure that such conduct does
not occur. Violations of this policy will result in disciplinary action up to
and including discharge or, in the event nonemployees are found to be at
fault, other appropriate action. Employees who feel they have been subject
to harassment must report the harassment to their supervisor, or if they
prefer to the department head, commissioner, personnel administrator or
the township attorney. See Employee Complaint Policy (Section 5-37).
§ 5-37. EMPLOYEE COMPLAINT POLICY. [Ord. #2510, § I]
Employees who wish to complain of harassment or any other workplace
wrongdoing are requested to immediately report the matter to their
supervisor, or, if they prefer to their department head, the commissioner,
the personnel administrator or the township attorney. Employees are
encouraged to complain in writing using the Employee Complaint form, but
may make a verbal complaint at their discretion. No retaliatory measures
shall be taken against any employee who complains of workplace
wrongdoing. The township will, to the maximum extent feasible, maintain
the confidentiality of such complaints on a need-to-know basis. However,
investigation of such complaints may require disclosure to the accused
party and other witnesses in order to gather pertinent facts.
§ 5-38. ACCESS TO PERSONNEL FILES POLICY. [Ord. #2510, § I]
The official personnel file for each employee shall be maintained by the
personnel administrator. Personnel files are confidential records that must
be secured in a locked cabinet and will only be available to authorized
managerial and supervisory personnel on a need-to-know basis. Records
c. Aggressive or hostile behavior that creates a reasonable fear of injury
to another person or subjects another individual to emotional distress;
d. Intentionally damaging employer property or property of another
employee;
e. Possession of a weapon while on township property or while on
township business except with the authority of the police chief; and
f. Committing acts motivated by, or related to, sexual harassment or
domestic violence.
Any potentially dangerous situations must be immediately reported.
The township will actively intervene in any potentially hostile or violent
situation.
§ 5-35 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-38
1:246
relating to any medical condition will be maintained in a separate file.
Electronic personnel and medical records must be protected from
unauthorized access. Any employee may review their file in the presence of
the personnel administrator upon reasonable request.
§ 5-39. POLITICAL ACTIVITY POLICY. [Ord. #2510, § I]
Employees have exactly the same right as any other citizen to join political
organizations and participate in political activities, as long as they maintain
a clear separation between their official responsibilities and their political
affiliations. Employees are prohibited from engaging in political activities
while performing their public duties and from using township time, supplies
or equipment in any political activity. Any violation of this policy must
be reported to the supervisor, department head, commissioner, personnel
administrator or the township attorney.
§ 5-40. EMPLOYEE EVALUATION POLICY. [Ord. #2510, § I]
The department head will complete a written evaluation and appraisal form
for every employee to measure progress and to encourage self-improvement
at least once a year. The evaluation will also record additional duties
performed, educational courses completed as well as a plan to correct any
weak points using the Employee Counseling form. After completing the
evaluation, the supervisor or department head will review the results with
the employee and return the form(s) with the signed acknowledgment to
the commissioner. After review by the commissioner, the form(s) are to be
forwarded to the personnel administrator for inclusion in the employee's
official personnel file. As a part of the evaluation, employees have the right
to request a conference with the commissioner or personnel administrator.
§ 5-41. WORKFORCE REDUCTION POLICY. [Ord. #2510, § I]
Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 4A:8-1.1 the township may institute layoff actions
for economy, efficiency or other related reasons, but will first consider
voluntary alternatives.
§ 5-42. E-MAIL, VOICE MAIL AND INTERNET USAGE POLICY. [Ord.
#2510, § I]
Township e-mail, voice mail and the Internet are for official business and
use for non-business purposes is prohibited. All e-mail, voice mail and
Internet messages are official documents subject to the provisions of the
Access to Public Records Act.
The township reserves the right to monitor, obtain, review and disclose all
e-mail, voice mail and Internet messages for lawful and legitimate reasons.
By using township e-mail, voice mail and the Internet, each user agrees
that the township has unrestricted access and the right to disclose all
information communicated or stored on the e-mail, voice mail and the
Internet for any security, health, employment or other legitimate business
reasons. Legitimate reasons also include systems maintenance, message
§ 5-38 GENERAL § 5-42
1:247
routing, retrieval of business information, trouble-shooting hardware and
software problems, preventing system misuse, protecting confidential
proprietary information, insuring compliance with software license policies
and complying with legal and regulatory requests for information.
§ 5-43. BULLETIN BOARD POLICY. [Ord. #2510, § I]
The bulletin boards located in the township administrative building and
other facilities are intended for official notices regarding policies,
procedures, meetings and special events. Only personnel authorized by the
commissioner may post, remove, or alter any notice.
§ 5-44. SAFETY POLICY. [Ord. #2510, § I]
The township will provide a safe and healthy work environment and shall
comply with the Public Employees Occupational Safety and Health Act
(PEOSHA). The township is equally concerned about the safety of the
public. Consistent with this policy, employees will receive periodic safety
training and will be provided with appropriate safety equipment. Employees
are responsible for observing safety rules and using available safety devices
including personal protective equipment. Failure to do so constitutes
grounds for disciplinary action. Any occupational or public unsafe condition,
practice, procedure or act must be immediately reported to the supervisor
or department head. Any on-the-job accident or accident involving township
facilities, equipment or motor vehicles must also be immediately reported.
§ 5-45. NO SMOKING POLICY. [Ord. #2510, § I]
The New Jersey Legislature has declared that in all governmental buildings
the rights of nonsmokers to breathe clean air supersedes the rights of
smokers. In accordance with state law, the township has adopted a smokefree
policy for all buildings. Township facilities shall be smoke-free and
no employee or visitor will be permitted to smoke anywhere in township
buildings. Employees are permitted to smoke only outside township
buildings and such locations as not to allow the re-entry of smoke into
building entrances. This policy shall be strictly enforced and any employee
found in violation will be subject to disciplinary action.
§ 5-46. OPEN PUBLIC MEETINGS ACT PROCEDURE CONCERNING
PERSONNEL MATTERS. [Ord. #2510, § I]
Discussions by the governing body or any body of the township concerning
appointment, termination, terms and conditions of employment,
performance evaluation, promotion or discipline of any current or
prospective officer or employee shall be in closed session unless the
individual requests in writing that the discussion be held in open session.
Such request must be granted. Prior to the discussion by the governing
body or any body of the township concerning such matters, the clerk
shall notify the affected person(s) of the meeting date, time and place, the
matters to be discussed and the person's right to request that the discussion
§ 5-42 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-46
1:248
occur in open session. In the event more than one person is affected by
the discussion and one of the affected persons does not request that the
discussion be in open session, then the discussion shall be in closed session.
If the individual(s) does not request that the discussion be held in open
session, the governing body or other body of the township may at its sole
discretion invite the affected individual(s) to attend the applicable portion
of the closed session.
§ 5-47. EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK PROCEDURE. [Ord. #2510, § 1]
The personnel administrator with the assistance of the township attorney
shall draft an Employee Handbook for the approval of the commissioner. A
separate version of the Handbook will be drafted for part-time and seasonal
employees as well as for major bargaining groups if appropriate. Once
approved, copies will be distributed and employees will be required to sign
an acknowledgment of receipt that will be placed in the official personnel
file. The Handbook will be revised and redistributed whenever there is a
significant change in personnel practice or every two years.
§ 5-48. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION PROCEDURE. [Ord. #2510,
§ I]
Periodic evaluations are critical to create a formal record of an employee's
performance over time and establish a foundation for personnel actions
such as promotion and termination. In addition to day-to-day feedback
to the employee, a performance evaluation must be conducted for all
employees at least annually. The completed appraisal becomes part of an
employee's permanent record. This is a legal document that is discoverable
in lawsuits.
Performance discussions must also provide employees with guidance
regarding their ability to meet job standards. Extraordinary skills or
abilities should be recognized in addition to areas for improvement.
Supervisors or department heads should review future training needs and
career planning. The reviewer should also encourage the employee to make
suggestions about how the department can improve. The reviewer should
ask employees for feedback regarding the employee's skills as they relate
to communication, team building, delegation, and sensitivity to needs of
subordinates. Open communication is the key to improvement.
a. Setting the Stage. The reviewer must create a productive climate for
the discussion. In preparing the evaluation form, prior evaluations
should be reviewed to identify trends. Employees must be notified in
advance of the meeting and should be given a copy of the blank
evaluation form. The meeting should be private without interruptions in
a comfortable environment.
b. Confirm Expectations. The reviewer should start the discussion of each
performance area by reviewing expectations. Ask the employee to
confirm the employee's understanding of job requirements. Refer to the
job description as appropriate.
§ 5-46 GENERAL § 5-48
1:249
c. Rating. Continue the discussion by giving the employee's rating in each
performance area. The supervisor should be prepared to refer to
documentation. Employees should be evaluated based on set standards,
not as they compare to other employees. It is rare that any person's
rating in all areas is either high or low. The evaluation should consider
performance during the entire period, not just the recent past. Care
should be taken to avoid allowing one aspect of a person's performance
to overshadow all other performance factors be it positive or negative.
Ideally, each performance area should be evaluated individually based
on specific behaviors exhibited.
d. Discussing Future Plans. This is where the reviewer should turn the
discussion to the future performance and development of the employee.
A Counseling Action Plan form must be completed if any item is rated
"Needs Improvement" or "Does Not Meet Minimum Standards."
Specific performance goals must be established for the next review
period along with plans for achieving those goals.
e. Closing the Discussion. When all performance areas have been
discussed, close the discussion by summarizing all of ratings in an
overall rating for the review period.
1. Outstanding means exceptional performance in all areas of
responsibility. Planned objectives were achieved well above the
established standards and accomplishments were made in
unexpected areas.
2. Exceeds Expectations means consistently exceeds established
standards in most areas of responsibility. All requirements must be
met and objectives achieved above the established standards.
3. Meets Job Requirements means all job requirements were met and
planned objectives accomplished within established standards.
There were no critical areas where accomplishments were less
than planned.
4. Needs Improvement means performance in one or more critical
areas does not meet expectations. Not all planned objectives were
accomplished within the established standards and some
responsibilities were not completely met.
5. Does Not Meet Minimum Standards means performance is
unacceptable and important objectives have not been
accomplished. Needs immediate improvement.
After completing the evaluation, the reviewer will return the
form(s) with the signed acknowledgment to the commissioner.
After review by the commissioner, the form(s) are to be forwarded
to the personnel administrator for inclusion in the employee's
official personnel file. As a part of the evaluation, employees have
the right to request a conference with the commissioner or
personnel administrator.
§ 5-48 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-49
1:250
§ 5-49. PERSONNEL FILE PROCEDURE. [Ord. #2510, § I]
The official personnel files shall be maintained by the personnel
administrator and employee medical information will be maintained in a
separate file. At least annually, the personnel administrator will review files
to make sure they are up-to-date and will follow-up with the department
heads as necessary.
The official file shall include at least the following:
§ 5-50. EMPLOYEE COMPLAINT INVESTIGATION PROCEDURE.
[Ord. #2510, § I]
Employees have the right to formally or informally report any statement,
act, or behavior by a co-employee, supervisor, elected official or visitor that
they believe to be improper.
a. The original application signed by the employee;
b. Notes from any pre-employment interview and reference check;
c. The original letter detailing an offer of employment and any additional
correspondence concerning the employee's hiring;
d. A signed acknowledgment that the employee received a copy of the
Employee Complaint Policy letter;
e. A signed acknowledgment that the employee has received the
Employee Handbook;
f. A signed acknowledgment that the employee received the safety
orientation;
g. Annual written performance evaluations including documentation that
the evaluation was reviewed with the employee;
h. Counseling Action Plans;
i. Records relating to on-the-job accidents;
j. Disciplinary actions including an acknowledgment that the employee
was notified of the proposed disciplinary action and was given an
opportunity to respond;
k. Records relating to any other employment actions including
promotions, demotions, transfers, resignations, leaves, etc.;
l. Educational transcripts; and
m. Any other pertinent information.
a. Reporting. Employees should be asked to report complaints in writing
utilizing the Employee Complaint form, but are not compelled to do so.
§ 5-49 GENERAL § 5-50
1:251
b. Identification/Screening. The supervisor, department head, personnel
administrator or the township attorney must report all written or verbal
complaints to the commissioner unless the complaint is against the
commissioner. Upon receipt, the commissioner will determine if the
complaint was made pursuant to the General Anti-Harassment Policy,
the Anti-Sexual Harassment Policy, the Whistle Blower Policy, a
grievance procedure or is another form of complaint. A file will be
established including the written complaint, the investigation
procedure followed and the response action plan. As soon as possible
but no later than 10 days after receiving the complaint, the
commissioner or investigator appointed by the commissioner will
interview the employee. If the employee is reluctant to sign a written
complaint, the commissioner or investigator will prepare written notes
of the date, time and place of the complaint and the specific allegations.
These notes will be read back to the employee who will be asked to
affirm, preferably in writing the information's accuracy.
c. Investigation. The commissioner will seek the advice of the township
attorney when planning the investigation. The investigation should be
conducted by the township attorney or county prosecutor if it involves
potential criminal charges. The investigation should establish the
frequency and nature of the alleged conduct and whether the complaint
coincides with other employment events such as a poor performance
evaluation. The investigation should also determine if other employees
were subjected to similar misconduct. It is important to protect the
rights of both the person making the complaint and the alleged
wrongdoer.
d. Response Plan — No Corrective Action Required. The commissioner
will discuss the conclusions with the township attorney and render a
decision within 14 days after the investigation is complete. If the
validity of a complaint cannot be determined or the complaint is
groundless, the complaining employee should be notified in writing.
Care should be taken to avoid being too specific, confrontational or
accusatory and to avoid any language that might be construed as
defamatory. A general statement is usually more appropriate that the
claim was thoroughly investigated, but could not be sufficiently
documented or confirmed to justify taking formal action. The employee
should be assured that future complaints will be investigated and that
the township is committed to eliminating wrongful employment
practices when they are found to exist. If the investigation reveals that
the complainant intentionally and maliciously levied false charges
against the alleged wrongdoer, the complainant must be notified of the
seriousness of filing a false complaint, and the appropriate disciplinary
penalty under the circumstances, up to and including termination.
e. Response Plan — Corrective Action Required. If the investigation
reveals that the complaint is justified and substantiated, the
commissioner will formulate with the advice of the township attorney a
corrective action plan as well as possible disciplinary action. The
§ 5-50 LYNDHURST CODE § 5-50
1:252
§ 5-51. REQUESTS FOR EMPLOYMENT VERIFICATION AND
REFERENCE PROCEDURE. [Ord. #2510, § I]
Inquiries and written requests for references or employment verification
regarding a current or former employee must be referred to the personnel
administrator. No employee may issue a reference letter without the
permission of the personnel administrator. Under no circumstances should
any information be released over the phone.
In response to a request for information, the personnel administrator will
only verify an employee's name, dates of employment, job title, department
and final salary. No other data or information will be furnished unless
(1) the township is required to release the information by law or (2) the
employee or former employee authorizes the township in writing to furnish
this information and releases the township from liability.
§ 5-52. CONTINUING EDUCATION PROCEDURE. [Ord. #2510, § I]
The township, in conjunction with the township attorney will arrange for
employment practices seminars at least annually to train all managerial/
supervisory personnel. The township will also offer nonmandatory training
to all other employees with special emphasis on employee rights and
protections under various federal and state laws as well as township
employment practices. Records will be maintained in the official personnel
files of all employees trained under this procedure.
Managerial and supervisory personnel will also update employees
periodically by department meetings and memos that should address
specific problems and concerns that may arise. Every effort will be made to
encourage employee suggestions about ways to avoid employer-employee
disputes and violations of employment rights.
§ 5-53. FORMS. [Ord. #2510, § I]
The personnel administrator shall provide copies of all forms which shall
be used by the township and its employees to implement the procedures
herein. (See Employee Handbook)
§ 5-54. DISCLAIMER. [Ord. #2306, § XI; Ord. #2510, § I]
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be interpreted to mean that
employees will only be terminated for just cause or that a particular job
shall remain available. This chapter is a guide not a bargained for contract
and every employee should be aware that it can be changed at any time
without notice.
complaining employee will be notified, in writing that it appears that
the complaint was justified and an appropriate response plan has been
formulated. A copy of the response plan should be attached to the letter.
The response plan should provide for appropriate remedial action to
prevent a recurrence of the wrongful act or behavior.
§ 5-50 GENERAL § 5-55
1:253
§ 5-55. SAVING CLAUSE. [Ord. #2510, § I]
If any sentence, section, clause or other portion of this chapter or the
application thereof to any person or circumstance shall for any reason be
adjudged by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such judgment
shall not effect, impair or repeal the remainder of this chapter.
§ 5-56. SEVERABILITY OF ORDINANCE NO. 2889-13. [Ord.
#2889-13 § 9]
If any part, sections, provision(s), or the total of any of the above-mentioned
provisions adopted by Ordinance No. 2889-13 are held to be invalid or
unenforceable in any court, the findings or judgments of which court are
applicable in the State of New Jersey, the remainder of such provisions
shall remain in full force and effect as an Ordinance of the Township of
Lyndhurst.
§ 5-57. SEVERABILITY OF ORDINANCE NO. 2910-14. [Ord.
#2910-14 § 6]
If any part, sections, provision(s), or the total of any of the above-mentioned
provisions of Ordinance No. 2910-14 are held to be invalid or unenforceable
in any court, the findings or judgments of which court are applicable in the
State of New Jersey, the remainder of such provisions shall remain in full
force and effect as an Ordinance of the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 5-58. SEVERABILITY OF ORDINANCE NO. 2920-15. [Ord.
#2920-15 § 3]
If any part, sections, provision(s), or the total of any of the above-mentioned
provisions adopted by Ordinance No. 2920-15 are held to be invalid or
unenforceable in any court, the findings or judgments of which court are
applicable in the State of New Jersey, the remainder of such provisions
shall remain in full force and effect as an Ordinance of the Township of
Lyndhurst.
Chapter 6
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL
[Editor's Note: Chapter 3, § 3-7, regulates the consumption of
alcoholic beverages in public places.]
§ 6-1. PURPOSE. [New]
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Township of Lyndhurst in accordance with the provisions
of an act of the Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled An Act
Concerning Alcoholic Beverages, comprising Chapter 436 of the Laws of
1933, its supplements and amendments, and also comprising N.J.R.S. 33:1-1
§ 5-55 LYNDHURST CODE § 6-1
1:254
et seq., and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-2. DEFINITIONS. [New]
For the purpose of this chapter, words and phrases herein shall have the
same meanings as in R.S. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 6-3. LICENSES.
§ 6-3.1. Laws Applicable. [New]
All applications for licenses, all licenses issued and all proceedings under
this chapter shall be in accordance with the act, rules and regulations
referred to in Section 6-1, and all other applicable laws of the State of New
Jersey or the United States.
§ 6-3.2. Issuing Authority. [New]
All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by the board of
commissioners, which shall also administer the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.3. License Required. [New]
No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages within the township
without obtaining a license in accordance with the act referred to in Section
6-1 and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 6-3.4. License Fees. [Ord. #1424, § 3; Ord. # 1763, § 1; Ord.
#1869, § 1; Ord. #2411, § I; Ord. #2499, § I; Ord. #2850-12]
The annual fees of licenses for the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages
in the township shall be as follows:
Class of Licenses Annual License Fee
Plenary Retail Consumption License $1,036
Plenary Retail Distribution License $777
Club License $150
The provisions of this subsection with respect to the limitation on the
number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses
presently issued.
§ 6-4. REGULATIONS OF LICENSES.
§ 6-4.1. Hours of Sale for Alcoholic Beverages. [Ord. # 1424, § 3;
Ord. #1811 § 1; Ord. #2871-12; Ord. #2877-12]
§ 6-1 GENERAL § 6-4.1
1:255
§ 6-4.2. Sundays. [Ord. #1424, § 3; Ord. #1811, § 2; Ord. #2871-12;
Ord. #2877-12]
§ 6-4.3. New Year's Day. [Ord. # 1424, § 3; Ord. #1811, § 1; Ord.
#2871-12; Ord. #2877-12]
§ 6-4.4. Sales to Certain Persons. [New]
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, directly
or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to any habitual drunkard, intoxicated
person or minor, or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on any
licensed premises by any of the above named classes or persons, or permit
any such persons to congregate in or about the licensed premises.
§ 6-4.5. Closing Provision. [New; Ord. No. 2349, § I]
During the hours that the sale of alcoholic beverages are prohibited, the
entire licensed premises shall also be closed, with the exception of hotels,
delicatessens, diners and restaurants, and no person shall be admitted or
permitted to remain therein except the licensee or bona fide employees of
the licensee.
a. No alcoholic beverage shall be sold for consumption on the licensed
premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. except Sundays
and New Year's Day and as hereinafter provided.
b. No alcoholic beverage shall be sold or delivered for consumption off the
licensed premises on any day between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 7:00
a.m. except Sundays and New Year's Day and as hereinafter provided.
a. No alcoholic beverage shall be sold or delivered for consumption off the
licensed premises before 12:00 noon nor after 10:00 p.m., except as
hereinafter provided.
b. Whenever Christmas Eve (December 24) and New Year's Eve
(December 31) fall on a Sunday, alcoholic beverages may be sold or
delivered for consumption off the licensed premises between the hours
of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. [Added 12-20-2017 by Ord. No.
2983-17]
a. No alcoholic beverage shall be sold or delivered for consumption on the
licensed premises between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless
January 1 is a Sunday, in which case, alcoholic beverages shall not be
sold for consumption on the licensed premises between the hours of
5:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon.
b. No alcoholic beverage shall be sold or delivered for consumption off the
licensed premises between the hours of 5:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless
January 1 is a Sunday in which case alcoholic beverages shall not be
sold or delivered for consumption off the licensed premises before
12:00 noon nor after 10:00 p.m., except as hereinafter provided.
§ 6-4.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 6-4.6
1:256
§ 6-4.6. Term of License; Deposit. [Ord. #1424, § 3]
A license shall be for the term of one year from the first day of July in each
year. Every application for a license shall be accompanied by the deposit of
the full amount of the properly prorated annual fee for such license.
§ 6-4.7. License Requirements. [Ord. #1424, § 3]
§ 6-4.8. Conduct of Business; Requirements. [Ord. #1424, § 3; Ord.
#2007, § I]
a. No license of any class shall be issued to any person who has been
convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude.
b. Every licensee and every agent, bartender or waiter connected with or
employed by any licensee shall make full and complete answers under
oath in writing on form furnished by the department of public safety to
all questions printed on such blanks which shall be for the purpose of
procuring information and data relating to or concerning the location,
housing and situation of any premises licensed under the act and
intended for use in the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages and of
information or data relating to or concerning the identity, character,
antecedents and general experience of any person, or person connected
with or employed by any licensee.
c. Upon notification by the township clerk to any person, firm or
corporation, that his, their or its application for a license under and by
virtue of the act above referred to has been approved, before the
license is granted, the licensee and every agent, bartender or waiter
connected with or employed by or to be connected with or employed by
the licensee shall submit to the taking by the department of public
safety of an impression of the thumb and fingertips of both hands. At
the time of the taking of fingerprints, the licensee and every agent,
bartender or waiter connected with or employed by the licensee or to
be connected with or employed by the licensee shall furnish to the
department of public safety a photograph in triplicate of himself. This
photograph shall be of a size two inches by two inches shall be
satisfactory to the department, and shall have been taken within one
year from the date when the photograph is submitted.
a. No licensee shall have in his employ anyone under the age of 18 years,
provided, however, that persons failing to qualify as to age may, with
the approval of the state commissioner, be employed by any licensee,
but the employee shall not in any manner whatsoever sell or solicit the
sale of any alcoholic beverages.
b. No sale shall be made of any distilled, fortified, rectified or blended
alcoholic beverages for consumption off the licensed premises except in
bottles or other receptacles which are properly sealed and have affixed
thereto all necessary federal and state stamps, and comply with the
standards of fill required by the state rules and regulations.
§ 6-4.6 GENERAL § 6-4.8
1:257
§ 6-4.9. Hours of Sale for Wine and Malt Alcoholic Beverages for
Consumption Off Licensed Premises. [Ord. # 2877-12]
c. No license shall be granted to any applicant unless the premises
desired to be licensed shall have been inspected and approved by the
department of public safety. If the applicant fails to abide by any
directions for a change in the premises about to be licensed, the
application of the applicant shall be denied. If, after the granting of any
application, and the issuance of a license, the premises shall be altered
or changed in any way contrary to the direction of the department of
public safety, the license of the licensee may, after hearing, be revoked.
d. All mixed or concocted drinks to be consumed on the premises of any
licensee shall be prepared, mixed or concocted in full view of the
purchasers, whether the same are served at the public bar or at tables.
e. No licensee shall sell any alcoholic beverages of any kind to any person
under the age of 21 years, or to any person actually or apparently
intoxicated.
f. The department of public safety shall furnish to the licensee and to
every agent, bartender or waiter connected with or employed by the
licensee an identification card showing compliance with the provisions
of this resolution which shall be on file on the premises of the licensee
so that it can be exhibited upon demand at any time. The identification
shall expire one year from the date of issuance, at which time new
photographs shall be submitted if requested by the department of
public safety.
g. No licensee shall engage any agent, bartender, waiter or other
employee in connection with the business of the licensee until or unless
the agent, bartender, waiter or other employee has conformed to the
rules and regulations above set forth.
h. Every agent, bartender or waiter shall forthwith notify the department
of public safety, of any change in employment, and any licensee
employing any agent, bartender or waiter who is the holder of an
identification card, from the department of public safety, shall forthwith
report to the department, the employment of any such agent, bartender
or waiter.
a. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section hereinabove, no wine
and malt alcoholic beverages shall be sold or delivered for consumption
off the licensed premises on any day between the hours of 11:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., except Sundays and New Year's Day as hereinafter
provided.
b. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section hereinabove, no wine
and malt alcoholic beverages shall be sold or delivered for consumption
off the licensed premises on Sundays before 12:00 noon nor after 11:00
p.m.
§ 6-4.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 6-4.9
1:258
§ 6-5. MINORS. [New; Ord. #2007, § II]
No licensee shall sell or serve any alcoholic beverages to any person under
the age of 21 years of age.
§ 6-6. REVOCATION OF LICENSE. [Ord. #1424, § 3; New]
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State Director of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with the
provisions of R.S. 33:1-31 by a service of a five day notice of charges
preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable opportunity for a
hearing.
Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
§ 6-7. RIGHT TO REPEAL. [Ord. #1424, § 3]
All licenses issued under these rules shall be subject to the right hereby
reserved by the board of commissioners to change, alter, amend or repeal
the same at any time.
c. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section hereinabove, if New
Year's Day is a Sunday, wine and malt alcoholic beverages shall not be
sold or delivered for consumption off the licensed premises before
12:00 noon nor after 11:00 p.m.
a. If any container, filled, partly filled, or empty, shall be found upon the
licensed premises of any licensee without all lawful and proper stamps
attached thereto or with forged, or counterfeit or any unlawful stamps
or if such stamps whether attached to any container or not shall be
found upon such licensed premises, then and in either of such events
the license of the licensee shall be revoked after hearing.
b. If any gambling device, lottery or number slip is found in or about any
licensed premises or on or about the person of any licensee, agent,
bartender or waiter of the licensee, then, in such event, the license of
the licensee may be revoked after hearing, as hereinafter provided for.
Such suspension or revocation shall apply to the licensee and may
apply to the licensed premises. Any revocation shall render the licensee
ineligible to receive any other license under these rules and regulations
for a period of two years from the effective date thereof and may in the
discretion of the board of commissioners render the licensed premises
ineligible to become a subject for any future license under these rules
and regulations during the period of two years.
§ 6-4.9 GENERAL § 6-8
1:259
§ 6-8. PERSONS UNDER 21 UNACCOMPANIED BY ADULTS
PROHIBITED FROM ENTERING PREMISES WITH LIQUOR
LICENSES.
§ 6-8.1. Persons Under 21. [Ord. #2119; Ord. #2509, § I]
No persons under the age of 21 shall enter any premises licensed for the
plenary sale of alcoholic beverages unless accompanied by his or her parent
or guardian. This shall not apply to minors who are guests at bona fide
hotels, motels or restaurants, or who enter a licensed premises where food
is sold, for the purpose of purchasing food, or who are required to enter a
licensed premises in the course of their business or occupation.
§ 6-8.2. (Reserved)20
Chapter 7
TRAFFIC
Editor's Note: Prior ordinances codified in Chapter VII include
Ordinance Nos. 1424, § 17; 1427, 1452, 1453, 1460, 1486, 1505,
1588, 1616, 1625, 1647, 1664, 1718, 1735, 1753, 1756, 1766, 1773,
1784, 1791, 1801, 1817, 1822, 1829, 1845, 1857, 1861, 1888, 1920,
1931, 1936, 1939, 1942, 1971 and 1979. Ordinance No. 2008
completely revised Chapter VII, Traffic on November 10, 1986.
Subsequent amendments are noted within the text.
See Chapter IV, Section 4-13 for regulation of tow truck operations.
Chapter VII, Traffic, received approval from the New Jersey
Department of Transportation on March 5, 1987.
§ 7-1. WORDS AND PHRASES. [Ord. #2008]
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle I of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes
of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used
herein.
§ 7-2. OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. [Ord. #2008]
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Saving Time as may be in
current use in the township.
§ 7-3. AUTHORIZATION FOR THE CLOSING OF ANY STREET. [Ord.
#2008]
20.Editor's Note: Former subsection 6-8.2, Conditions Permitting Entry of Minor, previously
codified herein and containing portions of Ordinance No. 2119 was repealed in its entirety
by Ordinance No. 2509.
§ 6-8 LYNDHURST CODE § 7-3
1:260
§ 7-3.1. Closing Streets in School Areas. [Added 6-11-2019 by Ord.
No. 3025-19]
a. The director of the department of public safety, or in his absence,
disability or inability to act, the mayor and in the event of his absence,
disability or inability to act, then the chief of police of the Township of
Lyndhurst is hereby authorized to provide by regulation for the closing
of any street or portion thereof to motor vehicle traffic on any day or
days during specified hours on any day or days whenever he finds that
such closing is necessary for the preservation of the public safety,
health or welfare.
b. Any regulations promulgated by the director of the department of
public safety under, and in accordance with paragraph a above, shall
provide for the posting of proper warnings signs of such closing in any
street or portion thereof during the time the same is closed in
pursuance thereof.
c. Any violation of this section or of any regulation promulgated
thereunder shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $50.
d. Any regulation adopted under this section that mandates the closing of
any street for a period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not
become effective unless and until it has been submitted to and
approved by the commissioner of transportation of the department of
transportation.
a. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.9, the following portions of the streets
shall be closed to the use of through vehicular traffic, between the
specified hours, when the schools adjoining such streets are in session:
Name of Street Boundaries School Times
Fern Avenue From
Stuyvesant
Avenue to
Livingston
Avenue
Franklin 7:45 a.m. to
8:45 a.m., 2:30
p.m. to 3:30
p.m.
Fifth Street Fifth Street at
Summer Avenue
to go north
Washington 8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Lake Avenue Lake Avenue at
Delafield Avenue
to go west
Jefferson 7:30 a.m. to
8:30 a.m.
Lake Avenue Lake Avenue at
Summit Avenue
to go west
Columbus 2:30 p.m. to
3:30 p.m.
§ 7-3 GENERAL § 7-3.1
1:261
§ 7-4. LIMITING THE USE OF STREETS TO CERTAIN CLASS OF
VEHICLES.
§ 7-4.1. Vehicles Over Designated Weight Excluded From Certain
Streets. [Ord. #2008]
Vehicles over the registered gross weight designated in Schedule I of
Chapter 7.1 are hereby excluded from the streets or parts of streets
described in Schedule I, except for the pickup and delivery of materials on
such streets. Schedule I is being attached hereto and made a part of this
chapter.
§ 7-4.2. Parking of Vehicles Weighing in Excess of 5,000 Pounds
Prohibited. [Ord. #2008]
No person shall park a truck, tractor, trailer, semi-trailer or omnibus having
a vehicle registered gross weight or combination of vehicles having
registered gross weights in excess of 5,000 pounds upon any street between
the hours specified as described in Schedule II of Chapter 7.1.
§ 7-4.3. Route for Vehicles Over Four Tons. [Ord. #2008; Ord.
#2025, § I]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1 the streets or parts of streets as described
in Schedule III of Chapter 7.1 are hereby designated as Route for Vehicles
Over Four Tons. All trucks having a total combined registered gross weight
of vehicle plus load in excess of four tons shall be excluded from all streets,
except from those streets which form a part of the system of truck routes.
Vehicles will be permitted on all streets for the purpose of pickup and
delivery of materials.
§ 7-5. PARKING.
§ 7-5.1. Regulations Not Exclusive. [Ord. #2008]
The provision of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey Statute or as hereinafter
provided.
Name of Street Boundaries School Times
Second Avenue Second Avenue
at Stuyvesant
Avenue to go
east
Memorial
Campus
7:30 a.m. to
8:30 a.m., 2:30
p.m. to 3:30
p.m.
b. Violation of this subsection shall be punishable pursuant to N.J.S.A.
39:4-215.
§ 7-3.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 7-5.2
1:262
§ 7-5.2. Parking Prohibited During State of Emergency. [Ord.
#2008]
§ 7-5.3. Parking Prohibited at All Times on Certain Streets. [Ord.
#2008; Ord. #2050, § I; Ord. #2134, § I; Ord. #2153, § I; Ord.
#2375, § I; Ord. # 2407, § I; Ord. #2476, § I; Ord. #2496, § I; Ord.
#2632, § 1; Ord. #2650, § 1; Ord. #2705, § 1; Ord. #2775, §§ 1, 2;
Ord. #2778, § 2; Ord. #2827-11, § 3; Ord. #2870-12, § 3; Ord.
#2879-13, §§ 2,3; Ord. #2883-13, § 3; Ord. #2884-13, § 1; Ord.
#2894-13 § 1; Ord. #2900-14 §§ 3, 4; Ord. #2904-14 § 1; Ord.
#2909-14 § 1; Ord. No. 2943-16; Ord. No. 2952-16; Ord. No.
2965-17]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule IV of Chapter 7.1.
§ 7-5.4. Parking Prohibited During Certain Hours on Certain
Streets. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2020, § II; Ord. #2021, § I; Ord. #2025,
§§ II, III; Ord. #2050, § II; Ord. #2074, § I; Ord. #2181, § 1; Ord.
#2209, § I; Ord. #2217, § I; Ord. #2240, § I; Ord. #2632, § 2; Ord.
#2635, § 1; Ord. #2645, § 1; Ord. #2651, § 1; Ord. #2692, § 1; Ord.
#2705, § 2; Ord. #2724, § 1; Ord. #2870-12, §§ 3, 4; Ord. #2874-12,
§ 4; Ord. #2879 § 1; Ord. #2900-14 §§ 5,6; Ord. #2907-14 §§ 3, 4;
Ord. #2909-14 § 2; Ord. No. 2917-15 § 1; Ord. No. 2918-15 § 2; Ord.
No. 2926-16 § 2]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified on Schedule V
of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in Schedule V of Chapter 7.1.
a. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
streets or sections of streets where temporary EMERGENCY NO
PARKING signs are displayed. The chief of police or, in his absence, the
ranking police officer is authorized to declare an emergency and to
direct the posting of EMERGENCY NO PARKING signs when weather
conditions, accidents, road construction, fire or public celebrations
dictate or require the avoidance of hazards or other conditions which
interfere with the free flow of traffic. Notification that EMERGENCY
NO PARKING signs are being or will be posted shall be given to the
operator or owner of any vehicle which has been parked prior to the
posting of the signs.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this
subsection shall be deemed a nuisance and menace to the safe and
proper regulations of traffic and any police officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of
removal and storage which may result from such removal before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
c. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
§ 7-5.2 GENERAL § 7-5.5
1:263
§ 7-5.5. Stopping or Standing Prohibited During Certain Hours on
Certain Streets. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2020, § I; Ord. #2025, § IV; Ord.
#2032, § I; Ord. #2036, § I; Ord. #2134, § I; Ord. #2591, § 1; Ord.
#2705, § 3; Ord. #2827-11, § 4]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours specified in
Schedule VI of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VI of Chapter 7.1.
§ 7-5.6. Parking Time Limited on Certain Streets. [Ord. #2008; Ord.
#2025, § V; Ord. #2152, § I; Ord. #2163, § I; Ord. #2611, § 1; Ord.
#2224, § I; Ord. #2288, § I; Ord. #2375, § II; Ord. #2382, § I; Ord.
#2611, § 1; Ord. #2668, § 1; Ord. #2879-13, §§ 5,6; Ord. #2884-13,
§ 2; Ord. #2900-14 §§ 7,8; Ord. No. 2930-16 § 2; amended 6-11-2019
by Ord. No. 3027-19]
§ 7-5.7. Parking Prohibited for Street Cleaning. [Ord. #2008; Ord.
#2030, § I; Ord. #2098, § I; Ord. #2325, § I; Ord. #2429, § I; Ord.
#2454, § I; Ord. #2673, § 1; Ord. #2681, § 2; Ord. #2759, §§ 2, 3;
Ord. #2827-11, § 5; Ord. #2874-12, § 5; Ord. No. 2918-15 § 3]
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor vehicle upon any
street between the specified hours and days as described in Schedule VIII
of Chapter 7.1, for the purpose of cleaning the streets and signs shall be
posted on the streets to effect same.
§ 7-5.8. Parking Prohibited for Sale or Repair. [Ord. #2008]
§ 7-5.9. Parking and Occupying Spaces and Stalls. [Ord. #2008]
No person shall park or leave a vehicle on a highway, or public property
within the township, so as to occupy more than one marked or designated
parking space or stall.
a. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule VII, Subsection a, at any time between the hours listed in
Schedule VII of any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any
of the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VII of Chapter
7.1.
b. No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule VII, Subsection b, at any time between the hours listed in
Schedule VII of any day (except Saturdays, Sundays and public
holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets described in
Schedule VII of Chapter 7.1.
a. No person shall park a vehicle on any street for the purpose of sale.
b. No person shall park a vehicle on any street for repairs, except in case
of emergency.
§ 7-5.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 7-5.9
1:264
§ 7-5.10. Parking Limited to Medical Emergency Vehicles Only.
[Ord. #2034, § I]
Parking on the streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XXVI of
Chapter 7.1shall be limited to medical emergency vehicles only.
§ 7-5.11. Parking Prohibited for Taxicabs During Certain Hours.
[Ord. #2768, § 1]
No person shall cause or permit a taxicab, as defined in Section 15-2 of
the Township of Lyndhurst Ordinances, to be parked upon any street in the
township between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
§ 7-5.12. Angle Parking. [Ord. #2886-13]
The establishment of zones, to be known as "angle parking zones,"
permitting the 90°-angle parking of motor vehicles within delineated
parking stall lines on streets, as described in Schedule XXVII of Chapter 7.1,
except in those areas where parking would otherwise be prohibited by state
statute or township ordinance, is hereby authorized.
§ 7-6. HANDICAPPED PARKING.
a. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
§ 7-5.9 GENERAL § 7-6.1
1:265
§ 7-6.1. Handicapped Parking on Street. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2030,
§ II; Ord. #2091, § I; Ord. #2131, § I; Ord. #2151, § I; Ord. #2158,
§§ I, II; Ord. #2190, § I; Ord. #2197, § 1; Ord. #2226, § I; Ord.
#2249, § I; Ord. #2251, § I; Ord. #2264, § I; Ord. #2383, §§ I, II;
Ord. #2405, § I; Ord. #2446, § I; Ord. #2602, § I; Ord. #2617, § 1;
Ord. #2619, § 1; Ord. #2623, § 1; Ord. #2630, § 1; Ord. #2631, § 1;
Ord. #2641, § 1; Ord. #2650, § 1; Ord. #2667, § 1; Ord. #2672, § 1;
Ord. #2677, § 1; Ord. #2687, § 1; Ord. No. 2691, § 1; Ord. #2691, § b
1; Ord. #2704, §§ 1,2; Ord. #2721, § 1; Ord. #2725, § 1; Ord. #2732,
§§ 1,2; Ord. #2734, § 1; Ord. #2753, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #2759, § 1; Ord.
#2763, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #2767, § 1; Ord. #2786; Ord. #2789-11; Ord.
#2792-11, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #2798-11, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #2807-11, §§ 1, 2;
Ord. #2816-11, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #2824-11, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #2827-11, §§ 1,
2; Ord. #2830-11, § 1; Ord. #2831-11; Ord. #2834-12; Ord.
#2842-12; Ord. #2847-12; Ord. #2860-12, § 1; Ord. #2866-12, § 1;
Ord. #2870-12, § 1, 2; Ord. #2874-12, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #2879-13, § 1;
Ord. #2883-13, §§ 1,2; Ord. #2884-13, §§ 3,4; Ord. #2900-14, §§ 1,2;
Ord. #2907-14 §§ 1, 2; Ord. #2909-14 §§ 3, 4; Ord. #2912-15 §§ 1, 2;
Ord. No. 2917-15 § 2; Ord. No. 2918-15 § 1; Ord. No. 2921-15; Ord.
No. 2922-15; Ord. No. 2924-15; Ord. No. 2926-16 § 1; Ord. No.
2930-16 § 1; Ord. No. 2935-16; Ord. No. 2949-16; Ord. No. 2951-16;
Ord. No. 2955-16 § 1; Ord. No. 2958-17; Ord. No. 2961-17; Ord. No.
2966-17]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following on
street locations as shown in Schedule IX-A of Chapter 7.1 are designated as
handicapped parking spaces. Such spaces are for use by persons who have
been issued special identification cards or plates or placards by the Motor
Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard issued by the chief of police.
No other person shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
§ 7-6.2. Handicapped Parking in Municipal Parking Lots and on
Board of Education Property. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2687, § 2; Ord.
#2691, § 2; Ord. #2704, § 3; Ord. #2752, § 1; Ord. #244-12; Ord.
#2909-14 §§ 5, 6]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following offstreet
municipal parking yards and board of education property as shown
in Schedule IX-B of Chapter 7.1 are designated as Handicapped Parking
Areas. Such spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special
identification cards, plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or
a temporary placard issued by the chief of police.
No other person shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
§ 7-6.3. Handicapped Parking on Private Property Open to the
Public. [Ord. #2008]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following
off-street parking yards as shown in Schedule IX-C of Chapter 7.1 are
§ 7-6.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 7-6.3
1:266
designated as Handicapped Parking Areas. Such spaces are for use by
persons who have been issued special identification cards, plates or
placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission or a temporary placard issued
by the chief of police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these
spaces.
§ 7-6.4. Handicapped Parking on All Other Private Property. [Ord.
#2008]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the following offstreet
parking yards as shown in Schedule IX-D of Chapter 7.1 are
designated as Handicapped Parking Areas. Such spaces are for use by
persons who have been issued special identification cards, plates or
placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard issued
by the chief of police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these
spaces.
§ 7-6.5. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance.
[Ord. #2008]
The owners of the premises referred to in subsections 7-6.3 and 7-6.4 shall
provide and install signs and pavement markings for each parking space
reserved for use by handicapped persons, which signing and markings shall
be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. The
cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement markings
shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property. The owner shall,
subsequent to initial procurement and installation, maintain such signs
and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense to the
township. The owner shall be responsible for the repair and restoration or
replacement of same.
§ 7-7. PERMIT PARKING. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2376, § I; Ord. #2407,
§ II; Ord. #2705, § 4; Ord. #2778, § 1; Ord. No. 2917-15 § 3]
a. In accordance with the provision of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197 the following
municipal parking yards as shown in Schedule X of Chapter 7.1 are
designated for parking by permit only.
b. A vehicle with a permit may only be parked in designated area during
the time and days specified in Schedule X.
c. The permit shall be in the form of a sticker prepared by the Lyndhurst
police department, and it shall set forth information contained in the
application, and it shall be placed in the rear window.
d. Any vehicle parked in violation of this subsection shall be deemed a
nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and
any peace officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The
owner shall bear the reasonable costs of removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
§ 7-6.3 GENERAL § 7-7
1:267
§ 7-7.1. Application; Fees; Term; Filing. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2227,
§ I; Ord. #2280, § I; Ord. #2606, § 1]
§ 7-8. ONE-WAY STREETS. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2155, § I; Ord.
#2220, § I; Ord. #2229, § I; Ord. #2304, § I; Ord. #2312, § I; Ord.
#2317, § I; Ord. #2396, § I; Ord. #2644, § 1; Ord. #2651, § 2; Ord.
#2686, § 1; Ord. #2883-13, § 4; Ord. #2884-13, § 5; Ord. #2894-13,
§ 2]
The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XI of Chapter 7.1 are
hereby designated as One-Way streets in the direction indicated.
§ 7-9. THROUGH STREETS, STOP INTERSECTIONS AND YIELD
INTERSECTIONS.
§ 7-9.1. Through Streets. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2025, §§ VI, VII]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described in Schedule XII of Chapter 7.1 are hereby designated as
Through Streets. STOP signs shall be installed on the near right side of
each street intersecting the Through Street except where YIELD signs are
provided for in the designations.
§ 7-9.2. Stop Intersections. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2258, § I; Ord.
#2909-14 § 7; Ord. No. 2956-16]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule XIII of Chapter 7.1 are hereby designated as Stop Intersections.
STOP signs shall be installed as provided therein.
e. No vehicle shall be allowed to stand unmoved for a period exceeding 48
hours.
a. The provisions of Section 7-7 apply to all registered passenger vehicles
or commercial vehicles of 6,000 pounds or less.
b. The application for a permit shall be made on a form prepared by the
township police department, and it shall set forth the name and address
of the owner of the vehicle for which the permit is to be issued together
with the make and license number of the vehicle. The permit may be
transferred to another vehicle owned by the applicant.
c. The fee for a permit for parking in the lot is hereby established at $250
per year, there shall be no refunds or prorating.
d. The permit shall be effective from July 1 through June 30 of the
following year and may be obtained from the township police
department.
e. The permit shall be issued on a first come first served basis with a
preference for Lyndhurst residents, who file prior to October 31 of the
permit year.
§ 7-7 LYNDHURST CODE § 7-9.3
1:268
§ 7-9.3. Yield Intersections. [Ord. #2008]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
in Schedule XIV of Chapter 7.1 are hereby designated as Yield Intersections.
YIELD signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 7-10. TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
§ 7-10.1. Established. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2148, § I; Ord. #2894-13,
§ 5]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-120.1, the intersections
described in Schedule XV of Chapter 7.1 are hereby designated as
Signalized Intersections. Traffic signals shall be installed as provided
therein.
§ 7-10.2. Installation of Signals. [Ord. #2008]
The traffic signal installation shall be in accordance with the provisions
of An Act Concerning Motor Vehicles and Traffic Regulations, Subtitle
1 of Title 39 of the N.J.S.A. and shall conform to the design and shall
be maintained in operation as authorized by the state department of
transportation.
§ 7-10.3. Automated Traffic Control Signal Monitoring System.
[Ord. #2707, § 1]
The installation and utilization of an automated traffic control signal
monitoring system pursuant to the Red Light Running (RLR) Automated
Enforcement pilot program enacted under Assembly Bill 4314, subject to
the provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the New Jersey statutes, is hereby
authorized at the following locations:
Location
Ridge Road and Valley Brook Avenue
Orient Way and Valley Brook Avenue
Ridge Road and Kingsland Avenue
Kingsland Avenue and Riverside Avenue
§ 7-11. TURN PROHIBITIONS. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2025, § VIII;
Ord. #2180, § 1; Ord. #2220, § I; Ord. #2632, § 3; Ord. #2705, § 5;
Ord. #2866-12, § 2; Ord. #2894-13, § 3; Ord. #2912-15]
No person shall make a turn at any of the locations, and in a manner
described in Schedule XVI of Chapter 7.1.
§ 7-9.3 GENERAL § 7-11A
1:269
§ 7-11A. TURNS REQUIRED. [Ord. #2134, § III; Ord. #2894-13, § 4;
Ord. #2904-14 § 2; Ord. #2912-15]
The lanes described in Schedule XVI-A of Chapter 7.1 are hereby designated
as Turns Required.
§ 7-12. LOADING ZONES.
§ 7-12.1. Established. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2261, § I; Ord. #2397, § I;
Ord. #2750, § 1; Ord. #2912-15]
The locations described in Schedule XVII of Chapter 7.1 are hereby
designated as Loading Zones.
§ 7-12.2. Parking Prohibitions. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2650, § 3; Ord.
#2750, § 1]
No person shall park a vehicle in said locations during the times indicated
other than for the loading or unloading of passengers, goods and materials.
§ 7-13. BUS STOPS.
§ 7-13.1. Established. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2014, § I; Ord. #2015, § I;
Ord. #2037, §§ I-III; Ord. #2044, § I; Ord. #2193, § I; Res. of
5-11-1999; Ord. #2437, § I; Ord. #2488, § I; Ord. #2535, § 1; Ord.
#2661, § 1; Ord. #2698, § 1; Ord. #2754, § 1; Ord. #2775; Ord.
#2893-13]
The locations described in Schedule XVIII of Chapter 7.1 are hereby
designated as Bus Stops.
§ 7-13.2. Parking Prohibitions. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2759, § 4]
No vehicle other than an omnibus, picking up or discharging passengers,
shall be permitted to occupy said location between the hours indicated.
§ 7-14. TAXI STANDS.
§ 7-14.1. Established. [Ord. #2008]
The locations described in Schedule XIX of Chapter 7.1 are hereby
designated as Taxi Stands.
§ 7-14.2. Parking Prohibitions. [Ord. #2008]
No vehicle other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy said locations
during the times indicated.
§ 7-15. LANE USE.
§ 7-11A LYNDHURST CODE § 7-15.1
1:270
§ 7-15.1. Lane Use Reservations. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2025, § IX]
The lane locations described in Schedule XX of Chapter 7.1 are designated
as Lane Use Reservations and traffic shall move as indicated.
§ 7-16. SPEED LIMITS. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2269, § I; Ord. #2763,
§ 3; Ord. #2884-13 § 6]
§ 7-17. NO-PASSING ZONES. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2013, § I; Ord.
#2912-15]
§ 7-18. CONTROL FOR MOVEMENT AND THE PARKING OF
TRAFFIC ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE PROPERTY.
§ 7-18.1. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Municipal Property and Board of Education Property. [Ord. #2008;
Ord. #2852-12; Ord. #2950-16]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following
municipal and board of education property, as shown in Schedule XXIII-A
of Chapter 7.1, shall have the movement of traffic controlled by the type of
regulation indicated. No person shall operate, or park a vehicle in violation
of the regulations indicated.
§ 7-18.2. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
Private Property Open to the Public. [Ord. #2008]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following
private property that is open to the public and to which the public is invited,
as shown in Schedule XXIII-B of Chapter 7.1, shall have the movement
of traffic controlled by the type of regulations indicated. No person shall
operate or park a vehicle in violation of the regulations.
a. The streets or parts of streets described in Schedule XXI of Chapter 7.1
shall have the speed limits designated in such schedule.
b. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the above designated speed limits as authorized by the department of
transportation.
a. The locations described in Schedule XXII of Chapter 7.1 shall be
designated as No-Passing Zones.
b. This section shall take effect upon the approval of the commissioner of
transportation as provided for by law.
§ 7-15.1 GENERAL § 7-18.3
1:271
§ 7-18.3. Regulation for the Movement and the Parking of Traffic on
All Other Private Property. [Ord. #2008]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the regulations of
Subtitle I of Title 39 are hereby made applicable to the properties listed in
Schedule XXIII-C of Chapter 7.1.
§ 7-18.4. Signs, Pavement Markings, Installation and Maintenance.
[Ord. #2008]
The owners of the premises referred to in subsections 17-18.2 and 17-18.3
shall provide and install signs and pavement markings as required, which
signage and markings shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices. The cost of procurement and installation of the
signs and pavement markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of
the property. The owner shall subsequently, to the initial procurement and
installation, maintain such signs and pavement markings in good condition
at no cost or expense to the township. The owner shall be responsible for
the repair and restoration or replacement of same.
§ 7-19. TEMPORARY PARKING PROHIBITION FOR SNOW
PLOWING AND REMOVAL. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2025, § X; Ord.
#2209, § II; Ord. #2240, § II; Ord. #2792-11, § 3; Ord. #2912-15;
Ord. No. 2917-15 § 4; Ord. No. 2959-17]
§ 7-20. PARKING, COVERING, PROPER ILLUMINATION AND
REMOVAL OF DUMPSTERS.
Editor’s Note: The provisions of Ordinance No. 2009 codified in this Section
7-20 supersede the provisions of Ordinance Nos. 2008 and 1979 in their
entirety.
a. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the streets or highway, an emergency shall exist and no vehicle shall be
parked on the streets or highways or portion thereof indicated in
Schedule XXIV of Chapter 7.1.
The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
b. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation of this section
shall be deemed a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper
regulation of traffic and any police officer may provide for the removal
of such vehicle. The owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal
and storage which may result from such removal and storage before
regaining possession of the vehicle.
c. Effectiveness of this section is contingent on signs being erected as
required by law.
§ 7-18.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 7-20.1
1:272
§ 7-20.1. Application. [Ord. #2009, § 1; Ord. #2801-11]
§ 7-20.2. Covering and Maintenance Required. [Ord. #2751, § 1]
§ 7-20.3. Illumination and Removal. [Ord. #2009, § II; Ord. #2751,
§ 1; Ord. #2801-11]
a. No property owner shall be allowed to use waste, refuse or storage
containers, commonly known as a dumpster, roll-off dumpster, roll-off
container, or portable on demand storage container ("POD") on or along
any roadway or public property within the Township of Lyndhurst, New
Jersey without first obtaining a permit from the police department and
completing an application form.
b. The permit shall be valid and remain in effect for a period of not more
than 72 hours, but may be renewed upon application through the police
department. The initial fee for the permit shall be $15 with renewals
costing $5 per day. The application form is attached hereto and made
part hereof.
c. The fee shall be paid directly to the Lyndhurst Tax Office which in turn
will give the applicant a receipted application form which must then be
presented to the police department for approval. The permit shall be
retained by the police department.
a. Any person, business entity or political subdivision of the State of New
Jersey who or which controls, whether owned, leased, or operated, a
refuse container or dumpster in the Township of Lyndhurst must ensure
that such container or dumpster is covered at all times and shall
prevent refuse from spilling out or overflowing, and that such container
or dumpster does not leak or otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids
or solids to the municipal separate stormwater sewer system operated
by the township.
b. Exceptions to the covering of such refuse containers or dumpsters are
as follows: (i) permitted temporary demolition container; (ii) litter
receptacles (other than dumpsters or other bulk containers); (iii) large
bulky items such as furniture, bound carpeting and white metal goods
placed curbside for pickup.
a. To warn the operators of vehicles of the presence of a traffic hazard
requiring the exercise of unusual care, the owner of any dumpster, rolloff
dumpster, roll-off container or POD, shall not cause such containers
or dumpsters to be parked or left unattended on or along any roadway
in the township without first providing for the proper illumination of
same as set forth below.
b. Type of Illumination.
1. Any dumpster, roll-off dumpster, roll-off container or POD shall be
equipped with, and display during times when lighted lamps are
required either flashing lights and/or reflectors. The lights and/or
§ 7-20.1 GENERAL § 7-20.3
1:273
§ 7-20.4. Off-Roadway Locations. [Ord. #2009, § III; Ord. #2751, § 1;
Ord. #2801-11]
reflectors shall be of a type approved by the director of the Motor
Vehicle Commission; at least two of the lights and/or reflectors
shall be permanently mounted on each side of the dumpsters,
facing approaching and opposing traffic. Such lights and/or
reflectors shall be mounted at the same level and as widely spaced
laterally as practical. The mounted height of lights or reflectors
shall not be less than 20 inches nor more than 60 inches, as
measured from the surface of the roadway to the center of the
reflectors. Every reflector or light shall be installed in a
workmanlike manner, as to perform its function adequately and to
provide maximum stability and minimum likelihood of damage.
2. When lights are used, they shall be of the flashing type, and shall
display simultaneously flashing yellow or amber lights, or any
shade of color between yellow or amber. Reflectors must be of a
type approved as meeting the standards of the Society of
Automotive Engineers for "Class A" type reflectors. Warning lights
and/or reflectors shall be visible from a distance of not less than
500 feet at any time when lighted lamps are required.
3. The exclusive use of reflective tape is prohibited. Reflective tape
may be used to augment or supplement lights and/or reflectors.
4. In the event such a container is not equipped with a permanently
fixed light or reflector as provided above, then the use of Type I
Barricade as described in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices shall be permitted. Such barricade must be of a reflective
type, and be equipped with warning lights as described above.
These barricades shall be spaced in the same manner as above.
c. No waste or refuse containers or storage containers, commonly known
as a dumpster, roll-off dumpster, roll-off container or POD shall remain
on or along any roadway or public property within the Township of
Lyndhurst in excess of 30 days.
a. Dumpsters, roll-off dumpsters, roll-off containers and PODs shall not be
located within 15 feet of any building or structure. Relief from this
requirement shall be obtained by application to the fire official in
writing. The basis for relief may be, but not limited to the following: 1)
parking needs; 2) traffic flow; 3) fire safety considerations; 4) type of
dumpster construction.
b. No dumpster, roll-off dumpster, roll-off container or POD shall remain
on the property of a private residence within the Township of
Lyndhurst, in excess of 30 days.
§ 7-20.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 7-20.5
1:274
§ 7-20.5. Inspection. [Ord. #2009, § IV; Ord. #2751, § 1; Ord.
#2801-11]
Any dumpster, roll-off dumpster, roll-off container or POD left parked upon
any roadway within the township shall be subject to inspection by the traffic
division of the police department. Any dumpster or container not found to
conform with the permit and illumination requirements stated above, or
that is parked or left in such a position or state, so as to create an immediate
traffic hazard shall be considered a violation of this section and shall be
moved immediately by the owner of the dumpster or container, at the police
department's direction. If the owner does not immediately comply and the
police department determines that the dumpster or container creates an
immediate traffic hazard it may be removed by the police at the owner's
expense.
§ 7-20.6. Penalty. [Ord. #2009, § V; Ord. #2751, § 1]
Unless another penalty is provided by New Jersey statute, every person
convicted of a violation of a provision of this section or any supplement
thereto, shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $100.
§ 7-21. TRAFFIC CONTROL DURING STREET CONSTRUCTION.
§ 7-21.1. Adoption of Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2202, § I]
The Township of Lyndhurst declares that problems of traffic control occur
when traffic must be moved through or around road or street construction,
maintenance operations, and utility work, above or below ground, which
requires blocking the roadway and obstructing the normal flow of traffic;
and that such obstructions are or can become dangerous when not properly
controlled. In order to better promote the public health, safety, peace and
welfare, it is necessary to establish controls and regulations directed to
the safe and expeditious movement of traffic through construction and
maintenance zones, and to provide safety for the work forces performing
these operations.
The Township of Lyndhurst in the County of Bergen, State of New Jersey,
does hereby adopt the most current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices as printed by the Federal Highway Administration hereinafter
known as M.U.T.C.D., except as hereby supplemented and amended, as it
controls and regulates whenever construction, maintenance operations or
utility work obstructs the normal flow of traffic. Any person, contractor,
or utility, who fails to comply with the provisions of M.U.T.C.D. while
performing such work is in violation of this section. Any future amendments
to the M.U.T.C.D. are also adopted.
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or utility to replace
all street markings to include crosswalks, stop lines and yellow curbs and
no passing zone lines. Also, to replace street signs to include all regulatory
signs, cautionary signs and Township Ord. signs, etc.
§ 7-20.5 GENERAL § 7-21.1
1:275
Any person, contractor or utility who fails to comply shall be in violation of
Section 7-21 and shall be subject to the penalties of subsection 7-21.8.
§ 7-21.2. Pre-Construction Meetings. [Ord. #2008]
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor, or in the case of
a public utility as required under the public utility agreement, Section
16:25-9.2, wishing to conduct work on, under or above the roadway to
contact the Traffic Bureau of the Lyndhurst Police Department in order to
arrange a preconstruction meeting in order to submit plans for the safe
movement of traffic during such period of construction of work. Any person,
contractor or utility who fails to comply with this section prior to the start
of such work or whose plans are not approved by the traffic bureau of the
police department is in violation of this section.
§ 7-21.3. Emergency Contact Phone Numbers. [Ord. #2008]
The person, contractor or utility shall provide the traffic bureau with at least
two emergency contact phone numbers to be called in case of emergency
problems at the construction or maintenance site prior to the start of
any work. If, for any reason emergency contacts cannot be reached, or if
the emergency contact person does not respond to a call from the police
department to correct a hazardous condition, the township may respond to
correct such hazardous condition. The reasonable fees for such emergency
services by the township shall be charged to the person, contractor or utility
responsible for such condition.
§ 7-21.4. Time Limits. [Ord. #2008]
There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or utility work on
any roadway in the township before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00
p.m. This time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or
after 4:00 p.m. by the officer in charge of the traffic bureau of the police
department. If it is determined by the officer in charge of the Lyndhurst
Police Traffic Bureau that the construction or maintenance operations prior
to 9:00 a.m. or after 4:00 p.m. would substantially delay traffic or cause a
safety or health hazard the work shall then be permitted only between 9:00
a.m. and 4:00 p.m.
§ 7-21.5. Road Closings and Detours. [Ord. #2008]
Road closings or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved by
the Lyndhurst Police Traffic Bureau.
§ 7-21.6. Traffic Directors. [Ord. #2008]
Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites,
when determined by the Lyndhurst Police Traffic Bureau that same is
necessary to provide for the safety and expeditious movement of traffic.
§ 7-21.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 7-21.7
1:276
§ 7-21.7. Stop Work. [Ord. #2008]
The traffic bureau of the police department shall have the authority to stop
work, including the removal of equipment and vehicles, stored material
within the street right-of-way, backfilling of open excavations and/or other
related work, in order to abate any nuisance and/or safety hazard or for any
violation of this section. Any delays caused by the contractor shall be at his
expense.
§ 7-21.8. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #2008]
Any person, contractor or utility who commits a violation of Section 7-21 et
seq. shall, upon conviction thereof for a first offense pay a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $500 and/or imprisoned in the county jail for a
term not exceeding 90 days. For a second offense, upon conviction thereof,
pay a fine of not less than $250 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a
term not exceeding 90 days. For a third or subsequent conviction pay a fine
of not less than $500 and/or be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 90 days.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 7-22. ENGINE BRAKING PROHIBITED.
§ 7-22.1. Definition. [Ord. #2801-11]
ENGINE BRAKING — Shall mean the use or operation of any mechanical
exhaust device designed to aid in the braking, decompression or
deceleration of an motor vehicle which results in excessive loud unusual or
explosive noise from such vehicle.
§ 7-22.2. Engine Braking Prohibited. [Ord. #2801-11]
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle to use or operate or
cause to be used or operated, at any time and on any roadway within the
Township of Lyndhurst, any mechanical exhaust or decompression device
which results in a practice known as "engine-braking."
§ 7-22.3. Exceptions. [Ord. #2801-11]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to engine braking where
necessary for the protection of persons and/or property which cannot be
avoided by application of an alternative braking system. Noise caused by
the application of engine compression brakes, otherwise known as enginebraking,
which is effectively muffled or if the application is necessary for the
health, safety and welfare of the community is exempt from the provisions
of this section. Sounds created by emergency equipment for emergency
purposes are also exempt.
§ 7-21.7 GENERAL § 7-22.4
1:277
§ 7-22.4. Posting of Signs. [Ord. #2801-11]
The township is hereby authorized to post signs at reasonable locations
within the township indicating the prohibition of the practice of enginebraking.
§ 7-22.5. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #2801-11]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, any
person convicted of a violation of this Section 7-22 shall be punished for a
first conviction thereof by a fine of not more than $100 or by imprisonment
for a period not to exceed 10 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment;
for a second such conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $200 or by imprisonment for a period of not to exceed 20 days, or
by both such fine and imprisonment; and upon the third or any subsequent
conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500
or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such
fine and imprisonment.
§ 7-23. PENALTY. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2031, § I; Ord. #2180, § I;
Ord. #2228, § I; Ord. #2328, § I; Ord. #2497, § I; Ord. #2514, § I;
Ord. #2584; Ord. #2768, § I; Ord. #2801-11]
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, this
chapter or shown in Schedule XXV of Chapter 7.1, every person convicted of
a violation of a provision of this chapter or any supplement thereto shall be
liable to a penalty of not more than $50 and/or imprisonment in the county
jail for a term not exceeding 90 days.
§ 7-24. REPEALER. [Ord. #2008; Ord. #2801-11]
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Lyndhurst covered in this
traffic chapter are hereby repealed except that this repeal shall not affect
or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any act done or
committed in violation of any ordinance hereby repealed prior to the taking
effect of this chapter.
§ 7-25. MID-BLOCK CROSSWALKS.
§ 7-25.1. Established. [Ord. #2909-14 § 8; Ord. #2912-15; Ord. No.
2917-15 § 5]
The locations as described in Schedule XXVIII of Chapter 7.1 are hereby
designated as Mid-Block Crosswalks.
§ 7-26. SCHOOL CROSSING GUARD POSTS. [Added 6-11-2019 by
Ord. No. 3026-19]
The locations described in Schedule XXIX of Chapter 7.1 are hereby
designated as school crossing guard posts.
§ 7-22.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 7-26
1:278
Chapter 7.1
TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
§ 7.1-1. SCHEDULE I: VEHICLES OVER DESIGNATED WEIGHT
EXCLUDED FROM CERTAIN STREETS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-4.1, vehicles over
designated weights indicated below are excluded from the following
described streets or parts of streets, except for pickup and delivery of
material on such streets.
(Reserved)
§ 7.1-2. SCHEDULE II: PARKING PROHIBITED FOR TRUCKS AND
VEHICLES IN EXCESS OF 5,000 POUNDS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-4.2, no person shall
park a truck, tractor, semi-tractor or omnibus having a vehicle weight or
combination of weights in excess of 5,000 pounds upon any street between
the hours specified.
Name of Street Sides Hours Location
All streets Both 9:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
All
§ 7.1-3. SCHEDULE III: ROUTE FOR TRUCKS OVER FOUR TONS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-4.3, the following streets
or parts of streets are hereby designated a route for trucks over four tons;
all trucks, having a total combined gross weight of vehicles plus load, in
excess of four tons, shall be excluded from all other streets except for the
pick-up and delivery of materials.
Name of Street Location
Jauncey Avenue From Fifth Street to Riverside
Avenue, westbound
Kingsland Avenue From Riverside Avenue to Ridge
Road
Orient Way Entire length
Page Avenue Between Orient Way and Schuyler
Avenue
Park Avenue Entire length
Polito Avenue Entire length
Ridge Road (Rt. 17) [for reference
only]
Entire length
§ 7-26 GENERAL § 7.1-3
1:279
Name of Street Location
Riverside Avenue Entire length
Rutherford Avenue Entire length south side only
Schuyler Avenue Entire length
Stuyvesant Avenue Entire length
Valley Brook Avenue From Polito Avenue to Terminus
Valley Brook Avenue From Riverside Avenue to Orient
Way
§ 7.1-4. SCHEDULE IV: NO PARKING.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-5.3, no person shall park
a vehicle at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of
streets.
Name of Street Side Location
Adler Street Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Ash Street Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Baldwin Avenue Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Beech Street Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Bloomfield Place North Lewandowski Street to Third Street
Carland Way Both Wall Street West to the northerly
terminus
Cassidy Court Both Entire length
Castle Terrace West From Valley Brook Avenue to Freeman
Street
Cedar Street East Paul Street to Sanford Avenue
Chubb Avenue Both Valley Brook Avenue to Wall Street
West
Clay Avenue Both Valley Brook Avenue to Wall Street
West
Copeland Avenue North Beginning at a point 594 feet from the
east edge of Riverside Avenue to a
point 45 feet easterly therefrom
Copeland Avenue South Beginning at a point 503 feet from the
east edge of Riverside Avenue to a
point 59 feet easterly therefrom
§ 7.1-3 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-4
1:280
Name of Street Side Location
Court Avenue North From the westerly edge of Delafield
Avenue to a point 99 feet west
therefrom
Court Avenue North Beginning at a point 532 feet west of
the westerly edge of Delafield Avenue
and continuing to a point 637 feet
west therefrom
Court Avenue North From the easterly edge of Stuyvesant
Avenue to a point 180 feet east
therefrom
Court Avenue South From Delafield Avenue to Stuyvesant
Avenue
Delafield Avenue East Rutherford Avenue to Valley Brook
Avenue
Eighth Street Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Eighth Street West From Kingsland Avenue proceeding
northerly to a point 30 feet from the
dead end
Elm Street From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Fourth Street West Marin Avenue to New Jersey Avenue
Freeman Street East Beginning at the dead end to a point
16 feet from the dead end
Freeman Street North Ridge Road to Castle Terrace
Freeman Street West Beginning at the dead end to a point
28 feet from the dead end
Grant Avenue West Valley Brook Avenue to northerly
terminus
Green Avenue East Freeman Street to Erie-Lackawanna
Railroad property line
Green Avenue (north
of Valley Brook
Avenue)
West From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Gutheil Place [Ord.
#2909-14]
North Beginning at a point 134 feet west
from the westerly curbline of Ridge
Road to a point 115 feet west
therefrom
Gutheil Place South From the easterly curbline of Green
Avenue to a point 300 feet east thereof
§ 7.1-4 GENERAL § 7.1-4
1:281
Name of Street Side Location
Gutheil Place South Beginning at Ridge Road to a point
209 feet westerly along the south side
therefrom
Harrington Avenue East Valley Brook Avenue to Freeman
Street
Hazel Street Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Jackson Place Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Jay Avenue East Court Avenue to Lake Avenue
Jerome Avenue Both From Schuyler Avenue to its easterly
terminus
Kingsland Avenue Both From the westerly curbline of
Riverside Avenue to westerly
corporate line of municipality at
Passaic River
Kingsland Avenue North From the westerly curbline of Ridge
Road (Route 17) to a point 95 feet
west thereof
Kingsland Avenue North From the easterly curbline of
Riverside Avenue to a point 150 feet
east thereof
Kingsland Avenue North From the easterly curbline of
Stuyvesant Avenue to a point 125 feet
east thereof
Kingsland Avenue North From the westerly curbline of
Stuyvesant Avenue to a point 100 feet
west thereof
Kingsland Avenue South Ridge Road to Riverside Avenue
Lafayette Avenue West Valley Brook Avenue to New York
Avenue
Lafayette Place Both New York Avenue to Lake Avenue
Lake Avenue South Stuyvesant Avenue to Delafield Avenue
Lake Avenue South From the southeast corner of Lake and
Park Avenues 50 feet east on Lake
Avenue south side of street
Lake Avenue South From west edge of Summit Avenue to
a point 175 feet westerly therefrom
§ 7.1-4 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-4
1:282
Name of Street Side Location
Laurel Avenue South Beginning at a point on the southerly
side of Laurel Avenue distant 98 feet
easterly from the southeasterly corner
of Green Avenue and Laurel Avenue,
to a point 28 feet easterly along the
southerly side of Laurel Avenue
Lincoln Street Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Livingston Avenue West From New York Avenue to Second
Avenue
Louise Court Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Madison Street Both New York Avenue to Pennsylvania
Avenue
Marin Avenue North From the westerly edge of Orient Way
to a point 280 feet west therefrom
Marin Avenue South From Lewandowski Street to Orient
Way
Marin Avenue South Beginning at a point on the southerly
side of Marin Avenue distant 150 feet
easterly from the south-easterly
corner of Ridge Road and Marin
Avenue, to a point 50 feet easterly
along the southerly side of Marin
Avenue
Monroe Street Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Nelson Place Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
New Jersey Avenue
[Added 10-9-2019
by Ord. No.
3031-19]
North Starting at a point 59 feet east of the
easterly line of Milburn Avenue to a
point 9 feet east therefrom
New York Avenue Both From the westerly curbline of Ridge
Road (Rte. 17) to a point 80 feet west
thereof
New York Avenue North From Meadow Road to the easterly
terminus
Oak Street Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Octavia Place Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
§ 7.1-4 GENERAL § 7.1-4
1:283
Name of Street Side Location
Olive Street Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Orient Way Both Valley Brook Avenue to Page Avenue
Orient Way [Ord.
#2904-14]
East From the northerly curbline of Valley
Brook Avenue to a point 239 feet north
therefrom
Orient Way [Ord.
#2904-14]
South From the westerly curbline of Orient
Way to a point 225 feet west therefrom
Orient Way West From the southwest corner of Orient
Way and Rutherford Avenue 39 feet
south on Orient Way west side of
street
Orient Way [Ord. No.
2943-16]
West From the southerly edge of Second
Avenue to the northerly edge of New
York Avenue
Orient Way [Ord.
#2904-14]
West From the northerly curbline of Valley
Brook Avenue to a point 248 feet north
therefrom
Page Avenue Both Orient Way to Schuyler Avenue
Page Avenue South Lewandowski Street to Orient Way
Page Avenue South From the easterly curbline of Ridge
Road to a point 174 feet east
therefrom
Park Avenue [Ord.
No. 2952-16]
East Beginning at a point 351 feet north of
the northerly edge of Lake Avenue to a
point 23 feet north therefrom
Park Avenue East From the southerly curbline of
Rutherford Avenue to a point 300 feet
south therefrom
Park Avenue [Added
11-7-2019 by Ord.
No. 3038-19]
West From the northerly curbline of Court
Avenue to a point 141 feet north
therefrom
Park Avenue West From the southerly curbline of
Rutherford Avenue to a point 200 feet
south therefrom
Paul Street South Weiderman Place to Meyer Avenue
Pennsylvania Avenue South From the dead end to a point 30 feet
west from the dead end
Pine Street East Valley Brook Avenue to Tontine Avenue
§ 7.1-4 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-4
1:284
Name of Street Side Location
Pine Street West From the northerly curbline of Valley
Brook Avenue from a point 90 feet
north therefrom
Polito Avenue Both From Valley Brook Avenue to
Lyndhurst-Rutherford boundary line
Prospect Place West Kingsland Avenue to Page Avenue
Regina Court Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Ridge Road [for
reference only]
East From the northerly edge of New Jersey
Avenue to a point 90 feet north
therefrom
Ridge Road [for
reference only]
East From the southerly edge of Page
Avenue to a point 75 feet south
therefrom
Ridge Road [for
reference only]
West From the southerly edge of Guthiel
Place to a point 73 feet south
therefrom
Ridge Road [for
reference only]
West From the southerly edge of Page
Avenue to a point 100 feet south
therefrom
Ridge Road [for
reference only]
West Beginning at a point 176 feet south of
the southerly edge of Summer Avenue
to a point 56 feet south therefrom
Riverside Avenue Both Rutherford Avenue to Jauncey Avenue
Rudolph Place Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Rutherford Avenue South Between points 91 feet east and 476
feet west of Delafield Avenue's
easterly and westerly curblines
Rutherford Avenue South Jackson Place to Ridge Road
Rutherford Avenue
[Added 4-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 3016-19]
South Starting at a point 248 feet east of the
easterly edge of Ridge Road to a point
11 feet east therefrom
Rutherford Avenue South Riverside Avenue and Livingston
Avenue
Sanford Avenue [Ord.
No. 2965-17]
North Starting at a point 373 feet east of the
easterly edge of Riverside Avenue to a
point 12 feet east therefrom
Sanford Avenue North Starting at a point 158 feet west of the
westerly edge of Tenth Street to a
point 13 feet west therefrom
§ 7.1-4 GENERAL § 7.1-4
1:285
Name of Street Side Location
Schuyler Avenue Both Page Avenue to Union Avenue
Schuyler Avenue East Union Avenue to Ewing Avenue
Second Avenue North From the easterly curbline of Delafield
Avenue to a point 100 feet east thereof
Second Avenue North From the westerly curbline of
Delafield Avenue to a point 110 feet
west thereof
Second Avenue North From the easterly curbline of
Stuyvesant Avenue to a point 180 feet
east thereof
Second Avenue South From the easterly curbline of Delafield
Avenue to a point 100 feet east thereof
Second Avenue South From the westerly curbline of
Delafield Avenue to a point 100 feet
west thereof
Second Avenue South From Jay Avenue To Stuyvesant
Avenue
Sixth Avenue South Starting at a point 146 feet east of the
easterly edge of Ridge Road to a point
14 feet east therefrom
Sixth Street Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Sollas Court East From the north edge of Kingsland
Avenue to a point 130 feet north
thereof
Stuyvesant Avenue East From the south edge of Rutherford
Avenue to a point 200 feet south
therefrom
Stuyvesant Avenue East From the southerly edge of Court
Avenue to a point 60 feet south
therefrom
Stuyvesant Avenue East From Court Avenue to Second Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue East Beginning at a point 105 feet north of
the north edge of Kingsland Avenue
and proceeding to a point 118 feet
northerly therefrom
Stuyvesant Avenue East From Kingsland Avenue to Copeland
Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue West From Copeland Avenue to Riverside
Avenue
§ 7.1-4 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-4
1:286
Name of Street Side Location
Stuyvesant Avenue West From the southerly edge of Court
Avenue to a point 108 feet south
therefrom
Stuyvesant Avenue West From Rutherford Avenue to Court
Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue West From southerly edge of Valley Brook
Avenue to a point 50 feet south
therefrom
Swayne Avenue South From Schuyler Avenue to dead end
Tenth Street Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Thomas Avenue North From Chase Avenue to Sixth Street
Tontine Avenue North Beginning at a point 111 feet west
from the westerly edge of Stuyvesant
Avenue to a point 29 feet west
therefrom
Travers Place West Valley Brook Avenue to Tontine Avenue
Tyler Street Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Valley Brook Avenue Both From Orient Way to the easterly
terminus
Valley Brook Avenue Both From the westerly edge of Stuyvesant
Avenue to a point 50 feet west
therefrom
Valley Brook Avenue
[Ord. #2904-14]
North From the westerly curbline of Orient
Way to a point 249 feet west therefrom
Valley Brook Avenue North From the westerly edge of Travers to a
point 50 feet west therefrom
Valley Brook Avenue North Beginning at a point 475 feet west of
the northwest corner of Valley Brook
Avenue and Orient Way to a point 10
feet easterly therefrom
Valley Brook Avenue South From the easterly edge of Grant
Avenue to a point 95 feet east
therefrom
Valley Brook Avenue South From Ridge Road to Milburn Avenue
Valley Brook Avenue South From the easterly edge of Stuyvesant
Avenue to a point 50 feet east
therefrom
§ 7.1-4 GENERAL § 7.1-4
1:287
Name of Street Side Location
Valley Brook Avenue South Beginning at a point 457 feet west of
the southwest corner of Valley Brook
Avenue and Orient Way to a point 17
feet westerly therefrom
Van Buren Street West From Valley Brook Avenue to New
York Avenue
Van Eyck Court Both Entire length
Wall Street West Both Entire length
Warren Street Both From the dead end to a point 30 feet
from the dead end
Weiderman Place East Riverside Avenue to Sanford Avenue
Willow Avenue West Kingsland Avenue to Fern Avenue
§ 7.1-5. SCHEDULE V: PARKING PROHIBITED CERTAIN HOURS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-5.4, no person shall park
a vehicle between the hours specified upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets.
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Chase Avenue Both 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Valley Brook Avenue to
Jauncey Avenue
Court Avenue South 10:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Livingston Avenue to
Delafield Avenue
Fern Avenue North Monday-Friday,
8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Starting 216 feet east of
the north-east corner of
Forest Avenue and Weart
Avenue and continuing the
next 100 feet east thereof
Fern Avenue South Monday-Friday,
8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Starting 273 feet east of
the south-east corner of
Fern Avenue and Weart
Avenue and continuing the
next 116 feet east thereof
Fern Avenue South Monday-Friday,
8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Livingston Avenue to
Stuyvesant Avenue
Fifth Street East Monday-Friday,
8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
From Summer Avenue to a
point 317 feet south
thereof
§ 7.1-4 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-5
1:288
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Forest Avenue
[Added
11-13-2017
by Ord. No.
2976-17]
North Monday-Friday,
7:30 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
From Weart Avenue to a
point 131 feet east thereof
Forest Avenue South Sundays, 6:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
From its intersection with
Stuyvesant Avenue
eastward to the first
driveway
Harding
Avenue
Both 9:00 p.m. to
3:00 a.m.
From the easterly curbline
of Riverside Avenue to a
point 325 feet east thereof
Jauncey
Avenue
North 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Riverside Avenue To Fifth
Street
Kingsland
Avenue
North 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Riverside Avenue to
Schyuler Avenue
Kingsland
Avenue
South 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Ridge Road to Schuyler
Avenue
Livingston
Avenue [Ord.
No. 2926-16
§ 2]
East 7:30 a.m. to
8:30 a.m.
From Lake Avenue to a
point 210 feet south
thereof
New Jersey
Avenue
North Monday-
Saturday, 9:00
a.m. to 11:00
a.m.
Starting at the northeast
corner of New Jersey
Avenue and Ridge Road
and continuing the next
260 feet east therefrom
New York
Avenue
North 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Beginning at a point 208
feet west of the westerly
edge of Livingston Avenue
to the westerly terminus
Orient Way West 3:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Fifth Avenue to New York
Avenue
Orient Way West 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Rutherford Avenue to Fifth
Avenue
Orient Way/
Schuyler
Avenue
East 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Rutherford Avenue to New
York Avenue
§ 7.1-5 GENERAL § 7.1-5
1:289
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Park Avenue
[Amended
2-13-2018 by
Ord. No.
2987-18]
Both 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Entire length
Ridge Road
[for reference
only]
Both 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Entire length
Rutherford
Avenue
South 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Livingston Avenue to
Orient Way
Second Avenue
[Repealed by
Ord. No.
2918-15 § 2]
Second Avenue
[Ord.
#2909-14]
North Monday-Friday,
8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Beginning at a point 188
feet east of the easterly
edge of Stuyvesant Avenue
and continuing the next 73
feet east therefrom
Stuyvesant
Avenue
Both 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Rutherford Avenue to
Riverside Avenue
Stuyvesant
Avenue
East Sundays, 6:00
a.m. to 6:00
p.m.
From its intersection with
Forest Avenue southward
to the first driveway
Stuyvesant
Avenue [Ord.
#2907-14;
amended
11-20-2018
by Ord. No.
3001-18]
East Monday-Friday,
8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Between Forest Avenue
and Fern Avenue
Third Avenue North Monday-Friday,
8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
From Summit Avenue to a
point 135 feet thereof
Union Avenue North 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Ridge Road to Schuyler
Avenue
Valley Brook
Avenue
[Repealed by
Ord. 2918-15
§ 2]
§ 7.1-5 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-5
1:290
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Valley Brook
Avenue [Ord.
No. 2918-15
§ 2]
Both 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Riverside Avenue to Ridge
Road
Valley Brook
Avenue [Ord.
No. 2917-15
§ 1]
North Monday-Friday,
7:30 a.m. to
8:30 a.m.
From Ridge Road to
Millburn Avenue
Valley Brook
Avenue [Ord.
#2909-14]
South Monday-Friday,
7:30 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.
From Ridge Road to a point
364 feet east thereof
Weart Avenue
[Added
11-13-2017
by Ord. No.
2976-17]
East Monday-Friday,
7:30 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
From Forest Avenue to a
point 187 feet north
thereof
§ 7.1-6. SCHEDULE VI: NO STOPPING OR STANDING.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-5.5, no person shall stop
or stand a vehicle between the hours specified upon any of the following
described streets or parts of streets.
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Grant Avenue East All From the curbline projection of the
southerly end of the island of the
northerly parking area's exit on the
easterly curbline to a point 60 feet
to the north
Grant Avenue East All Starting at the intersection of
Forest Avenue and Grant Avenue
from the point of tangency on the
easterly curbline of Grant Avenue
to a point 50 feet to the north
Grant Avenue East All Starting at the intersection of Fern
Avenue and Grant Avenue from the
point of tangency on the easterly
curbline of Grant Avenue to a point
25 feet to the south
§ 7.1-5 GENERAL § 7.1-6
1:291
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Grant Avenue East All Starting at the intersection of Post
Avenue and Grant Avenue from the
point of tangency on the easterly
curbline to a point 63 feet to the
south
Grant Avenue West All Starting at the intersection of
Forest Avenue and Grant Avenue
from the point of tangency on the
westerly curbline of Grant Avenue
to a point 240 feet to the north
Grant Avenue West All Starting at the intersection of Fern
Avenue and Grant Avenue from the
point of tangency on the westerly
curbline of Grant Avenue to a point
380 feet to the south
Jauncey
Avenue
North All East curbline of Riverside Avenue
to approximately 210 feet east
therefrom
Kingsland
Avenue
South All From west edge of Route 17 to a
point 90 feet westerly therefrom
Kingsland
Avenue
South All From west edge of Stuyvesant
Avenue to a point 97 feet westerly
therefrom
New Jersey
Avenue
South All From west edge of Orient Way to a
point 133 feet westerly therefrom
Orient Way East All Within 200 feet of the driveways to
Hillside Cemetery and from New
York Avenue north to the
southernmost driveway entrance of
Mt. Zion Cemetery
Park Avenue Both All Within 215 feet of Rutherford
Avenue's southerly curbline
Park Avenue East All Starting at the intersection of Park
Avenue and Valley Brook Avenue
from the point of tangency on the
easterly curbline of Park Avenue to
a point 103 feet to the north
Second
Avenue
South All From east edge of Stuyvesant
Avenue to a point 168 feet easterly
therefrom
§ 7.1-6 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-6
1:292
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
Stuyvesant
Avenue
Both All From the north curbline of Page
Avenue to a point 100 feet north
therefrom
Stuyvesant
Avenue
Both All From the south curbline of Page
Avenue to a point 100 feet south
therefrom
Stuyvesant
Avenue
Both All Within 215 feet of Rutherford
Avenue's southerly curbline
Stuyvesant
Avenue
East All From the south edge of Fern
Avenue to a point 102 feet
southerly therefrom
Stuyvesant
Avenue
East All From north edge of Lake Avenue to
a point 60 feet northerly therefrom
Stuyvesant
Avenue
East All From south edge of Lake Avenue to
a point 60 feet southerly therefrom
Stuyvesant
Avenue
West All From south edge of Fern Avenue to
a point 55 feet southerly therefrom
Stuyvesant
Avenue
West All From north edge of Tontine Avenue
to a point 65 feet northerly
therefrom
Stuyvesant
Avenue
[Repealed
10-9-2019 by
Ord. No.
3033-19]
Valley Brook
Avenue
North All From east edge of Stuyvesant
Avenue to a point 60 feet easterly
therefrom
Van Buren
Avenue
East All From north edge of Valley Brook
Avenue to a point 35 feet northerly
therefrom
§ 7.1-7. SCHEDULE VII: TIME LIMIT PARKING.
In accordance with the provisions of Subsection 7-5.6, no person shall park
a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown on any of the following streets
or parts of streets:
a. Per Subsection 7-5.6a:
§ 7.1-6 GENERAL § 7.1-7
1:293
Name of
Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Court
Avenue
South 2 hours 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to Delafield
Avenue
New York
Avenue
North 2 hours 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
From Livingston
Avenue to westerly
terminus
Oriental
Place
Both 2 hours 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to Jay Avenue
Orient Way West 3 hours 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.
From Fifth Avenue to
Rutherford Avenue
Park Avenue
[Added
2-13-2018
by Ord. No.
2988-18]
Both 3 hours 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Rutherford
Avenue to Lake Avenue
Ridge Road
[Amended
10-10-2017
by Ord. No.
2972-17;
1-16-2018
by Ord. No.
2985-17]
Both 2 hours 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
From Rutherford
Avenue to Union
Avenue
Rutherford
Avenue
South 3 hours 6:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Livingston
Avenue to Orient Way
Second
Avenue
Both 2 hours 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to Livingston
Avenue
Stuyvesant
Avenue
[Ord. No.
2930-16
§ 2]
Both 2 hours 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
Between Copeland
Avenue and Forest
Avenue
Stuyvesant
Avenue
Both 2 hours 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
From Valley Brook
Avenue to Court
Avenue
Stuyvesant
Avenue
East 2 hours 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
From Second Avenue
to Rutherford Avenue
§ 7.1-7 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-7
1:294
§ 7.1-8. SCHEDULE VIII: PARKING FOR STREET CLEANING.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-5.7, the streets
designated below, between the hours specified and the days set forth, shall
be posted for no parking for the purpose of street cleaning.
Name of
Street Sides Hours and Days Location
Alder Street Both Monday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Stuyvesant
and Riverside Avenues
Ash Street Both Monday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Stuyvesant
and Riverside Avenues
Baldwin Avenue Both Friday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Entire length
Beech Street Both Monday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Stuyvesant
and Riverside Avenues
Name of
Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Stuyvesant
Avenue
[Amended
10-9-2019
by Ord. No.
3033-19]
West 30
minutes
8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.
From the southwest
corner of Tontine
Avenue thence 136
feet southerly
Ten Eyck
Avenue
Both 2 hours 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
From Ridge Road to
Fourth Street
Ten Eyck
Avenue
North 30 min. 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
From the northeast
corner of Ridge Road,
thence 69 feet easterly
Valley Brook
Avenue
Both 2 hours 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
From Ridge Road to
Travers Place
Valley Brook
Avenue
Both 2 hours 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
From Stuyvesant
Avenue to Ridge Road
b. Per Subsection 7-5.6b:
Name of
Street Side
Time
Limit Hours Location
Valley Brook
Avenue
[Added
6-11-2019
by Ord. No.
3027-19]
North 30 min. 9:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
From Delafield Avenue
to Pine Street
§ 7.1-7 GENERAL § 7.1-8
1:295
Name of
Street Sides Hours and Days Location
Bloomfield
Place
Both Friday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Bogle Court Both Wednesday 1:00 p.m.
to 2:00 p.m.
Entire length
Brisbin Avenue Both Friday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Castle Terrace Both Thursday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Entire length
Chase Avenue Both Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Valley Brook Avenue to
dead end
Chase Avenue Both Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Between Valley Brook
and Post Avenues
Chase Avenue Both Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
to 10:00 a.m.
Between Forest and
Kingsland Avenues
Chase Avenue Both Wednesday 10:00 a.m.
to 12:00 noon
Between Kingsland
and Jauncey Avenues
Cleveland
Avenue and
Chase Avenue
Both Tuesday 3:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Between Valley Brook
Avenue and Railroad
Clinton Terrace Both Thursday 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Entire length
Copeland
Avenue
Both Monday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Stuyvesant
and Riverside Avenues
Copeland
Avenue
Both Wednesday 2:00 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
Between Tenth Street
and Stuyvesant
Avenue
Court Avenue Both Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Stuyvesant
and Delafield Avenues
Delafield
Avenue
Both Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Rutherford
and Lake Avenues
Delafield
Avenue
Both Tuesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Lake and
Valley Brook Avenues
Eighth Street Both Friday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Kingsland
Avenue and the dead
end
Elizabeth
Avenue
Both Friday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Elm Street Both Monday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Stuyvesant
and Riverside Avenues
§ 7.1-8 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-8
1:296
Name of
Street Sides Hours and Days Location
Fern Avenue Both Monday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Stuyvesant
and Riverside Avenues
Fern Avenue Both Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Stuyvesant
Avenue
Fern Avenue Both Saturday 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Between Weart Avenue
and Grant Avenue
Fifth Avenue Both Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Delafield Avenue
Fifth Avenue Both Thursday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Orient Way
Fifth Street Both Wednesday 10:00 a.m.
to 12:00 noon
Entire length
First Street Both Friday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Kingsland
and Ten Eyck Avenues
First Street Both Friday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Ten Eyck and
Union Avenues
Forest Avenue Both Tuesday 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Grant Avenue
Forest Avenue Both Tuesday 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Between Weart and
Stuyvesant Avenues
Forest Avenue Both Saturday 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Between Weart Avenue
and Chase Avenue
Forest Avenue South Tuesday 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Between Grand and
Weart Avenues
Fourth Street Both Thursday 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Between New Jersey
and Marin Avenues
Fourth Street Both Friday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Kingsland
and Ten Eyck Avenues
Fourth Street Both Friday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Ten Eyck and
Union Avenues
Freeman Street Both Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Ridge Road to Chase
Avenue
Freeman Street Both Thursday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Castle Terrace
Furman Place Both Thursday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Grant Avenue Both Tuesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Valley Brook
Avenue and Railroad
§ 7.1-8 GENERAL § 7.1-8
1:297
Name of
Street Sides Hours and Days Location
Grant Avenue
[Added
11-13-2017 by
Ord. No.
2974-17]
Both Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Between Fern Avenue
and Valley Brook
Avenue
Grant Avenue Both Saturday 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Between Fern Avenue
and Forest Avenue
Grant Avenue East Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Between Fern and Post
Avenues
Grant Avenue East Tuesday 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Between Post and
Forest Avenues
Grant Avenue East Friday 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Between Valley Brook
Avenue and northern
terminus
Green Avenue Both Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Dead end to Valley
Brook Avenue
Green Avenue Both Tuesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Valley Brook
Avenue and Railroad
Green Avenue Both Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Between Valley Brook
and Post Avenues
Guthiel Place Both Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Ridge Road to Green
Avenue
Harding Avenue Both Wednesday 10:00 a.m.
to 12:00 noon
Between Chase
Avenue and Sixth
Street
Harding Avenue Both Wednesday 1:00 p.m.
to 2:00 p.m.
Between Riverside and
Chase Avenues
Harrington
Avenue
Both Thursday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Entire length
Hazel Street Both Monday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Stuyvesant
and Riverside Avenues
Irving Place Both Thursday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between New York
and Milton Avenues
Jackson Place Both Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Jenness Place Both Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Kennedy Court Both Thursday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Entire length
§ 7.1-8 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-8
1:298
Name of
Street Sides Hours and Days Location
Kingsland
Avenue
Both Friday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Schuyler Avenue
Lafayette
Avenue
Both Tuesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between New York
and Valley Brook
Avenues
Lafayette Place Both Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Rutherford
and Lake Avenues
Lafayette Place Both Tuesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Lake and
New York Avenues
Lake Avenue Both Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Stuyvesant
Avenue
Lake Avenue Both Thursday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Orient Way
Lake Avenue/
Kearney Street/
Oriental Place
and Court
Avenue
Both Monday 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Between Stuyvesant
and Riverside Avenues
Laurel Avenue/
New Jersey
Avenue
Both Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Milburn Avenue
Lewandowski
Street
Both Thursday 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Between New Jersey
and Marin Avenue
Lewandowski
Street
Both Friday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Marin and
Ten Eyck Avenues
Lewandowski
Street
Both Friday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Ten Eyck and
Union Avenues
Lincoln Avenue
and Grant
Avenue
Both Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Between Valley Brook
and Fern Avenues
Livingston
Avenue
Both Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Between Valley Brook
and Fern Avenues
Livingston
Avenue
Both Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Court Avenue
and Valley Brook
Avenue
Livingston
Avenue
Both Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Lake Avenue
and New York Avenue
Livingston
Avenue
Both Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Rutherford
and Lake Avenues
§ 7.1-8 GENERAL § 7.1-8
1:299
Name of
Street Sides Hours and Days Location
Louise Court Both Friday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Entire length
Lyndhurst
Avenue
Both Monday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Between Fern and
Tontine Avenues
Manor Court Both Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Maple Avenue Both Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
to 10:00 a.m.
Between Kingsland
Avenue and the dead
end
Marin Avenue
and Tenth
Street
Both Thursday 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Orient Way
Meyer Avenue/
Cedar Street/
Wiederman
Place/Paul
Street and
Sanford Avenue
Both Monday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Stuyvesant
and Riverside Avenues
Milburn Avenue Both Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Entire length
Milton Avenue Both Thursday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Monroe Street Both Wednesday 1:00 p.m.
to 2:00 p.m.
Between Jauncey and
Harding Avenues
Mountain Way Both Thursday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
New Jersey
Avenue
Both Thursday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Orient Way
Newark Avenue Both Thursday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Entire length
New York
Avenue
Both Tuesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Ridge Road
and Station Square
New York
Avenue
Both Thursday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Orient Way
New York
Avenue
Both Thursday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Orient Way
and Lafayette Avenue
Oak Street Both Monday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Stuyvesant
and Riverside Avenues
§ 7.1-8 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-8
1:300
Name of
Street Sides Hours and Days Location
Octavia Place
and Sixth Street
Both Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
to 10:00 a.m.
Between Kingsland
Avenue and the dead
end
Olive Street Both Friday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Entire length
Orient Way Both Thursday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 p.m.
Rutherford Avenue to
Valley Brook Avenue
Page Avenue Both Monday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Riverside
Avenue and the River
Bank
Page Avenue Both Monday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Stuyvesant
and Riverside Avenues
Page Avenue Both Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
to 10:00 a.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Stuyvesant
Avenue
Page Avenue Both Friday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Schuyler Avenue
Park Place Both Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
to 10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Paul Place/
Rudolph Place
and Green
Avenue
Both Tuesday 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Between Post and
Forest Avenues
Peabody
Avenue/Webster
Avenue and Jay
Avenue
Both Monday 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Between Tontine and
Lake Avenues
Pennsylvania
Avenue
Both Thursday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Summit
Avenue and Orient
Way
Pennsylvania
Avenue
Both Thursday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Orient Way
and Lafayette Avenue
Pine Street Both Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Dead end to Valley
Brook Avenue
Post Avenue Both Tuesday 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Stuyvesant
Avenue
§ 7.1-8 GENERAL § 7.1-8
1:301
Name of
Street Sides Hours and Days Location
Prospect Place/
New Street/
Anthony Court
and Willow
Avenue
Both Monday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Kingsland
and Page Avenues
Regina Court Both Friday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Entire length
Roosevelt
Avenue
Both Wednesday 10:00 a.m.
to 12:00 noon
Between Chase
Avenue and Sixth
Street
Roosevelt
Avenue
Both Wednesday 1:00 p.m.
to 2:00 p.m.
Between Riverside and
Chase Avenues
Sanford Avenue Both Wednesday 2:00 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
Between Tenth Street
Stuyvesant Avenue
Second Avenue Both Monday 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Between Stuyvesant
and Jay Avenues
Second Avenue Both Tuesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 p.m.
Stuyvesant Avenue to
Ridge Road
Second Avenue
[Ord. No.
2918-15 § 3]
Both Thursday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Orient Way
Seventh Street
and Eighth
Street
Both Wednesday 10:00 a.m.
to 12:00 noon
Between Park Place
and Thomas Avenue
Sixth Avenue Both Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Delafield Avenue
Sixth Avenue Both Thursday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Orient Way
Sixth Street Both Wednesday 10:00 a.m.
to 12:00 noon
Between Summer and
Jauncey Avenues
Sollas Court/
Seventh and
Eighth Streets
Both Friday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Kingsland
and Park Place
Summer Avenue
and Thomas
Avenue
Both Wednesday 10:00 a.m.
to 12:00 noon
Between Chase
Avenue and Sixth
Street
Summit Avenue Both Thursday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Swayne Avenue Both Friday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Entire length
§ 7.1-8 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-8
1:302
Name of
Street Sides Hours and Days Location
Ten Eyck
Avenue
Both Friday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Ridge Road
and Schuyler Avenue
Third Avenue Both Tuesday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Ridge Road
and Delafield Avenue
Third Avenue Both Thursday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Orient Way
Third Street Both Thursday 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Between New Jersey
and Marin Avenues
Third Street Both Friday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Ten Eyck and
Union Avenues
Thomas Avenue Both Wednesday 2:00 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
Between Chase and
Stuyvesant Avenues
Tontine Avenue Both Monday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Between Stuyvesant
and Riverside Avenues
Tontine Avenue Both Tuesday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Stuyvesant
Avenue and Pine
Street
Travers Place Both Monday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Between Fern and
Valley Brook Avenues
Travers Place East Monday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Between Valley Brook
and Tontine Avenues
Tyler Street/
Lincoln Street/
Monroe Street
and Dead End
Both Wednesday 2:00 p.m.
to 4:00 p.m.
Entire length
Union Avenue Both Wednesday 10:00 a.m.
to 12:00 noon
Between Fifth Street
and Ridge Road
Union Avenue North Friday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Ridge Road
and Schuyler Avenue
Valley Brook
Avenue [Ord.
No. 2918-15
§ 3]
Both Saturday 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Between Ridge Road
and Orient Way
Van Buren
Street
Both Thursday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Entire length
Warren Street Both Thursday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Entire length
Warren Street Both Thursday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Entire length
§ 7.1-8 GENERAL § 7.1-8
1:303
Name of
Street Sides Hours and Days Location
Watson Avenue Both Monday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Between Fern and
Tontine Avenues
Weart Avenue Both Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Between Valley Brook
and Fern Avenues
Weart Avenue Both Wednesday 8:00 a.m.
to 10:00 a.m.
Between Forest and
Kingsland Avenues
Weart Avenue Both Saturday 3:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
Between Fern Avenue
and Forest Avenue
Weart Avenue West Tuesday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Between Fern and Post
Avenues
Weart Avenue West Tuesday 2:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Between Post and
Forest Avenues
Willow Avenue Both Monday 10:00 a.m. to
12:00 noon
Between Page and
Fern Avenues
Willow Avenue Both Monday 1:00 p.m. to
2:00 p.m.
Between Fern and
Tontine Avenues
Wilson Avenue Both Monday 8:00 a.m. to
10:00 a.m.
Between Stuyvesant
and Riverside Avenues
Wilson Avenue Both Wednesday 10:00 a.m.
to 12:00 noon
Between Chase
Avenue and Sixth
Street
Wilson Avenue Both Wednesday 1:00 p.m.
to 2:00 p.m.
Between Stuyvesant
and Chase Avenues
§ 7.1-9A. SCHEDULE IX-A: HANDICAPPED PARKING - ON STREET.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-6.1, the following street
locations are hereby designated as handicapped parking spaces.
Name of Street Location
720 Bloomfield Place
[Repealed by Ord. No.
2955-16 § 1]
264 Castle Terrace
[Added 12-19-2018 by
Ord. No. 3008-18]
Starting 30 feet south of the southeast corner
of Castle Terrace and Freeman Street and
continuing the next 22 feet south thereof for
space
706 Cedar Street Begins 79 feet south of Sanford Avenue then 22
feet southerly therefrom
§ 7.1-8 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-9A
1:304
Name of Street Location
265 Chase Avenue Starting 367 feet north of the northwest corner
of Chase Avenue and Valley Brook Avenue and
continuing the next 20 feet north thereof for
space
275 Chase Avenue Begins 290 feet north of Valley Brook Avenue
then 27 feet north therefrom
616 Chase Avenue [Ord.
#2907-14]
Starting 95 feet north of the northeast corner
of Chase Avenue and Park Place and continuing
the next 22 feet south thereof for space
664 Chase Avenue
[Added 5-14-2019 by
Ord. No. 3021-19]
Starting 67 feet north of the northeast corner of
Chase Avenue and Thomas Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet north thereof for
space
Cleveland Avenue Senior Citizen Building (4 spaces)
280 Cleveland Avenue Starting 219 feet north from the northeast
corner of Valley Brook Avenue and Cleveland
Avenue then 22 feet therefrom for space
282 Cleveland Avenue Starting 198 feet north from the northeast
corner of Valley Brook Avenue and Cleveland
Avenue then 22 feet therefrom for space
284 Cleveland Avenue
[Repealed by Ord. No.
2935-16]
285 Cleveland Avenue
[Repealed 11-13-2017
by Ord. No. 2975-17]
286 Cleveland Avenue Starting 156 feet north from the northeast
corner of Valley Brook Avenue and Cleveland
Avenue then 22 feet therefrom for space
167 Copeland Avenue
[Repealed by Ord. No.
2918-15 § 1]
226 Copeland Avenue
[Ord. #2907-14]
Starting 378 feet west of the southwest corner
of Copeland Avenue and Stuyvesant Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet west thereof for
space
Court Avenue The first 2 adjacent parking stalls east of
Livingston Avenue
Court Avenue The first parking stall west of Livingston
Avenue
Court Avenue The first parking stall east of Stuyvesant
Avenue
§ 7.1-9A GENERAL § 7.1-9A
1:305
Name of Street Location
641 Eighth Street Starting 155 feet south of the southwest corner
of Eighth Street and New York Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet north thereof
Elizabeth Avenue Starting 147 feet east of the northeast corner
of Elizabeth Avenue and First Street then the
next 22 feet thereof for space
Fern Avenue Starting 116 feet east of the southeast corner
of Fern Avenue and Willow Avenue then the
next 22 feet westbound
Fern Avenue [Ord. No.
2966-17]
Starting 56 feet east of the northeast corner of
Fern Avenue and Weart Avenue and continuing
the next 22 feet east thereof
Fern Avenue [Repealed
by Ord. No. 2966-17]
100 Fern Avenue 58 feet east from the southeastern corner of
Fern Avenue and Riverside Avenue, then 22
feet therefrom for space
214 Fern Avenue [Ord.
No. 2966-17; repealed
4-10-2018 by Ord. No.
2992-18]
560 Fern Avenue
[Repealed 10-9-2019
by Ord. No. 3032-19]
611 Fifth Avenue
[Added 1-16-2018 by
Ord. No. 2984-17]
Starting 144 feet east of the northeast corner of
Fifth Avenue and Ridge Road and continuing
the next 22 feet east thereof for space
744 Fifth Avenue Starting 109 feet west of the southwest corner
of Fifth Avenue and Orient Way then the next
22 feet west therefrom for space
133 Forest Avenue Starting 72 feet west from the northwest
corner of Ash Avenue and Forest Avenue then
the next 22 feet for space
153 Forest Avenue
[Added 5-14-2019 by
Ord. No. 3021-19]
Starting 63 feet west of the northwest corner of
Forest Avenue and Beech Street and continuing
the next 22 feet west thereof for space
203 Forest Avenue
[Repealed 10-9-2019
by Ord. No. 3032-19]
233 Forest Avenue [Ord.
No. 2922-15]
Starting 33 feet west of the northwest corner of
Forest Avenue and Oak Street and continuing
the next 22 feet east thereof for space
§ 7.1-9A LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-9A
1:306
Name of Street Location
241 Forest Avenue [Ord.
No. 2926-16 § 1]
Starting 56 feet north of the northeast corner
of Forest Avenue and Oak Street and
continuing the next 22 feet east thereof for
space
329 Forest Avenue [Ord.
No. 2949-16]
Starting 64 feet west of the northwest corner of
Forest Avenue and Weart Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet west thereof for
space
348 Forest Avenue Southeast corner 50 feet east on Forest Avenue
then the next 22 feet for space
460 Forest Avenue Southeast corner of Chase and Forest Avenues
405 feet east on Forest Avenue then the next 22
feet east thereof for space
348 Fourth Street
[Added 2-26-2019 by
Ord. No. 3011-19]
Starting 131 feet south of the southeast corner
of Fourth Street and New Jersey Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet south thereof for
space
Franklin School Starting 124 feet south from the southeast
corner of Fern Avenue and Stuyvesant Avenue
then the next 24 feet thereof of space
Freeman Street Starting 190 feet west of the south west corner
of Freeman Street and Ridge Road and
continuing the next 22 feet west thereof
537 Freeman Street Northwest corner of Ridge Road and Freeman
Street then 352 feet west on Freeman Street
then the next 22 feet thereof for space
257 Green Avenue Begins 80 feet south of northerly edge of
Freeman Street then 12 feet northerly
therefrom (Head in)
261 Green Avenue Starting 107 feet north of the northwest corner
of Green Avenue and Freeman Street and
continuing the next 9 feet south thereof for
space
263 Green Avenue Begins 80 feet north of northerly edge of
Freeman Street then 24 feet northerly
therefrom (Head in)
263 Green Avenue
[Readded 11-13-2017
by Ord. No. 2975-17]
Starting 90 feet north of the northwest corner
of Green Avenue and Freeman Street and
continuing the next 8 feet north thereof for
space
292 Green Avenue Starting 54 feet south of the southeast corner
of Green Avenue and Gutheil Place and
continuing the next 22 feet south thereof
§ 7.1-9A GENERAL § 7.1-9A
1:307
Name of Street Location
262 Harrington Avenue
[Repealed by Ord. No.
2918-15 § 1]
285 Harrington Avenue
[Ord. No. 2961-17]
Starting 60 feet north of the northwest corner
of Harrington Avenue and Valley Brook Avenue
and continuing the next 22 feet north thereof
for space
785 Harrington Avenue
[Ord. No. 2958-17]
Starting 60 feet north of the northwest corner
of Harrington Avenue and Valley Brook Avenue
and continuing the next 22 feet north thereof of
space
226 Irving Place Northeast corner 65 feet north on Irving Place
then the next 22 feet for space
329 Jauncey Avenue Starting 34 feet north from the northeast
corner of Jauncey Avenue and Monroe Street
then the next 22 feet thereof for space
32 Kearney Street
[Added 4-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 3015-19]
Starting 305 feet south of the southeast corner
of Kearney Street and Rutherford Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet south thereof for
space
Kingsland Avenue
[Repealed 2-13-2018
by Ord. No. 2986-18]
211 Kingsland Avenue
[Repealed 8-8-2017 by
Ord. No. 2969-17]
419 Kingsland Avenue On Chase Avenue beginning at a point 50 feet
north of Kingsland Avenue to a point 22 feet
north therefrom
664 Kingsland Avenue Starting 193 feet west of the southwest corner
of Kingsland Avenue and Lewandowski Street
and continuing the next 22 feet west thereof for
space
728 Kingsland Avenue
[Ord. No. 2966-17]
Starting 45 feet west of the southwest corner of
Kingsland Avenue and First Street and
continuing the next 22 feet west thereof for
space
746 Kingsland Avenue
[Repealed by Ord.
#2907-14]
§ 7.1-9A LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-9A
1:308
Name of Street Location
220 Lafayette Avenue
[Ord. #2912-15]
Starting 284 feet south of the southeast corner
of Lafayette Avenue and New York Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet north thereof for
space
263 Lafayette Avenue Starting 120 feet south from the southeast
corner of Lafayette Avenue and Pennsylvania
Avenue then 21 feet therefrom
108 Lake Avenue Starting 100 feet east from the southeast
corner of Lake Avenue and Riverside Avenue
then the next 22 feet thereof for space
211 Lake Avenue Northeast corner of Lake and Park Avenues 178
feet east on Lake Avenue next 22 feet for space
309 Lake Avenue
[Repealed by Ord.
#2912-15]
349 Lake Avenue Begins 289 feet east of Livingston Avenue then
22 feet easterly therefrom
407 Lake Avenue [Ord.
#2912-15]
Starting 117 feet east of the northeast corner
of Lake Avenue and Delafield Avenue and then
the next 22 feet thereof for space
612 Lake Avenue Starting 195 feet east from the southwest
corner of Lake Avenue and Ridge Road and
continuing the next 22 feet west thereof for
space
553 Laurel Avenue Beginning at a point 25 feet west of Millburn
Avenue to a point 22 feet westward
348 Lewandowski Street Starting 146 feet south from the southeast
corner of Lewandowski Street and New Jersey
Avenue then the next 22 feet thereof
729 Lewandowski Street
[Repealed by Ord. No.
2917-15 § 2]
Lincoln Street Starting 59 feet north of the northwest corner
of Lincoln Street and Thomas Avenue then the
next 22 feet south therefrom for space
718 Lincoln Street
[Repealed by Ord. No.
2921-15]
46 Livingston Avenue
[Ord. No. 2949-16]
Starting 172 feet south of the southeast corner
of Livingston Avenue and Manor Court and
continuing the next 22 feet south thereof for
space
§ 7.1-9A GENERAL § 7.1-9A
1:309
Name of Street Location
271 Lyndhurst Avenue
[Added 11-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 2975-17]
Starting 112 feet south of the southwest corner
of Lyndhurst Avenue and Tontine Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet south thereof for
space
284 Lyndhurst Avenue Northeast corner then starting 276 feet north
thereof and then 22 feet north for 1 space
360 Maple Avenue
[Added 9-11-2018 by
Ord. No. 2999-18]
Starting 186 feet west of the southwest corner
of Maple Avenue and Tenth Street and
continuing for the next 22 feet west thereof for
space
Memorial Campus [Ord.
#2909-14]
Starting 198 feet east of the southeast corner
of Second Avenue and Stuyvesant Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet west thereof for
space
707 Meyer Avenue Starting 60 feet north from the northwest
corner of Meyer Avenue and Paul Street and
extending the next 22 feet north thereof for
space
711 Meyer Avenue [Ord.
#2907-14]
Starting 13 feet north from the northwest
corner of Meyer Avenue and Paul Street then
the next 22 feet thereof for space
305 Milburn Avenue Begins 100 feet south of Valley Brook Avenue
then 22 feet southerly therefrom
349 Milburn Avenue
[Added 11-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 2975-17]
Starting 62 feet north of the northwest corner
of Milburn Avenue and Valley Brook Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet north thereof for
space
214 New Street
[Repealed by Ord. No.
2917-15 § 2]
210 Newark Avenue
[Repealed by Ord.
#2907-14]
212 Newark Avenue Begins 201 feet south of New York Avenue then
22 feet southerly therefrom
213 Newark Avenue Starting 172 feet south from the southwest
corner of Newark Avenue and New York Avenue
then the 22 feet therefrom for space
New Jersey Avenue
[Repealed by Ord.
#2909-14]
§ 7.1-9A LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-9A
1:310
Name of Street Location
New Jersey Avenue
[Ord. #2909-14]
Starting 72 feet east of the northeast corner of
New Jersey Avenue and Ridge Road and
continuing the next 22 feet east thereof
341 New Jersey Avenue Begins 25 feet east of Orient Way then 22 feet
easterly therefrom
569 New Jersey Avenue
[Added 11-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 2975-17]
Starting 73 feet east of the northeast corner of
New Jersey Avenue and Milburn Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet east thereof for
space
712 New Jersey Avenue Starting 100 feet west on Lewandowski Street
from the southwest corner of New Jersey
Avenue and Lewandowski Street then the next
22 feet for space
256 New Street Begins 241 feet west of Prospect Place then 22
feet westerly therefrom
637 New York Avenue Starting 200 feet from the southwest corner of
Summit Avenue and New York Avenue then 22
feet therefrom for the space
714 New York Avenue Starting 160 feet east from the southeast
corner of New York Avenue and Summit Avenue
then 24 feet therefrom
749 New York Avenue
[Added 6-12-2018 by
Ord. No. 2995-18]
Starting 134 feet west of the northwest corner
of Orient Way and New York Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet west thereof for
space
443 Oak Avenue [Ord.
No. 2926-16 § 1]
Starting 150 feet north of the northwest corner
of Oak Street and Forest Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet north thereof for
space
200 Orient Way [Ord.
No. 2951-16]
Starting 38 feet south of the southeast corner
of Orient Way and New York Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet south thereof for
space
202 Orient Way Starting 41 feet south from the southeast
corner of Orient Way and New York Avenue
then the next 22 feet thereof
206 Orient Way Starting 100 feet south from the southeast
corner of New York Avenue and Orient Way
then 22 feet therefrom
238 Orient Way Northwest corner then starting 182 feet north
thereof then 23 feet north for 1 space
§ 7.1-9A GENERAL § 7.1-9A
1:311
Name of Street Location
242 Orient Way On Newark Avenue beginning at a point 116
feet north of Pennsylvania Avenue to a point 22
feet north therefrom
252 Orient Way
[Repealed by Ord.
#2909-14]
Page Avenue Starting 183 feet east of the southeast corner
of Page Avenue and Ridge Road and continuing
the next 22 feet west thereof for space
164 Page Avenue Northwest corner of Page and Willow Avenues
25 feet west on Page Avenue from Willow next
22 feet for space
251 Page Avenue [Ord.
#2912-15]
Starting 394 feet west of the northwest corner
of Page Avenue and Stuyvesant Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet east thereof for
space
253 Page Avenue Starting 337 feet west from the northwest
corner of Page Avenue and Stuyvesant Avenue
then 22 feet therefrom for space
328 Page Avenue Starting 61 feet south from the southwest
corner of Page Avenue and Weart Avenue then
the next 22 feet thereof for space
544 Page Avenue
[Repealed 8-8-2017 by
Ord. No. 2969-17]
545 Page Avenue Starting 252 feet west from the northwest
corner of Page Avenue and Ridge Road then the
next 22 feet thereof
713 Page Avenue
[Added 1-16-2018 by
Ord. No. 2984-17;
amended 9-10-2019 by
Ord. No. 3030-19]
Starting 147 feet east of the northeast corner of
Page Avenue and Sparta Drive and continuing
the next 20 feet east thereof for space
501 Park Place Starting 25 feet east of the northeast corner of
Park Place and Seventh Street and continuing
the next 15 feet east thereof for space
214 Paul Street Starting 25 feet east from the northeast corner
of Paul Street and Cedar Street, and continuing
the next 22 feet eastbound thereof
§ 7.1-9A LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-9A
1:312
Name of Street Location
715 Pennsylvania Avenue
[Added 9-11-2018 by
Ord. No. 2999-18;
repealed 3-12-2019 by
Ord. No. 3013-19]
297 Pine Street Starting 215 feet south of the southwest corner
of Pine Street and Tontine Avenue and
continuing 22 feet north therefrom for space
Post Avenue Starting 363 feet west of the southwest corner
of Post Avenue and Stuyvesant Avenue then the
next 22 feet thereof
Post Avenue [Ord. No.
2966-17]
Starting 363 feet west of southwest corner of
Post Avenue and Stuyvesant Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet east thereof
110 Post Avenue [Added
10-9-2019 by Ord. No.
3032-19]
Starting 113 feet east of the southeast corner
of Post Avenue and Riverside Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet east thereof for
space
162 Post Avenue [Added
4-9-2019 by Ord. No.
3015-19]
Starting 218 feet west of the southwest corner
of Post Avenue and Willow Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet west thereof for
space
211 Post Avenue
[Repealed by Ord. No.
2935-16]
404 Post Avenue
[Repealed 4-10-2018
by Ord. No. 2992-18]
Ridge Road Starting 248 feet south of the southwest corner
of Summer Avenue and Ridge Road then the
next 22 feet north therefrom
17-19 Ridge Road West from the southwest corner of Ridge Road
and Sixth Avenue along the southerly side, then
22 feet therefrom for space
519 Ridge Road Southwest corner of Sollas Court 25 feet west
on Sollas Court then the next 22 feet for space
519-521 Ridge Road Starting 47 feet west of the northwest corner of
Sollas Court and Ridge Road and continuing
the next 22 feet east thereof for space
318 Roosevelt Avenue
[Added 11-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 2975-17]
Starting 127 feet east of the southeast corner
of Roosevelt Avenue and Riverside Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet east thereof for
space
§ 7.1-9A GENERAL § 7.1-9A
1:313
Name of Street Location
357 Roosevelt Avenue
[Ord. #2907-14;
repealed by Ord. No.
2917-15 § 2]
376 Roosevelt Avenue Begins 225 feet west of Chase Avenue then 22
feet westerly therefrom
380 Roosevelt Avenue
[Ord. #2909-14]
Starting 201 feet west of the southwest corner
of Roosevelt Avenue and Chase Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet west thereof for
space
446 Roosevelt Avenue Begins 290 feet east of Chase Avenue then 22
feet easterly therefrom
447 Roosevelt Avenue
[Ord. No. 2922-15]
Starting 197 feet east of the northeast corner
of Roosevelt Avenue and Chase Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet east thereof for
space
451 Roosevelt Avenue
[Repealed by Ord. No.
2926-16 § 1]
455 Roosevelt Avenue Starting 304 feet east of the north-east corner
of Roosevelt Avenue and Chase Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet east thereof for
space
464 Roosevelt Avenue
[Repealed 2-13-2018
by Ord. No. 2986-18]
475 Roosevelt Avenue
[Repealed by Ord. No.
2924-15]
330 Sanford Avenue
[Ord. #2907-14]
Starting 359 feet east of the southeast corner
of Sanford Avenue and Stuyvesant Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet east thereof for
space
337 Sanford Avenue Starting 462 feet east of the north-east corner
of Sanford Avenue and Stuyvesant Avenue and
extending the next 22 feet north thereof for
space
351 Sanford Avenue Starting 377 feet west from the northwest
corner of Sanford Avenue and 10th Street then
22 feet westerly thereof
§ 7.1-9A LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-9A
1:314
Name of Street Location
461 Second Avenue
[Ord. #2907-14]
Starting 96 feet west of the northwest corner of
Second Avenue and Jenness Place and
continuing the next 22 feet east thereof for
space
549 Second Avenue
[Added 9-11-2018 by
Ord. No. 2999-18]
Starting 201 feet west of the northwest corner
of Second Avenue and Ridge Road and
continuing the next 20 feet west thereof for
space
724 Second Avenue
[Added 10-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 3032-19]
Starting 311 feet east of the southeast corner
of Second Avenue and Summit Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet east thereof for
space
727 Second Avenue Starting 100 feet west from the northeast
corner of Orient Way and Second Avenue then
22 feet therefrom
617 Seventh Street
[Ord. #2907-14;
repealed by Ord. No.
2961-17]
519 Sixth Avenue
[Added 7-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 3028-19]
Starting 50 feet north of the northwest corner
of Sixth Avenue and Jackson Place and
continuing the next 22 feet north thereof for
space
785 Sixth Street Starting 137 feet north of the northwest corner
of Sixth Street and Jauncey Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet north thereof for
space
786 Sixth Street [Added
3-20-2018 by Ord. No.
2990-18]
Starting 159 feet north of the northeast corner
of Sixth Street and Jauncey Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet north thereof for
space
253 Stuyvesant Avenue
[Added 10-9-2019 by
Ord. No. 3032-19]
Starting 104 feet south of the southwest corner
of Stuyvesant Avenue and Tontine Avenue and
continuing the next 20 feet south thereof for
space
740 Stuyvesant Avenue
[Ord. No. 2951-16;
repealed 2-13-2018 by
Ord. No. 2986-18]
609 Ten Eyck Avenue
[Ord. No. 2949-16]
Starting 117 feet east of the northeast corner
of Ten Eyck Avenue and Ridge Road and
continuing the next 22 feet east thereof for
space
§ 7.1-9A GENERAL § 7.1-9A
1:315
Name of Street Location
610 Ten Eyck Avenue Begins 128 feet east of (Rt. 17) Ridge Road
then 22 feet easterly therefrom
633 10th Street Starting 71 feet north from the northwest
corner of 10th Street and Sanford Avenue then
the next 22 feet thereof for space
651 Tenth Street Starting 223 feet north of the northwest corner
of Thomas Avenue and Tenth Street and
continuing the next 22 feet north thereof for
space
659 Tenth Street 30 feet north from the northwest corner of
Tenth Street and Thomas Avenue along the
westerly side of the street, then 22 feet
therefrom for space
439 Third Avenue Starting 79 feet east of the northeast corner of
Third Avenue and Lafayette Place and
continuing the next 22 feet east thereof
511 Third Avenue [Ord.
No. 2930-16 § 1]
Starting 122 feet east of the northeast corner
of Third Avenue and Jenness Place and
continuing the next 22 feet east thereof for
space
517 Third Avenue Starting 225 feet east from the northeast
corner of Third Avenue and Jenness Place then
the next 19 feet thereof
525 Third Avenue
[Repealed 8-8-2017 by
Ord. No. 2969-17]
528 Third Avenue
[Added 1-16-2018 by
Ord. No. 2984-17]
Starting 372 feet west of the southwest corner
of Third Avenue and Ridge Road and continuing
the next 22 feet west thereof for space
543 Third Avenue
[Repealed by Ord. No.
2961-17]
551 Third Avenue [Ord.
#2909-14]
Starting 47 feet west of the northwest corner of
Third Avenue and Ridge Road and continuing
the next 22 feet east thereof for space
742 Third Avenue Starting 158 feet west from the southwest
corner of Orient Way and Third Avenue then 22
feet therefrom
528 Third Street Northeast corner then starting 25 feet north
thereof then 44 feet north to provide 2 spaces
538 Third Street Northeast corner of Third Street and Kingsland
Avenue 90 feet north on Third Street then the
next 22 feet north thereof for space
§ 7.1-9A LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-9A
1:316
Name of Street Location
612 Third Street Starting 113 feet south from the southeast
corner of Third Street and Kingsland Avenue
then 22 feet therefrom for space
625 Third Street [Ord.
No. 2924-15 § 1;
repealed by Ord. No.
2966-17]
632 Third Street [Added
1-16-2018 by Ord. No.
2984-17]
Starting 214 feet north of the northeast corner
of Third Street and Ten Eyck Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet north thereof for
space
Travers Place [Repealed
by Ord. #2907-14]
264 Travers Place Starting 38 feet south from the southeast
corner of Travers Place and Tontine Avenue
then the next 22 feet thereof for space
307 Travers Place 108 feet south from the southwest corner of
Travers Place and Valley Brook Avenue along
the westerly side of the street, then 22 feet
therefrom for space
347 Travers Place [Ord.
No. 2924-15 § 1]
Starting 54 feet north of the northwest corner
of Travers Place and Fern Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet north thereof for
space
Valley Brook Avenue Beginning 196 feet west of the southwest
corner of Valley Brook Avenue and Grant
Avenue then the next 22 feet west therefrom
152 Valley Brook Avenue On the westerly side of Lyndhurst Avenue
beginning 35 feet south of the intersection with
Valley Brook Avenue to a point 22 feet
southerly therefrom
367 Valley Brook Avenue
(Town Hall)
Begins 142 feet west of Delafield Avenue then
44 feet westerly therefrom (2 spaces)
442 Valley Brook Avenue Starting 59 feet north of the northeast corner
of Valley Brook Avenue and Grant Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet south thereof for
space
442 Valley Brook Avenue
[Repealed by Ord.
#2912-15]
204 Van Buren Street 83 feet south of the southeastern corner of New
York Avenue and Van Buren Street, then 20 feet
thereof for space
§ 7.1-9A GENERAL § 7.1-9A
1:317
Name of Street Location
209 Van Buren Street 38 feet south of the southeastern corner of New
York Avenue and Van Buren Street, then 20 feet
thereof for space
270 Warren Street [Ord.
No. 2949-16]
Starting 306 feet north of the northeast corner
of Warren Street and Valley Brook Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet north thereof for
space
273 Warren Street
[Added 11-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 2975-17]
Starting 249 feet northwest of the corner of
Warren Street and Valley Brook Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet north thereof for
space
311 Watson Avenue Starting 165 feet south from the southwest
corner of Watson Avenue and Valley Brook
Avenue then the next 22 feet for space
Weart Avenue (High
School - 2 spaces)
Begins 167 feet south of Fern Avenue then 42
feet southerly therefrom
Weart Avenue (High
School - 2 spaces)
[Added 11-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 2975-17]
Starting 173 feet north of the northeast corner
of Weart Avenue and Forest Avenue and
continuing the next 44 feet north thereof
Weart Avenue (High
School - 2 spaces north
of Forest Avenue)
[Repealed 11-13-2017
by Ord. No. 2975-17]
341 Weart Avenue
[Repealed 11-13-2017
by Ord. No. 2975-17]
513 Weart Avenue Starting 148 feet south from the southwest
corner of Weart Avenue and Page Avenue then
the next 22 feet therefrom for space
513 Weart Avenue Starting 179 feet south of the southwest corner
of Weart Avenue and Page Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet north thereof for
space
Willow Avenue Starting 48 feet north of the northwest corner
of Fern Avenue and Willow Avenue then the
next 22 feet north therefrom for space
278 Willow Avenue Starting 165 feet south from the southeast
corner of Willow Avenue and Tontine Avenue
then the next 22 feet therefrom for space
§ 7.1-9A LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-9A
1:318
Name of Street Location
440 Willow Avenue
[Added 11-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 2975-17]
Starting 141 feet south of the southeast corner
of Willow Avenue and Post Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet south thereof for
space
516 Willow Avenue Starting 71 feet north of the northeast corner
of Willow Avenue and New Street and
continuing the next 22 feet north thereof for
space
Wilson Avenue [Ord.
#2909-14]
Starting 25 feet east of the southeast corner of
Wilson Avenue and Riverside Avenue and
continuing the next 22 feet east thereof for
space
§ 7.1-9B. SCHEDULE IX-B: HANDICAPPED PARKING IN
MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS AND BOARD OF EDUCATION
PROPERTY.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-6.2, the following
locations indicated below and/or shown on the attached site plan, which is
hereby made a part of this chapter, are designated as handicapped parking
spaces.
Property
Number of
Spaces Location
Health Department
253 Stuyvesant
Avenue
1 Starting 18 feet west and 108 feet
south of the southern curbline of
Tontine Avenue at the westerly
edge of the entrance/exit and the
next 10 feet south thereof
Health Department
253 Stuyvesant
Avenue
1 Starting 140 feet south and 35 feet
west of the southern curbline of
Tontine Avenue at the westerly
edge of the entrance/exit and the
next 10 feet south thereof
Jefferson School
336 Lake Avenue
1 Starting 8 feet east and 110 feet
south of the southern curbline of
Lake Avenue at the easterly edge of
the entrance/exit and the next 10
feet south thereof
Jefferson School
336 Lake Avenue
1 Starting 8 feet east and 145 feet
south of the southern curbline of
Lake Avenue at the easterly edge of
the entrance/exit and the next 10
feet south thereof
§ 7.1-9A GENERAL § 7.1-9B
1:319
Property
Number of
Spaces Location
Jefferson School
336 Lake Avenue
1 Starting 10 feet west and 72 feet
south of the southern curbline of
Lake Avenue at the easterly edge of
the entrance/exit and the next 10
feet west thereof
Jefferson School
336 Lake Avenue
1 Starting 20 feet west and 63 feet
south of the southern curbline of
Lake Avenue at the easterly edge of
the entrance/exit and the next 10
feet west thereof
Jefferson School
Community Center
319 New York
Avenue [Repealed
by Ord. #2909-14]
Jefferson School
Community Center
319 New York
Avenue [Repealed
by Ord. #2909-14]
Lincoln School
281 Ridge Road
1 Starting 7 feet west and 42 feet
south of the southern curbline of
Gutheil Place at the easterly edge
of the easterly entrance/exit and
the next 10 feet south thereof
Memorial Campus
319 New York
Avenue [Ord.
#2909-14]
2 The first 2 adjacent parking stalls
nearest the New York Avenue
entrance to the property
Public Library
335 Valley Brook
Avenue
2 Starting 13 feet south and 54 feet
east of the southern curbline of
Pine Street at the southerly edge of
the entrance/exit and the next 20
feet east thereof
Recreation Center
862 Valley Brook
Avenue
2 Starting 76 feet south of the
southern curbline of Valley Brook
Avenue at the easterly side of the
westerly entrance/exit and the next
27 feet east thereof
§ 7.1-9B LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-9B
1:320
Property
Number of
Spaces Location
Recreation Center
862 Valley Brook
Avenue
6 Starting 14 feet west and 39 feet
south of the southern curbline of
Valley Brook Avenue at the westerly
edge of the easterly entrance/exit
and the next 67 feet south thereof
Roosevelt School
530 Stuyvesant
Avenue
1 Starting 19 feet south and 73 feet
east of the eastern curbline of
Stuyvesant Avenue at the southern
edge of the entrance/exit and the
next 10 feet east thereof
Senior Citizen
Complex
2 As per sketch on file in township
clerk's office
Station Square
[Repealed by Ord.
#2909-14]
Station Square/
Second Avenue and
Stuyvesant Avenue
[Repealed by Ord.
#2909-14]
Washington School
709 Ridge Road
1 Starting 96 feet south and 107 feet
west of the southwest corner of
Ridge Road and Summer Avenue
and continuing the next 8 feet west
therefrom
Washington School
709 Ridge Road
1 Starting 96 feet south and 123 feet
west of the southwest corner of
Ridge Road and Summer Avenue
and continuing the next 8 feet west
therefrom
§ 7.1-9C. SCHEDULE IX-C: HANDICAPPED PARKING ON PRIVATE
PROPERTY OPEN TO THE PUBLIC AND TO WHICH THE PUBLIC IS
INVITED.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-6.3, the locations
indicated below and on the attached site plan, which is made a part of this
chapter, are designated as handicapped parking spaces.
§ 7.1-9B GENERAL § 7.1-9C
1:321
Property
Number of
Spaces Location
Burger King-1 Park
Avenue
1 As per sketch on file in the
township clerk's office
County Trust
Company-55 Park
Avenue
1 As per sketch on file in the
township clerk's office
Foodtown Market-
Riverside Avenue
2 As per sketch on file in the
township clerk's office
Kings Court-525
Riverside Avenue
3 As per sketch on file in the
township clerk's office
Quick Check-626
Ridge Road
1 As per sketch on file in the
township clerk's office
Redi-Mart-Ridge
Road
1 As per sketch on file in the
township clerk's office
Scrupples
Restaurant-528
Riverside Avenue
2 As per sketch on file in the
township clerk's office
Shop-Rite
Market-425 Valley
Brook Avenue
2 As per sketch on file in the
township clerk's office
§ 7.1-9D. SCHEDULE IX-D: HANDICAPPED PARKING ON ALL
OTHER PRIVATE PROPERTY.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-6.4, the locations
indicated below and on the attached site plan, which is made a part of this
chapter, are designated as handicapped parking spaces.
(Reserved)
§ 7.1-10. SCHEDULE X: SPECIAL PERMIT PARKING.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-7, the locations indicated
below are designated as permit parking areas.
Area Days and Hours Location
Board of Education
Staff Only
Monday through Friday
(excluding major
holidays) 8:00 a.m.-5:00
p.m.
Both parking lots located
on Weart Avenue between
Fern Avenue and Forest
Avenue
Library Staff
Parking Lot
Monday through Friday
(excluding major
holidays) 8:00 a.m.-5:00
p.m.
Entire lot located on Pine
Street across from the
Library
§ 7.1-9C LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-10
1:322
Area Days and Hours Location
Memorial Campus
[Ord. No. 2917-15
§ 3]
Monday through Friday
(excluding Major
holidays) 7:00 a.m.-5:00
p.m.
The parking stalls
adjacent to New Jersey
Transit Railroad Tracks
and opposite New York
Avenue
Station Square
Parking Lot
Monday through Friday
(excluding major
holidays) 6:00 a.m.-7:00
p.m.
Entire lot including the
parking stall adjacent to
New Jersey Transit
Railroad Tracks and
opposite New York
Avenue
§ 7.1-11. SCHEDULE XI: ONE-WAY STREETS.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-8, the following described
streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as one-way streets in the
direction indicated. Parking on these streets will be permitted on the sides
indicated below:
Name of
Street DirectionLimits Parking Permitted
Bloomfield
Place
East From Third Street to
Lewandowski Street
Both sides
Clinton
Terrace
North Entire length Both sides
Court Avenue West Delafield Avenue to
Stuyvesant Avenue
2 hours from 7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m., both sides
Freeman
Street
West Entire length Castle Terrace to Ridge
Road, south side only
Freeman
Street
West Entire length Ridge Road to Green
Avenue, both sides
Grant Avenue North Fern Avenue to Valley
Brook Avenue
Both sides
Green Avenue North Fern Avenue to Valley
Brook Avenue
Both sides
Guthiel Place East Entire length Both sides
Harrington
Avenue
North Entire length West side
Jackson Place South From Rutherford
Avenue to Fifth Avenue
Both sides
Kearney
Street
North Lake Avenue to
Rutherford Avenue
§ 7.1-10 GENERAL § 7.1-11
1:323
Name of
Street DirectionLimits Parking Permitted
Lafayette
Avenue
South Entire length East side
Lincoln
Avenue
South Valley Brook Avenue to
Fern Avenue
Both sides
Livingston
Avenue
North New York Avenue to
Rutherford Avenue
New York Avenue to
Second Avenue, east side
Livingston
Avenue
North New York Avenue to
Rutherford Avenue
Second Avenue to
Rutherford Avenue, both
sides
Livingston
Avenue
North Tontine Avenue to
Court Avenue
Both sides
Livingston
Avenue
South Tontine Avenue to
Valley Brook Avenue
Both sides
Madison
Street
South Entire length No parking
Milton
Avenue
East Entire length Both sides
Newark
Avenue
South Entire length Both sides
New York
Avenue
East Starting 272 feet west
of the northwest
corner of New York
Avenue and Livingston
Avenue to the
terminus
Both sides
Oriental
Place
West Entire length Both sides
Pine Street South From Tontine Avenue
to Valley Brook Avenue
West side
Sanford
Avenue
West Entire length Both sides
Sollas Court West Entire length Both sides; except on
east side from
intersection of Kingsland
Avenue to 130 feet north
therefrom
Thomas
Avenue
East Riverside Avenue to
Chase Avenue
Both sides
Weart Avenue South From Page Avenue to
Kingsland Avenue
Both sides
§ 7.1-11 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-11
1:324
Name of
Street DirectionLimits Parking Permitted
Webster
Avenue
North Tontine Avenue to
Court Avenue
Both sides
Weiderman
Place
East Entire length Both sides
Wilson
Avenue
West Chase Avenue to
Riverside Avenue
Both sides
Van Buren
Street
North Entire length East side
§ 7.1-12. SCHEDULE XII: THROUGH STREETS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-9.1, the following
described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as through
streets. Stop signs shall be installed on, or near, the right side of each street
intersecting the through street, except where yield signs are provided for,
in the designation.
Name of Street Location Between
Chase Avenue Jauncey Avenue and Kingsland
Chase Avenue Page Avenue and Fern Avenue
Fern Avenue Riverside Avenue and Stuyvesant Avenue
Fern Avenue Stuyvesant Avenue and Ridge Road
Forest Avenue Riverside Avenue and Stuyvesant Avenue
Forest Avenue Stuyvesant Avenue and Ridge Road
Jauncey Avenue Riverside Avenue and Fifth Street
Kingsland Avenue Riverside Avenue to Ridge Road
Kingsland Avenue Ridge Road and Schuyler Avenue
Lake Avenue Riverside Avenue and Park Avenue
Lake Avenue Park Avenue and Stuyvesant Avenue
Lake Avenue Stuyvesant Avenue and Ridge Road
Lake Avenue Ridge Road and Summit Avenue
Lake Avenue Summit Avenue and Orient Way
Marin Avenue Ridge Road and Orient Way
New Jersey Avenue Ridge Road and Orient Way
Orient Way Page Avenue and Rutherford Avenue
Page Avenue River Road and Stuyvesant Avenue
Page Avenue Stuyvesant Avenue and Ridge Road
§ 7.1-11 GENERAL § 7.1-12
1:325
Name of Street Location Between
Page Avenue Ridge Road and Schuyler Avenue
Park Avenue River Road and Rutherford Avenue
Ridge Road [for
reference only]
Union Avenue and Rutherford Avenue, then
east to Route 17 boundary with Rutherford
Riverside Avenue Jauncey Avenue and Rutherford Avenue
Rutherford Avenue Riverside Avenue and Ridge Road
Sixth Avenue Delafield Avenue and Ridge Road
Sixth Street Jauncey Avenue and Summer Avenue
Summit Avenue Milton Avenue and Second Avenue
Summit Avenue Second Avenue and Route 17
Stuyvesant Avenue Riverside Avenue and Rutherford Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue Riverside Avenue to Kingsland Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue Kingsland Avenue to Rutherford Avenue
Ten Eyck Avenue Ridge Road and Schuyler Avenue
Thomas Avenue Stuyvesant Avenue and Chase Avenue
Thomas Avenue Chase Avenue and Sixth Street
Tontine Avenue Park Avenue and Stuyvesant Avenue
Union Avenue Ridge Road and Schuyler Avenue
Valley Brook Avenue River Road and Stuyvesant Avenue
Valley Brook Avenue Stuyvesant Avenue and Ridge Road
Valley Brook Avenue Ridge Road and Orient Way
Valley Brook Avenue Orient Way and terminus
§ 7.1-13. SCHEDULE XIII: STOP INTERSECTIONS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-9.2, the following
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections.
Intersection Stop Sign On
Bloomfield Place and Lewandowski
Street
Bloomfield Place
Bloomfield Place and Third Street Bloomfield Place
Brisbin Avenue and Lewandowski
Street
Brisbin Avenue
Cedar Street and Paul Street Cedar Street
Cedar Street and Sanford Avenue Cedar Street
Chubb Avenue and Wall Street West Chubb Avenue
§ 7.1-12 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-13
1:326
Intersection Stop Sign On
Clay Avenue and Wall Street West Clay Avenue
Copeland Avenue and Tenth Street Tenth Street
Elizabeth Avenue and First Street Elizabeth Avenue
Elizabeth Avenue and Lewandowski
Street
Elizabeth Avenue
Fern Avenue and Chase Avenue Fern Avenue and Chase Avenue
Fern Avenue and Weart Avenue
[Ord. No. 2956-16]
Fern Avenue and Weart Avenue
Fifth Street and Summer Avenue Fifth Street
Forest Avenue and Weart Avenue
[Added 3-12-2019 by Ord. No.
3012-19]
All sides
Freeman Avenue and Chase Avenue Freeman Avenue
Freeman Avenue and Green Avenue Freeman Avenue
Furman Place and Milton Avenue Furman Place
Furman Place and New York Avenue Furman Place
Garland Way and Wall Street West Garland Way
Green Avenue and Post Avenue Green Avenue
Irving Place and Milton Avenue Irving Place
Irving Place and New York Avenue Irving Place
Jay Avenue and Second Avenue Jay Avenue
Lafayette Place and Fifth Avenue Lafayette Place
Lafayette Place and New York
Avenue
Lafayette Place
Lake Avenue and Delafield Avenue
[Added 3-12-2019 by Ord. No.
3012-19]
All sides
Lewandowski Street and Page
Avenue [Added 3-12-2019 by Ord.
No. 3012-19]
All sides
Manor Court and Livingston Avenue Manor Court
Meadow Road and New York Avenue Meadow Road
Meyer Avenue and Sanford Avenue Meyer Avenue
Meyer Avenue and Thomas Avenue Meyer Avenue
Monroe Street and Harding Avenue Monroe Street
Monroe Street and Roosevelt
Avenue
Monroe Street
§ 7.1-13 GENERAL § 7.1-13
1:327
Intersection Stop Sign On
Mountain Way and New York
Avenue
Mountain Way
Mountain Way and Pennsylvania
Avenue
Mountain Way
New Jersey Avenue and Milburn
Avenue
New Jersey Avenue
New Street and Prospect Place New Street
New Street and Willow Avenue New Street
Newark Avenue and New Jersey
Avenue [Ord. #2909-14]
Newark Avenue
Oriental Place and Jay Avenue Oriental Place
Page Avenue and Stuyvesant Avenue
[Added 3-12-2019 by Ord. No.
3012-19]
All sides
Park Place and Tenth Street Park Place
Paul Street and Meyer Avenue Paul Street
Paul Street and Weiderman Place Paul Street
Peabody Avenue and Court Avenue Peabody Avenue
Peabody Avenue and Tontine Avenue Peabody Avenue
Post Avenue and Grant Avenue Post Avenue
Post Avenue and Weart Avenue Post Avenue
Regina Court and Lewandowski
Avenue
Regina Court
Sanford Avenue and Tenth Street Sanford Avenue
Second Avenue and Delafield
Avenue [Amended 3-12-2019 by
Ord. No. 3012-19]
All sides
Sixth Street and Summer Avenue Sixth Street
Wall Street West and Polito Avenue Wall Street West
Wall Street West and Service Road Wall Street West
Webster Avenue and Court Avenue Webster Avenue
Weiderman Place and Sanford
Avenue
Weiderman Place
§ 7.1-14. SCHEDULE XIV: YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-9.3, the following
intersections are designated as yield intersections.
§ 7.1-13 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-14
1:328
(Reserved)
§ 7.1-15. SCHEDULE XV: TRAFFIC SIGNALS.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-10, the following
intersections are hereby designated as signalized intersections. Agencies
responsible for maintenance of intersections are listed.
County:
Kingsland Avenue and Riverside Avenue
Orient Way and Page Avenue
Park Avenue and Riverside Avenue
Riverside Avenue and Valley Brook Avenue
Rutherford Avenue and Park Avenue
Rutherford Avenue and Stuyvesant Avenue
Municipal:
Delafield Avenue and Rutherford Avenue
Kingsland Avenue and Stuyvesant Avenue
Orient Way and Marin Avenue
Orient Way and Vermella Way
Valley Brook Avenue and Orient Way
Valley Brook Avenue and Stuyvesant Avenue
Wall Street West and Polito Avenue
State:
Ridge Road and Lake Avenue
Ridge Road and Second Avenue
Ridge Road and New York Avenue
Ridge Road and Valley Brook Avenue
Ridge Road and New Jersey Avenue
Ridge Road and Page Avenue
Ridge Road and Kingsland Avenue
Ridge Road and Summer Avenue
Ridge Road and Ten Eyck Avenue
Rutherford Avenue and Polito Avenue
Rutherford Avenue and Orient Way
Rutherford Avenue and Ridge Road
§ 7.1-14 GENERAL § 7.1-16
1:329
§ 7.1-16. SCHEDULE XVI: TURN PROHIBITIONS.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-11, no person shall make a
turn as indicated at the location designated.
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Copeland Avenue and
Riverside Avenue
Left Westbound on Copeland Avenue to
go southbound on Riverside
Avenue
Copeland Avenue and
Riverside Avenue
Left Southbound on Riverside Avenue
to go eastbound on Copeland
Avenue
Gutheil Place and
Ridge Road
Left Eastbound on Gutheil Place to go
northbound on Ridge Road
Kingsland Avenue Left Eastbound on Kingsland Avenue
onto Prospect Place
Kingsland Avenue and
Riverside Avenue [Ord.
#2912-15]
On Red Westbound on Kingsland Avenue to
go northbound on Riverside
Avenue
Kingsland Avenue and
entrance driveway to
555 Riverside Avenue
[Ord. #2912-15]
Left Eastbound on Kingsland Avenue to
go northbound into the driveway of
555 Riverside Avenue
Kingsland Avenue and
exit driveway to 555
Riverside Avenue [Ord.
#2912-15]
Left Southbound from driveway of 555
Riverside Avenue to go eastbound
on Kingsland Avenue
Kingsland Avenue and
entrance driveway to
601 Riverside Avenue
[Ord. #2912-15]
Left Westbound on Kingsland Avenue to
go southbound into the driveway
of 601 Riverside Avenue
Kingsland Avenue and
exit driveway to 601
Riverside Avenue [Ord.
#2912-15]
Left Northbound from driveway of 601
Riverside Avenue to go westbound
on Kingsland Avenue
Kingsland Avenue and
exit driveway of
Stuyvesant Avenue
On Red All approaches
Kingsland Avenue and
Weart Avenue
Right Westbound on Kingsland Avenue to
go northbound on Weart Avenue,
Monday -Friday, 8:00 a.m. - 4:00
p.m.
Orient Way and Marin
Avenue
Left Northbound on Orient Way to go
westbound on Marin Avenue
§ 7.1-16 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-16
1:330
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Orient Way and Page
Avenue
On Red Southbound on Orient Way to go
westbound on Page Avenue
Page Avenue and
Orient Way
On Red Westbound on Page Avenue to go
northbound on Orient Way
Page Avenue and Ridge
Road [Added
10-10-2017 by Ord.
No. 2973-17]
On Red Eastbound on Page Avenue to go
southbound on Ridge Road,
Monday - Friday, 7:30 a.m. - 4:00
p.m.
Page Avenue and Ridge
Road [Added
10-10-2017 by Ord.
No. 2973-17]
On Red Westbound on Page Avenue to go
northbound on Ridge Road,
Monday - Friday, 7:30 a.m. - 4:00
p.m.
Park Avenue and exit
driveway of Burger
King drive-in
Left Eastbound from driveway to go
northbound on Park Avenue
Park Avenue and
driveway to National
Community Bank drivein
and parking lot
Left Southbound on Park Avenue to go
eastbound into driveway
Ridge Road and Page
Avenue [Added
10-10-2017 by Ord.
No. 2973-17]
On Red Northbound on Ridge Road to go
eastbound on Page Avenue,
Monday - Friday, 7:30 a.m. - 4:00
p.m.
Ridge Road and Page
Avenue [Added
10-10-2017 by Ord.
No. 2973-17]
On Red Southbound on Ridge Road to go
westbound on Page Avenue,
Monday - Friday, 7:30 a.m. - 4:00
p.m.
Ridge Road and
entrance driveway to
Roy Rogers [for
reference only]
Left Northbound on Ridge Road to go
westbound in driveway
Ridge Road and exit
driveway to Roy Rogers
Left Eastbound from driveway to go
northbound on Ridge Road
Ridge Road and
entrance driveway to
Wendy's [for reference
only] [Added
5-14-2019 by Ord.
No. 3020-19]
Left Northbound on Ridge Road to
westbound in driveway
§ 7.1-16 GENERAL § 7.1-16
1:331
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Ridge Road and exit
driveway to Wendy's
[Added 5-14-2019 by
Ord. No. 3020-19]
Left Eastbound from driveway to go
northbound on Ridge Road
Riverside Avenue and
Kingsland Avenue
[Ord. #2912-15]
On Red Northbound on Riverside Avenue
to go eastbound on Kingsland
Avenue
Riverside Avenue and
Kingsland Avenue
[Ord. #2912-15]
On Red Southbound on Riverside Avenue
to go westbound on Kingsland
Avenue
Riverside Avenue and
Roosevelt Avenue
Left Westbound Roosevelt Avenue to
Southbound River-side Avenue
Rutherford Avenue and
exit driveway of 204
Rutherford Avenue
Left Northbound from driveway to go
westbound on Rutherford Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue and
entrance to 281
Stuyvesant Avenue
Left Northbound on Stuyvesant Avenue
to go westbound into driveway of
281 Stuyvesant Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue and
Valley Brook Avenue
On Red Northbound on Stuyvesant Avenue
to go eastbound on Valley Brook
Avenue
Summer Avenue and
Ridge Road
On Red Eastbound on Summer Avenue to
go southbound on Ridge Road
Ten Eyck Avenue and
Ridge Road
On Red Westbound on Ten Eyck Avenue to
go northbound on Ridge Road
Valley Brook Avenue
and Newark Avenue
[Added 3-20-2018 by
Ord. No. 2989-17]
Left Westbound on Valley Brook Avenue
to go southbound on Newark
Avenue, Monday - Friday, 4:00
p.m. - 6:00 p.m.
Valley Brook Avenue
and Ridge Road
On Red Eastbound on Valley Brook Avenue
to go southbound on Ridge Road,
Monday - Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
Valley Brook Avenue
and Ridge Road
On Red Northbound on Ridge Road to go
eastbound on Valley Brook Avenue,
Monday - Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
Valley Brook Avenue
and Ridge Road
[Added 10-10-2017
by Ord. No. 2973-17]
On Red Southbound on Ridge Road to go
westbound on Valley Brook
Avenue, Monday - Friday, 7:30 a.m.
- 4:00 p.m.
§ 7.1-16 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-16
1:332
Intersection
Turn
Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Valley Brook Avenue
and Ridge Road
On Red Westbound on Valley Brook Avenue
to go northbound on Ridge Road,
Monday - Friday, 7:00 a.m. to 4:30
p.m.
Valley Brook Avenue
and Stuyvesant Avenue
On Red Southbound on Stuyvesant Avenue
to go westbound on Valley Brook
Avenue
Valley Brook Avenue
and Stuyvesant Avenue
On Red Westbound on Valley Brook Avenue
to go northbound on Stuyvesant
Avenue
Valley Brook Avenue
and Van Buren Street
[Added 3-20-2018 by
Ord. No. 2989-17]
Right Westbound on Valley Brook Avenue
to go northbound on Van Buren
Street, Monday - Friday, 4:00 p.m.
- 6:00 p.m.
Valley Brook Avenue
and entrance driveway
to National Community
Bank drive-in
Left Westbound on Valley Brook Avenue
to go southbound into driveway
Valley Brook Avenue
and driveway to Roy
Rogers
Left Westbound on Valley Brook Avenue
to go southbound into driveway
Valley Brook Avenue
and entrance driveway
to Shop-Rite
Left Eastbound on Valley Brook Avenue
to go northbound into driveway
§ 7.1-16A. SCHEDULE XVI-A: TURNS REQUIRED.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-11A, turns shall be required
from the locations designated below.
Name of Street Location
Kingsland Avenue [Ord.
#2912-15]
The left lane of Kingsland Avenue's west
approach shall be reserved for left turns onto
Riverside Avenue
Kingsland Avenue [Ord.
#2912-15]
The right lane of Kingsland Avenue's west
approach shall be reserved for right turns onto
Riverside Avenue
Kingsland Avenue [Ord.
#2912-15]
The left lane of Kingsland Avenue's east
approach shall be reserved for left turns onto
Riverside Avenue
Marin Avenue The right lane of Marin Avenue's west approach
shall be reserved for right turns onto Orient
Way
§ 7.1-16 GENERAL § 7.1-16A
1:333
Name of Street Location
Orient Way The left lane of Orient Way's north approach
shall be reserved for left turns onto Vermella
Way
Page Avenue The left lane of Page Avenue's west approach
shall be reserved for left turns onto Orient Way
Page Avenue The right lane of Page Avenue's east approach
shall be reserved for right turns onto Orient
Way
Park Avenue The right lane of Park Avenue's south approach
shall be reserved for right turns onto
Stuyvesant Avenue and Rutherford Avenue
Riverside Avenue [Ord.
#2912-15]
The left lane of Riverside Avenue's south
approach shall be reserved for left turns onto
Kingsland Avenue
Riverside Avenue [Ord.
#2912-15]
The right lane of Riverside Avenue's north
approach shall be reserved for right turns onto
Kingsland Avenue
Rutherford Avenue The right lane of Rutherford Avenue's west
approach shall be reserved for right turns onto
Park Avenue and Stuyvesant Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue The right lane of Stuyvesant Avenue shall be
reserved for right turns onto Rutherford
Avenue
Valley Brook Avenue
[Ord. #2904-14]
The left lane of Valley Brook Avenue's east
approach shall be reserved for left turns onto
Orient Way
Valley Brook Avenue
[Ord. #2904-14]
The left lane of Valley Brook Avenue's west
approach shall be reserved for left turns onto
Orient Way
§ 7.1-17. SCHEDULE XVII: LOADING ZONES.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-12, the following described
locations are hereby designated as loading zones.
§ 7.1-16A LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-17
1:334
Name of
Street Time Side Location
Brisbin Avenue Monday -
Friday, 7:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Beginning at a point 25 feet
east of the easterly edge of
Lewandowski Street and
extending to a point 20 feet
easterly therefrom
Court Avenue All day South Beginning at a point 102 feet
west of the south-west corner
of Court Avenue and Delafield
Avenue and extending 267
feet west therefrom
Oriental Place Monday -
Friday, 7:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
South Beginning at a point 25 feet
west of the westerly edge of
Stuyvesant Avenue, and
extending to a point 46 feet
westerly therefrom
Tontine Avenue Monday -
Friday, 7:00
a.m. to 7:00
p.m.
North Beginning at a point 27 feet
west of the westerly edge of
Stuyvesant Avenue, and
extending to a point 84 feet
westerly therefrom
Valley Brook
Avenue
Monday-Friday,
7:00 a.m. to
7:00 p.m.
North Beginning at a point 275 feet
west of the westerly edge of
Orient Way and extending to a
point 105 feet westerly
therefrom
Warren Street
[Ord.
#2912-15]
Monday-Friday,
7:00 a.m. to
5:00 p.m.
West Beginning at a point 116 feet
north of the northerly edge of
Valley Brook Avenue and
extending to a point 94 feet
north therefrom
§ 7.1-18. SCHEDULE XVIII: BUS STOPS.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-13, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 7.1-18.1. State Highways.
a. Along State Highway 17 (Ridge Road), northbound on the easterly side
thereof at:
1. Ten Eyck Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Ten Eyck Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
§ 7.1-17 GENERAL § 7.1-18.1
1:335
2. Baldwin Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Baldwin Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
3. Page Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Page Avenue and extending
105 feet southerly therefrom.
4. Marin Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Marin Avenue and extending
105 feet southerly therefrom.
5. Valley Brook Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Valley Brook Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
6. Milton Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Milton Avenue and extending
105 feet southerly therefrom.
7. New York Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of New York Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
8. Third Avenue -(Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Third Avenue and extending
105 feet southerly therefrom.
9. Fifth Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Fifth Avenue and extending
105 feet southerly therefrom.
b. Along State Highway 17 (Ridge Road), southbound on the westerly side
thereof at:
1. Fifth Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Fifth Avenue and extending
105 feet northerly therefrom.
2. Third Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Third Avenue and extending
105 feet northerly therefrom.
3. (Reserved)
4. Freeman Street - (Near side)
§ 7.1-18.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-18.1
1:336
§ 7.1-18.2. County Roads.
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Freeman Street and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
5. Valley Brook Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Valley Brook Avenue and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
6. Post Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Post Avenue and extending
105 feet northerly therefrom.
7. Page Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Page Avenue and extending
105 feet northerly therefrom.
8. Kingsland Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Kingsland Avenue and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
9. Summer Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Summer Avenue and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
a. Along Kingsland Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
1. Willow Avenue - (Mid-block) (Prolongation)
Beginning 500 feet east of the prolongation of the easterly curbline
of Willow Avenue and extending 135 feet easterly therefrom (by
parking lot).
b. Along Kingsland Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at:
1. Willow Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Willow Avenue and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom.
2. Riverside Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Riverside Avenue and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
c. Along Rutherford Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
1. Stuyvesant Avenue - (Far side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Stuyvesant Avenue and
extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
§ 7.1-18.1 GENERAL § 7.1-18.2
1:337
2. Delafield Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Delafield Avenue and
extending 105 feet westerly therefrom.
3. Ridge Road - (Near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Ridge Road and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom.
4. Orient Way - (Near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Orient Way and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom.
5. Polito Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Polito Avenue and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom.
d. Along Rutherford Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at:
1. Polito Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Polito Avenue and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom
e. Along Riverside Avenue, southbound on the westerly side at:
1. The northwest corner of Riverside and Kingsland Avenues 260 feet
north thence 110 feet therefrom.
2. Fern Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the prolongation of the northerly curbline of Fern
Avenue and extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
f. Along Riverside Avenue, northbound on the easterly side at:
1. The southeast corner of Riverside and Page Avenues 4.5 feet south
thence 108 feet therefrom.
2. Fern Avenue - (Far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Fern Avenue and extending
100 feet northerly therefrom.
g. Along Park Avenue, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
1. Tontine Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Tontine Avenue and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
2. Court Avenue - (Near side)
§ 7.1-18.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-18.2
1:338
§ 7.1-18.3. Municipal Roadways.
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Court Avenue and extending
105 feet southerly therefrom
3. Lake Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Lake Avenue and extending
105 feet southerly therefrom.
h. Along Park Avenue, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
1. Lake Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Lake Avenue and extending
105 feet northerly therefrom
2. Court Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Court Avenue and extending
105 feet northerly therefrom
3. Tontine Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Tontine Avenue and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom
4. Rutherford Avenue - (Far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Park Avenue and extending
100 feet southerly therefrom
a. Along Chubb Avenue, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
1. Valley Brook Avenue - (Far side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Valley Brook Avenue and
extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
2. Valley Brook Avenue - (Mid-block)
Beginning 1584 feet north of the northerly curbline of Valley Brook
Avenue and extending 135 feet northerly therefrom.
3. Valley Brook Avenue - (Mid-block)
Beginning 2376 feet north of the northerly curbline of Valley Brook
Avenue and extending 135 feet northerly therefrom.
b. Along Chubb Avenue, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
1. Valley Brook Avenue - (Mid-block)
Beginning 2376 feet north of the northerly curbline of Valley Brook
Avenue and extending 135 feet northerly therefrom.
§ 7.1-18.2 GENERAL § 7.1-18.3
1:339
2. Valley Brook Avenue - (Mid-block)
Beginning 1584 feet north of the northerly curbline of Valley Brook
Avenue and extending 135 feet northerly therefrom.
3. Valley Brook Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Valley Brook Avenue and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
c. Along Polito Avenue, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
1. Rutherford Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Rutherford Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
d. Along Polito Avenue, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
1. Wall Street West - (Near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Wall Street West and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
e. Along Stuyvesant Avenue, northbound on the easterly side thereof at:
1. Kingsland Avenue - (Far side)
Beginning at the northerly/curbline of Kingsland Avenue and
extending 100 feet northerly therefrom.
2. Forrest Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Forrest Avenue and
extending 105 feet southerly therefrom.
3. Valley Brook Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Valley Brook Avenue and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom.
f. Along Stuyvesant Avenue, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
1. Valley Brook Avenue - (Far side)
Beginning at the southerly curbline of Valley Brook Avenue and
extending 100 feet southerly therefrom
2. Page Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Page Avenue and extending
105 feet northerly therefrom
3. Kingsland Avenue - (Near side)
§ 7.1-18.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-18.3
1:340
Beginning at the northerly curbline of Kingsland Avenue and
extending 105 feet northerly therefrom
g. Along Valley Brook Avenue, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
1. Weart Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Weart Avenue and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom.
2. Chase Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Chase Avenue and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom
3. Ridge Road - (Near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Ridge Road and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom
4. Polito Avenue - (Mid-block) (Prolongation) Beginning 792 feet east
of the prolongation of the easterly curbline of Polito Avenue and
extending 135 feet easterly therefrom
5. Ridge Road - (Mid-block) (Prolongation)
Beginning 138 feet east of the prolongation of the easterly curbline
of Ridge Road and extending 98 feet easterly therefrom
h. Along Valley Brook Avenue, westbound on the northerly side thereof at:
1. Cleveland Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Cleveland Avenue and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom.
2. Lincoln Avenue - (Far side) (Prolongation)
Beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curbline of Lincoln
Avenue and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom
3. Livingston Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Livingston Avenue and
extending 105 feet easterly therefrom
i. Along Wall Street West, eastbound on the southerly side thereof at:
1. Clay Avenue - (Near side)
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Clay Avenue and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom.
2. Chubb Avenue - (Near side)
§ 7.1-18.3 GENERAL § 7.1-18.3
1:341
§ 7.1-18.4. Municipal/Board Of Education Property.
§ 7.1-19. SCHEDULE XIX: TAXI STANDS.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-14, the following described
locations are hereby designated as taxi stands.
(Reserved)
§ 7.1-20. SCHEDULE XX: LANE USE RESERVATION.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-15, the lane locations
described below are designated as lane use reservations, and traffic shall
move only as indicated.
Beginning at the westerly curbline of Chubb Avenue and extending
105 feet westerly therefrom.
3. Garland Way - (Far side) (Prolongation)
Beginning at the prolongation of the easterly curbline of Garland
Way and extending 100 feet easterly therefrom.
j. Along Wall Street West, westbound on the northerly side thereof at:
1. Chubb Avenue - (Far side) (Prolongation)
Beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curbline of Chubb
Avenue and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
2. Clay Avenue - (Far side) (Prolongation)
Beginning at the prolongation of the westerly curbline of Clay
Avenue and extending 100 feet westerly therefrom.
3. Garland Way - (Near side)
Beginning at the easterly curbline of Garland Way and extending
105 feet easterly therefrom.
k. Along Clay Avenue, southbound on the westerly side thereof at:
1. Between Wall Street West and Valley Brook Avenue - Mid-block
beginning 778 feet south of the southerly curbline of Wall Street
West and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
2. Between Valley Brook Avenue and Wall Street West - Mid-block
beginning 248 feet north of the northerly curbline of Valley Brook
Avenue and extending 135 feet southerly therefrom.
a. 862 Valley Brook Avenue
The entire length of the northerly face of the structure.
§ 7.1-18.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-20
1:342
Intersection Movement
Riverside and Kingsland
Avenues
a. Northbound left lane of Riverside Avenue
reserved for left turns only
b. Eastbound left lane of Kingsland Avenue
reserved for left turns only
c. Westbound left lane of Kingsland Avenue
reserved for left turns only
d. Southbound left lane of Riverside Avenue
reserved for left turns only
Ridge Road and Valley
Brook Avenue
a. Eastbound left lane of Valley Brook Avenue
reserved for left turns only
b. Eastbound center lane of Valley Brook
Avenue reserved for through traffic only
c. Eastbound right lane of Valley Brook
Avenue reserved for right turns only
Riverside and Jauncey
Avenues
a. Southbound left lane of Riverside Avenue
reserved for left turn only
§ 7.1-21. SCHEDULE XXI: SPEED LIMITS.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-16, the streets or parts of
streets indicated below shall have speed limits as designated.
Name of Street Side
Speed
Limit Location
Court Avenue Both 15 m.p.h. From Delafield Avenue to
Livingston Avenue
Olive Street Both 15 m.p.h. Entire length
Valley Brook
Avenue
Both 15 m.p.h. From Orient Way to Polito
Avenue
§ 7.1-22. SCHEDULE XXII: NO-PASSING ZONES.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-17, the street locations which
are indicated below are hereby designated as no-passing zones.
Street Location
NJ Route 17 [Ord. #2912-15] Entire length
Polito Avenue Between Route 17 and Valley Brook
Avenue
Valley Brook Avenue Entire length
§ 7.1-20 GENERAL § 7.1-23A
1:343
§ 7.1-23A. SCHEDULE XXIII-A: REGULATIONS FOR THE
MOVEMENT OF TRAFFIC ON MUNICIPAL PROPERTY AND BOARD
OF EDUCATION PROPERTY.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-18.1, the municipal
property and board of education property indicated below shall have traffic
regulated as described below, or shown in an attached site plan, which is
hereby made a part of this chapter.
Property Regulation Movement
Columbus School (640
Lake Avenue)
No Stopping or
Standing
Franklin School (360
Stuyvesant Avenue)
No Stopping or
Standing
Franklin School (360
Stuyvesant Avenue)
[Ord. No. 2950-16]
No Parking Along the entire southerly
property line
Jefferson School (336
Lake Avenue)
No Stopping or
Standing
Lincoln School (281
Ridge Road)
No Stopping or
Standing
Lyndhurst High School
(440 Weart Avenue)
No Stopping or
Standing
Roosevelt School (530
Stuyvesant Avenue)
No Stopping or
Standing
Station Square Parking
Lot
One-way Westbound from Delafield
Avenue to parking lot exit
on Second Avenue
Station Square Parking
Lot
No Stopping or
Standing
Washington School (709
Ridge Road)
No Stopping or
Standing
§ 7.1-23B. SCHEDULE XXIII-B: REGULATION FOR THE
MOVEMENT OF TRAFFIC ON PRIVATE PROPERTY OPEN TO
PUBLIC.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-18.2, the property
indicated below shall have traffic regulated as described below, or shown in
an attached site plan, which is hereby made a part of this chapter.
Property Regulation Movement
Shop Rite/Lyndhurst
Plaza
No Stopping or
Standing [Fire Lane]
As per sketch on file in
township clerk's office
§ 7.1-23A LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-23C
1:344
§ 7.1-23C. SCHEDULE XXIII-C: REGULATION FOR THE MOVEMENT
OF TRAFFIC ON ALL OTHER PRIVATE PROPERTY.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-18.3, the properties
indicated below shall have traffic regulated as described below, or shown in
an attached site plan, which is hereby made a part of this chapter.
(Reserved)
§ 7.1-24. SCHEDULE XXIV: PARKING PROHIBITED TEMPORARILY
FOR SNOW PLOWING, SNOW REMOVAL AND OTHER
EMERGENCIES.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-19, the following streets are
designated as snow emergency streets.
Street Location
Chase Avenue Entire length - Both sides
Fern Avenue [Ord.
#2912-15]
Between Stuyvesant Avenue and
Livingston Avenue - South side only
Fern Avenue [Ord.
#2912-15; Ord. No.
2917-15 § 4]
Between Weart Avenue and Grant Avenue
- Both sides
Fifth Street [Ord. #2912-15] From Summer Avenue to a point 317 feet
south thereof — East side only
Forest Avenue [Ord.
#2912-15; Ord. No.
2917-15 § 4]
Between Grant Avenue and Weart Avenue
— Both sides
Freeman Avenue Between Castle Terrace and the northeast
terminus - North side only
Grant Avenue [Ord. No.
2917-15 § 4]
Between Fern Avenue and Forest Avenue -
Both sides
Kingsland Avenue [Repealed
by Ord. No. 2959-17]
Kingsland Avenue [Ord. No.
2959-17]
Between Ridge Road and Riverside
Avenue-North side
Livingston Avenue [Ord.
#2912-15]
Between Second Avenue and Lake Avenue
— East side only
Orient Way Entire length - Both sides
Orient Way/Schuyler Avenue Entire length - Both sides
Page Avenue Entire length - Both sides
Park Avenue Entire length - Both sides
Ridge Road [for reference
only]
Entire length - Both sides
§ 7.1-23C GENERAL § 7.1-24
1:345
Street Location
Riverside Avenue Entire length - Both sides
Rutherford Avenue Entire length - Both sides
Second Avenue Between Orient Way and Stuyvesant
Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue Entire length - Both sides
Summit Avenue [Ord.
#2912-15]
Between Lake Avenue and Third Avenue
— West side only
Ten Eyck Avenue Entire length - Both sides
Third Avenue [Ord.
#2912-15]
From Summit Avenue to a point 135 feet
west thereof — North side only
Valley Brook Avenue Entire length - Both sides
Weart Avenue [Ord.
#2912-15; Ord. No.
2917-15 § 4]
Between Forest Avenue and Fern Avenue
— Both sides
Weart Avenue [Ord.
#2912-15]
Between Maple Avenue and Kingsland
Avenue — West side only
Wilson Avenue [Ord.
#2912-15]
Between Stuyvesant Avenue and Riverside
Avenue — South side only
§ 7.1-25. SCHEDULE XXV: FINES AND COSTS.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-22, the following offenses
shall have fines and costs assessed as indicated.
Subsection
Number Offenses Total Fines/Costs
7-4.1 No parking vehicles over
designated weight
$50
7-4.2 No parking vehicle excess 5,000
pounds
$45
7-4.3 No parking truck route over 4 tons $50
7-5.2 No parking emergency w/signs $45
7-5.3 No parking all times certain streets $45
7-5.4 No parking certain hours certain
streets
$40
7-5.5 No stopping or standing $50
7-5.6 No parking overtime limit, certain
streets
$40
7-5.7 No parking street cleaning $35
7-5.8(a)(b) No parking sale or repair $45
§ 7.1-24 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-25
1:346
Subsection
Number Offenses Total Fines/Costs
7-5.9 No parking over 1 space $45
7-5.11 No parking of taxicabs certain
hours
$50
7-7a No parking without permit $55
7-11 No improper turns $45
7-12.1 No parking in loading zone $45
7-13.2 No parking in bus stop $45
7-14.2 No parking in taxi stand $45
11-1.4e, 2 No parking in fire zone or lane $50
7-19A No parking snow removal-w/signs $60
3-18.1 No parking private property notice
posted
$50
7A-2 No parking without resident permit
9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
$50
§ 7.1-26. SCHEDULE XXVI: PARKING LIMITED TO MEDICAL
EMERGENCY VEHICLES ONLY.
In accordance with the provisions of subsection 7-5.10, parking on the
following streets or parts of streets shall be limited to medical emergency
vehicles only.
Street Location
464 Valley Brook Avenue The 40 most easterly feet of the
frontage
§ 7.1-27. SCHEDULE XXVII: ANGLE PARKING.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-5.12, the following
establishes angle parking zones as indicated.
Name of Street Side Location
Court Avenue North Between Delafield Avenue and
Stuyvesant Avenue
§ 7.1-28. SCHEDULE XXVIII: MID-BLOCK CROSSWALKS.
In accordance with the provisions of Section 7-25.1, the following
establishes mid-block crosswalks as indicated.
§ 7.1-25 GENERAL § 7.1-28
1:347
Name of Street Location
Delafield Avenue
[Ord. #2912-15]
Beginning at a point 137 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Court Avenue and extending
to a point 10 feet south therefrom
Delafield Avenue
[Ord. #2912-15]
Beginning at a point 289 feet south of the
southerly curbline of Court Avenue and extending
to a point 10 feet south therefrom
Delafield Avenue
[Ord. #2912-15]
Beginning at a point 274 feet north of the
northerly curbline of Valley Brook Avenue and
extending to a point 10 feet north therefrom
Second Avenue [Ord.
#2909-14]
Beginning at a point 155 feet east of the easterly
curbline of Stuyvesant Avenue and extending to a
point 10 feet easterly therefrom
Valley Brook Avenue
[Ord. No. 2917-15
§ 5]
Beginning at a point 186 feet west of the westerly
curbline of Polito Avenue and extending to a point
10 feet westerly therefrom
§ 7.1-29. SCHEDULE XXIX: SCHOOL CROSSING GUARD POSTS.
[Added 6-11-2019 by Ord. No. 3026-19]
In accordance with the provisions of § 7-26, the following described
locations are hereby designated as school crossing guard posts:
Location
Delafield Avenue and Lake Avenue
Fern Avenue and Weart Avenue
Forest Avenue and Weart Avenue
Lake Avenue and Summit Avenue
Livingston Avenue and Lake Avenue
Orient Way and New York Avenue
Orient Way and Valley Brook Avenue
Page Avenue and Court Avenue
Page Avenue and Weart Avenue
Park Avenue and Lake Avenue
Ridge Road and Kingsland Avenue
Ridge Road and Lake Avenue
Ridge Road and New Jersey Avenue
Ridge Road and Page Avenue
Ridge Road and Ten Eyck Avenue
Ridge Road and Valley Brook Avenue - a
§ 7.1-28 LYNDHURST CODE § 7.1-29
1:348
Location
Ridge Road and Valley Brook Avenue - b
Second Avenue and Livingston Avenue
Second Avenue midblock between Stuyvesant Avenue and Livingston
Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue and Court Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue and Fern Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue and Kingsland Avenue - a
Stuyvesant Avenue and Kingsland Avenue - b
Stuyvesant Avenue and Lake Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue and Page Avenue - a
Stuyvesant Avenue and Page Avenue - b
Stuyvesant Avenue and Post Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue and Riverside Avenue
Stuyvesant Avenue and Second Avenue
Third Avenue and Summit Avenue
Valley Brook Avenue and Delafield Avenue
Valley Brook Avenue and Harrington Avenue
Valley Brook Avenue and Milburn Avenue
Valley Brook Avenue and Weart Avenue
Weart Avenue and Maple Avenue
Chapter 7A
PARKING PERMITS AND PARKING LOTS
§ 7A-1. PREAMBLE. [Ord. #2154; Ord. #2162; Ord. #2254, § I]
The purpose of this chapter is to reduce hazardous traffic conditions
resulting from the use of streets within areas reserved for residential use
for the parking of vehicles by persons using districts zoned for commercial
and the business uses, to protect those districts from polluted air, excessive
noise, and trash and refuse caused by the entry of such vehicles, to protect
the residents of those districts from unreasonable burdens in gaining access
to their residences; to preserve the character of those districts as
residential districts; to promote efficiency in the maintenance of those
streets in a clean and safe condition, and to reduce the use of streets within
areas zoned for residential uses for the parking of vehicles used by all-day
commuters and to thereby encourage car pooling. In order to promote these
goals the board of commissioners of the Township of Lyndhurst ordain the
following.
§ 7.1-29 GENERAL § 7A-2
1:349
§ 7A-2. RESIDENT PARKING PROGRAM. [Ord. #2154, § I; Ord.
#2162, § I; Ord. #2254, § I; Ord. #2266; Ord. #2282; Ord. #2283;
Ord. #2284; Ord. #2293, § I; Ord. #2305, § I; Ord. #2309, § I; Ord.
#2368, § I; Ord. #2370, § I; Ord. #2373, § I; Ord. #2376, § I; Ord.
#2407, § IV; Ord. #2539, § I; Ord. #2706, § I; Ord. #2708, § I; Ord.
#2725, § 2; Ord. #2775, § 4; Ord. #2816-11, § 3; Ord. #2830, § 2;
Ord. #2860-12, § 2; Ord. #2879-13, § 7; Ord. No. 2955-16 § 2]
A resident parking program shall be instituted as follows:
§ 7A-3. RULES AND REGULATIONS. [Ord. #2154, § II; Ord. #2162,
§ II; Ord. #2254, § I; Ord. #2407, § III; Ord. #2712, § 1]
The following rules and regulations shall apply to the Lyndhurst Resident
Permit Parking Program:
a. From 9:00 a.m. through 5:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday, excluding
Saturday, Sunday and holidays (New Year's Day, Lincoln's Birthday,
Presidents' Day, Memorial Day, July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day
and Christmas) on the streets of Lyndhurst listed on the attached
Schedule A21 which streets will be designated resident parking permit
only.
b. From 10:00 p.m. through 3:00 a.m. each day, including weekends and
holidays, on the streets of Lyndhurst as listed on the attached Schedule
B22 which streets will be designated resident parking permits only.
a. A resident parking permit tag of a design specified by the public safety
department will be issued to the resident owner of the vehicle. The
permit tag shall display the zone in which the vehicle may park. The
vehicle must be owned by a person residing in the zone specified in
Schedule A of Chapter 7A in the Township of Lyndhurst and have a
gross weight of no more than 2 1/2 tons. The resident tag shall permit
the resident to park on the street only in the zone for which the permit
is issued.
b. Proof of residency of the owner of a vehicle must be presented when
applying for a permit. The following is acceptable proof of residency:
1. A copy of a valid New Jersey driver's license reflecting an address
within Lyndhurst; and
2. A copy of a valid New Jersey motor vehicle registration for the
vehicle for which the permit is sought showing an address within
Lyndhurst. In the case of a vehicle claimed to be leased and used by
a Lyndhurst resident, a copy of a valid motor vehicle registration
and a copy of the automobile lease shall be presented to the
township in lieu of the New Jersey motor vehicle registration.
21.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
22.Editor's Note: Schedule B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 7A-2 LYNDHURST CODE § 7A-3
1:350
§ 7A-4. VISITOR PERMITS. [Ord. #2154, § III; Ord. #2162, § III;
Ord. #2254, § I]
§ 7A-5. USE OF VISITOR PERMIT - RULES AND REGULATIONS.
[Ord. #2154, § IV; Ord. #2162, § IV; Ord. #2254, § I]
c. The resident's tag is to be placed on the rear view mirror of the
registered vehicle.
d. The public safety department shall have the authority to issue
temporary resident permit parking stickers to persons who reside on
streets marked "Permit Parking Only" who (1) show proof of residence
in the township satisfactory to the department, including, but not
limited to, deed, lease, letter from landlord or owner, or utility bills, but
who have not yet changed their driver's license or their motor vehicle
registration to reflect the Lyndhurst address, or (2) hold a current
resident permit tag but whose vehicle has been stolen or incapacitated
and who is driving a temporary vehicle. The temporary sticker shall be
valid for a period not to exceed 90 days, at which time the resident must
obtain a permanent tag by presentation of the proofs of residency set
forth in subsection 7A-3b above. Temporary permits are valid only
within one block of the resident's address.
a. One annual visitor permit of a design specified by the public safety
department shall be issued to any resident who meets one of the
following qualifications:
1. The resident owns a vehicle which qualifies for a resident parking
permit; provided, however, that no other person residing in the
same household as the resident has been issued a visitor permit; or
2. In a household where the residents do not have a car, a current
utility or phone bill in the name of one of such residents, or a
notarized lease inclusive of utilities in the name of one of such
residents (valid for at least one year) is presented to the public
safety department provided, that no other person in the same
household has been issued a visitor permit; or
3. A household in which the residents own a vehicle which has not
been issued a resident parking permit will be issued one visitor
permit for use on their visitor's vehicle only.
b. A visitor permit will not be issued to anyone residing in any building
exclusively used by students and affiliates of a college.
c. Additional visitor permits, in numbers as specified by the public safety
department, may be issued to doctors, dentists, and lawyers, and other
professionals upon written request. The request must be sent on the
applicant's business letterhead and there must be no off street parking
available in the area of the applicant's place of business.
§ 7A-3 GENERAL § 7A-5
1:351
§ 7A-6. REQUIRED INFORMATION ON PERMITS. [Ord. #2154, § V;
Ord. #2162, § V; Ord. #2254, § I]
The temporary visitor permit shall require the vehicle identification number
and license plate of the vehicle, the driver's license number and such other
information as may be required by the department of public safety.
§ 7A-7. BUSINESS PERMITS. [Ord. #2162, § VI; Ord. #2254, § I]
§ 7A-8. ABUSE OF VISITOR OR BUSINESS PERMIT. [Ord. #2154,
§ VI: Ord. #2162, § VII; Ord. #2254, § I]
a. One visitor permit shall be issued per household for use by visitors only,
while visitors are actually visiting the household to which the permit
was issued. The presumption shall be that any vehicle parked more than
one block from the household for which the visitor permit has been
issued shall not be visiting such household.
b. All visitor permits are to be displayed on the front dashboard above the
steering wheel and must be fully readable from the exterior of the
vehicle. A visitor permit should be returned to the resident at the
conclusion of the visit as it will not be replaced if lost.
c. One temporary visitor permit may be requested in writing to the public
safety department. A temporary visitor permit will be issued for a
specific period of time and the expiration date will appear on the front
of the temporary visitor permit.
a. Business establishments located in the Township of Lyndhurst may
obtain business permits for any non-resident employee of such business
establishment who commutes to work by automobile, in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
The permit shall be limited to the hours during which the nonresident
employee works. In order to obtain such permits, the business
establishment must present a letter to the public safety department
verifying that there is no adequate off-street parking available to the
employee. The letter shall list the name of the employee, the vehicle
identification number and the license number, the employee, and such
other information as may be required; which information shall be
placed on the permit.
b. All written requests for business permits shall be executed by a
responsible officer of the employer. The public safety department shall
be entitled to obtain periodic verification of all relevant information and
shall have the power to invalidate or not renew any business permit
issued pursuant to this section if the information indicates
nonentitlement to the business permit or requested information to
verify entitlement is not furnished.
§ 7A-5 LYNDHURST CODE § 7A-8
1:352
§ 7A-9. RESIDENT PARKING PERMIT FEE. [Ord. #2154, § VII; Ord.
#2162, § VIII; Ord. #2254, § I; Ord. #2266, § II; Ord. #2376, § I;
Ord. #2421, § I; Ord. #2430, § I]
§ 7A-10. TERM OF PERMITS. [Ord. #2154, § VIII; Ord. #2162, § IX;
Ord. #2254, § I]
Resident permits, and visitor permits will expire annually as reasonably
determined by the public safety department. Any vehicle bearing an expired
resident permit, visitor permit, or temporary visitor permit, and parked on
a street posted "Permit Parking Only" shall be subject to the same penalty
as a vehicle parked on the street without a resident permit, visitor permit
or temporary visitor permit.
§ 7A-11. PENALTIES. [Ord. #2154, § IX; Ord. #2162, § X; Ord.
#2254, § I; Ord. #2712, § 1]
Any vehicle parked on a street posted "Permit Parking Only" without a valid
resident permit, visitor permit, temporary visitor permit, shall be subject to
a parking fine of $50. Persons who engage in the unlawful or unauthorized
use of resident permits, visitor permits, or temporary visitor permits are
subject to revocation of the permits for one year and a $100 fine.
§ 7A-12. GRACE PERIOD. [Ord. #2154, § X; Ord. #2162, § XI; Ord.
#2254, § I]
Any vehicles parked in a resident permit parking only zone (as defined in
this chapter) without a valid resident permit, visitor permit, or temporary
visitor permit, will have two hours grace period after which they will be
ticketed.
a. Any abuse in the use of a visitor permit or business permit will result in
its revocation in the following circumstances:
1. Any such permit is used on any vehicle owned and controlled by a
resident; or
2. The extended use of a visitor permit by a visitor without prior
approval of the public safety department.
3. Any such permit is used on a car other than the car originally
issued the permit.
a. There is no permit fee.
b. A fee of $5 will be charged for the replacement of a lost tag.
§ 7A-8 GENERAL § 7A-12
1:353
Chapter 8
BUILDING AND HOUSING
[Editor's Note: See also Chapter 11, Fire Prevention, and Chapter 25,
Hazardous Chemicals. See Chapter 24, § 24-5, for construction noise
prohibitions. See Chapter 13 for the Property Maintenance Code.]
§ 8-1. UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE ENFORCING AGENCY.
§ 8-1.1. Establishment of the Lyndhurst Construction Department.
[Ord. #1652, § 1A]
§ 8-1.2. Appeals. [Ord. #1652, § 2]
Appeals from decisions of the enforcing agency shall be taken to the Bergen
County Construction Board of Appeals pursuant to Chapter 217, Laws of
New Jersey, 1975, Title 5, and Chapter 23 of the New Jersey Administrative
Code.
a. There is hereby established in the township a State Uniform
Construction Code Enforcing Agency to be known as Lyndhurst
Construction Department consisting of a construction official, building
subcode official, plumbing subcode official, electrical subcode official,
fire protection subcode official, and such other subcode officials for
such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs, State of New Jersey, shall hereafter adopt as part of
the State Uniform Construction Code. The construction official shall be
the chief administrator of the enforcing agency.
b. Each official position created in paragraph a hereof shall be filled by a
person qualified for such position pursuant to P.L. 1975, C. 217 as
amended and N.J.A.C. 523; provided that in lieu of any particular
subcode official, an on-site inspection agency may be retained by
contract pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23. More than one such official position
may be held by the same person; provided that such person is qualified
pursuant to P.L. 1975, C. 217 and N.J.A.C. 5:23 to hold each such
position.
c. The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency
at one office location except for emergencies, and unforeseen or
unavoidable circumstances.
§ 7A-12 LYNDHURST CODE § 8-1.3
1:354
§ 8-1.3. Fees. [Ord. #1652, § 3A; Ord. #1677, § 2; Ord. #1776; Ord.
#1799, § 5; Ord. #1978, § 1; Ord. #2146, § I; Ord. #2212, § I; Ord.
#2250, § I; Ord. #2333, § I; Ord. #2365, § I; Ord. #2404, § I; Ord.
#2542, § I; Ord. No. 2579, § 1; Ord. #2605, § 1; Ord. #2757, § 1; Ord.
#2826-11, § 1; Ord. #2875-12, § 1]
a. The fee for a construction permit shall be the sum of the subcode fees
listed in paragraphs a1 through a4 hereof and shall be paid to the
Lyndhurst Construction Department before the permit is issued.
SECTION I
1. Building Subcode Fees. The Building Subcode Fees shall be:
(a) New construction:23
(1)Residential structures $0.027 pcf.
Minimum fee shall be $200
(2)Accessory residential structures $0.0165 pcf
Private garages etc.
Residential private sheds (100
sq. ft. or more) shall be priced as
(b) below (alterations)
Minimum fee shall be $75
(3)Commercial/industrial/business
structures
$0.027 pcf
Minimum fee shall be $300
(4)Accessory structures, all other
uses
$0.027 pcf
Minimum fee shall be $175
(b) Alterations, siding, wood burning stoves, walls:
(1)Estimated cost up to $1,000 $60
(2)Plus each additional $1,000 over
first $1,000 or any portion
thereof of estimated cost
$12
(c) Swimming pools:
(1)Aboveground $100
(2)In-ground $150
(d) Fences: Over 6 feet $50
(e) Signs (per sign): $50
(f) Re-roof (nonstructural):
23.Editor’s Note: See subsection 8-1.6 for permit provisions requiring extermination of
insects and baiting of rats.
§ 8-1.3 GENERAL § 8-1.3
1:355
(1)One and two-family $75
(2)All others up to $5,000 of
estimated cost
$75
(3)Each additional $5,000 of
estimated cost
$5
(g) Tank installation:
(1)Residential one and two-family
each
$100
(2)All other uses each $200
(h) Demolition:24
(1)Residential accessory building $50
(2)One and two family dwellings $100
(3)All other uses $200
(4)Tank removal (residential) each
one and two family
$100
(5)Tank removal (all other uses)
each
$200
(i) Certificate of occupancy:
New building $100
Plus each unit and tenant $50
(j) Certificate of continued occupancy:
(1)One family $75
(2)Two family $100
(3) All other residential uses (first
two units)
$100
(4)All other residential uses (each
residential unit three or over)
$25
(5)Mercantile, per unit $100
(6)Commercial, per unit $100
(k) Certificate of approval:
For each UCC permit issued, for
each subcode except for when a
certificate of occupancy is required
on said permit, then and only the
building subcode certificate of
approval is exempt
$9
24.Editor’s Note: See subsection 8-1.6 for permit provisions requiring extermination of
insects and baiting of rats.
§ 8-1.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 8-1.3
1:356
(l) Elevators:
(1)Elevators in the Township of
Lyndhurst shall be installed and
inspected in accordance with
N.J.A.C. 5:23-12, et seq. The fees
for inspections and tests of
elevator devices shall be in
accordance with the
requirements N.J.A.C. 5:23-12.
(2) The fee for the installation of a
new elevator device in structures
not in use group R-3, R-4, R-5, or
an exempted R-2 shall be
$300
(m) Moving of building25 $200
(n) Asbestos removal:
(1)Cost of removal $100
(2)Certificate of occupancy after
removal
$50
(o) Driveway, curbcut and/or apron
(collectively)
$35
2. Plumbing Subcode Fees. The Plumbing Subcode Fees shall be:
(a) New or replacement first fixture:
(1)One and two family $25
(2)All other uses $80
(b) Each fixture to be installed or replaced in excess of first
fixture:
(1)One and two family $10
(2)All other uses $15
(c) New house sewer connection:
(1)One and two family $75
(2)All other uses $100
(d) Replacement sewer connection:
(1)One and two family $50
(2)All other uses $100
(e) Repair sewer:
(1)One and two family $50
(2)All other uses $100
25.Editor’s Note: See subsection 8-1.6 for permit provisions requiring extermination of
insects and baiting of rats.
§ 8-1.3 GENERAL § 8-1.3
1:357
(f) New water service line - curb to building:
(1)One and two family $75
(2)All other uses $100
(g) Replace water service line to
building
$65
(h) New or replacement hot water heater:
(1)One and two family $50
(2)All other uses $100
(i) New or replacement
refrigeration equipment - air
conditioning
$75
(j) Grease traps and similar devices $75
(k) New/replacement industrial heating
equipment to sewer/potable water
$100
(l) New/replacement domestic heating
equipment to sewer/potable water
$50
(m) Gas/fuel oil piping $35
(n) Annual testing of commercial
backflow preventors
$75
(o) Lawn sprinkler installations:
(1)Residential $45
(2)All other uses $100
3. Electrical Subcode Fees. Electrical subcode fees shall be:
(a) Furnace - Boiler, oil, gas and air handlers:
(1)One and two family $25
(2)All other uses $50
(b) Wiring, switches, lighting, and receptacles:
(1)1 to 25 $40
(2)Each additional 25 or portion
thereof
$12
(c) Motor schedule:
(1)Less than 1 hp $15
(2)1 hp to 10 hp $30
(3)10.1 hp to 35 hp $92
(4)36 hp to 100 hp $150
(5)100.1 hp and up $500
(d) Commercial light poles parking lots:
§ 8-1.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 8-1.3
1:358
(1)1-5 $50
(2)Each additional pole $10
(e) Heating, cooking equipment or similar appliances:
(1)Single 20 kW or less $10
(2)Each additional unit or outlet 20
kW or less residential
$15
(f) Swimming pools:
(1)Aboveground $75
(2)In-ground $100
(g) Service meter equipment, feeders, sub-panels:
(1)Not over 224 amp service $46
(2)225 amp to 600 amp $150
(3)601 amp to 1,000 amp $250
(4)Over 1,000 amp $500
(h) Transformers:
(1)Less than 1 KVA $15
(2)1 KVA to 10 KVA $30
(3)10.1 KVA to 35 KVA $92
(4)36 KVA to 100 KVA $150
(5)Over 100 KVA $500
(i) Electric signs, incandescent each $50
(j) Electric discharge sign:
(1)0 to 10 KVA $75
(2)Each additional 5 KVA $15
(3)Minimum fee $50
(k) Electrical safety inspection (public pools, hot tubs, spas,
etc.):
(1) First installation $100
(2)More than one each $50
(l) Radio and TV transmitting
equipment
$75
(m) Inspection for reintroduction of
power
$40
(n) Fire/burglar alarm system:
(1)Residential $50
(2)Commercial $75
§ 8-1.3 GENERAL § 8-1.3
1:359
(o) Communication wiring:
(1)1 to 25 devices $75
(2)26 to 50 devices $80
(3)51 to 75 devices $90
(4)76 to 100 devices $100
(5)101 to 125 devices $110
(6)126 to 150 devices $120
(7)151 to 200 devices $130
(8)201 to 225 devices $140
(p) Temporary installation $100
(q) Minimum inspection fee $50
4. Fire Subcode Fees:
(a) Suppression system all based on sprinkler heads:
(1)1 to 49 $200
(2)50 to 99 $250
(3)100 to 149 $300
(4)150 to 199 $350
(5)200 to 500 $400
(6)Over 500 $500
(7)Minimum fee $200
(b) Suppression system dry chemicals/halon/foam/CO2, etc. All
uses. New installation/repair/replacement fees:
(1)Estimated cost $1,000 and below $75
(2)Each additional $1,000 or any
portion thereof of estimated cost
$20
(3)Minimum fee $80
(c) Standpipes all uses each riser:
(1)Up to and including five stories $150
(2)Each riser over five stories $50
(3)Minimum fee $150
(d) Alarm devices:
(1)One and two family $50
(2)All other uses $100
(e) Commercial kitchen hood system $150
§ 8-1.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 8-1.3
1:360
5. Special Inspection Fees. Requests for any required code inspection,
either before or after regular Lyndhurst Building Department hours
or on holidays or weekends, shall require a payment at the rate
of $75 per hour with a minimum of four hours, in addition to any
established permit or certificate fees.
b. The construction official shall, with the advice of the subcode officials,
prepare and submit to the board of commissioners, biannually, a report
recommending a fee schedule based on the operating expenses of the
agency, and any other expenses of the municipality fairly attributable to
the enforcement of the State Uniform Construction Code Act.
c. In order to provide for the training, certification, and technical support
programs, required by the Uniform Construction Code Act and the
regulations, the enforcing agency shall collect in addition to the fees
specified above, a surcharge fee in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.19.
d. Waiver of Fees.
1. No person shall be charged a construction permit fee or enforcing
agency fee for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement designed and undertaken solely to promote
accessibility by disabled persons to an owner-occupied premises with
not more than three rental units or any of the facilities contained
therein. A "disabled person" means a person who has the total and
permanent inability to engage in any substantial gainful activity by
reason of any medically determinable physical or mental impairment,
including blindness, and shall include, but is not limited to, any
resident of this state who is disabled pursuant to the Federal Social
Security Act (42 U.S.C. § 416), or the Federal Railroad Retirement
Act of 1974 (45 U.S.C. § 231), or is rated as having a 60% disability or
higher pursuant to any federal law administered by the United States
Veterans' Act. "Blindness" means central visual acuity of 20/200 or
less in the better eye with the use of a correcting lens. An eye which
is accompanied by a limitation in the fields of vision such that the
widest diameter of the visual field subtends an angle no greater than
20° shall be considered as having a central visual acuity of 20/200 or
less.
§ 8-1.3 GENERAL § 8-1.3
1:361
2. No person shall be charged a construction permit fee or enforcing
agency fee for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement designed and undertaken for the purpose of repairing,
replacing or correcting any property or facilities damaged,
destroyed, or rendered unusable or inoperable as a result of the
"Nor'easter" storm which occurred on or about April 15, 2007, and
which caused flooding and severe damage to property and created a
dangerous and hazardous condition in the township. This paragraph
is urgent and necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
health and safety in order to permit residents and property owners
to expeditiously and efficiently make the required repairs,
replacements and corrections described hereinabove, which would
necessitate that they assume the financial responsibility for the costs
thereof, without incurring the additional financial burden of the fees
described herein. This subsection shall be given retroactive effect.
e. No person shall be charged a construction permit fee or enforcing
agency fee for any construction, reconstruction, alteration or
improvement designed and undertaken for the purpose of repairing,
replacing or correcting any property or facilities damaged, destroyed,
or rendered unusable or inoperable as a result of Hurricane Irene which
occurred on or about August 28, 2011 and Hurricane Sandy which
occurred on or about October 29, 2012, both of which caused flooding
and severe damage to property and created a dangerous and hazardous
condition in the township. This paragraph is urgent and necessary for
the immediate preservation of the public health and safety in order to
permit residents and property owners to expeditiously and efficiently
make the required repairs, replacements and corrections described
hereinabove, which would necessitate that they assume the financial
responsibility for the costs thereof, without incurring the additional
financial burden of the fees described herein. This subsection shall be
given retroactive effect.
§ 8-1.4. Fire Limits. [Ord. #1652, § 4]
The fire limits contained in Ordinance No. 1264 adopted by the board of
commissioners on April 7, 1960 are hereby incorporated in this section by
reference and are established as fire limits pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23.
§ 8-1.5. Revocation, Suspension, or Cancellation of Permit. [Ord.
#2054, § I]
a. The construction department official may revoke or suspend, any
construction permit where he or she determines that a permit holder
has unduly delayed the commencement and/or completion of the
construction authorized by the permit and where he or she finds the
following:
1. No construction has been undertaken above the foundation walls
within one year from the time of issuance of the permit; or
§ 8-1.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 8-1.5
1:362
§ 8-1.6. Permits Requiring Extermination of Insects and Baiting of
Rats. [Ord. #2066, § I]
Before issuing a permit under subsection 81.3a1(a), New Construction,
subsection 8-1.3a1(f), Demolition, subsection 8-1.3a1(k), Moving a Building,
or any other permit requiring foundation work, the construction department
shall inspect the property and determine whether the applicant shall be
required to bait for rats and/or to arrange extermination of insects.
§ 8-2. ON-SITE ELECTRICAL INSPECTION AGENCY.
§ 8-2.1. Agency Established. [Ord. #1677, § 1; Ord. #1799, § 1]
Pursuant to 5:23-4.6 of the Uniform Construction Code there is hereby
established for the Township of Lyndhurst an on-site electrical inspection
agency to provide for electrical inspections for the Township of Lyndhurst.
The agency must possess a current subcode official license and an H.H.S.
(Class I) electrical inspector's license as issued pursuant to the
requirements of the State Uniform Construction Code. The agency shall
be selected by the director of the department of public affairs after an
investigation and interview by the construction official and shall serve at
the pleasure of the director.
§ 8-2.2. Duties. [Ord. #1677; Ord. #1799, §§ 2, 3]
2. The construction is not completed with the time period determined
by the construction official pursuant to paragraph b.;
3. No construction has been undertaken within six months of issuance
of the permit.
b. The construction department official shall before issuing a building
permit determine the time period in which the construction authorized
by the permit must be completed. This determination shall be based
upon a review of the time in which comparable construction projects
were completed within the township, assuming that no other
circumstances existed which caused a delay.
a. The on-site electrical inspection agency shall have an adequate certified
staff to review all plans and specifications for all classes and types of
construction within the township upon the request of the construction
official and to review all the plans and specifications for all construction
with the township for the purpose of determining compliance of said
electrical plans and specifications with the National Electrical Code.
b. The agency shall report to the construction official at least two days per
week, in person, for the review of electrical plans, processing of
electrical permit applications and such other matters that are
necessary. The agency shall report at the times determined by the
construction official and further shall be subject to his rulings,
directives and orders and shall compile appropriate data applicable to
§ 8-1.5 GENERAL § 8-2.2
1:363
§ 8-2.3. Fees. [Ord. #1677, § 2; Ord. #1799, § 4]
Compensation for the on-site electrical inspection agency shall be on a
monthly basis by voucher. The Township of Lyndhurst shall retain 25% of
the electrical permit fees for administrative costs.
§ 8-3. HOUSING AUTHORITY OF BERGEN COUNTY.
§ 8-3.1. Preamble. [Ord. #1580]
It is the considered opinion of the board of commissioners that senior
citizens of low-income in the community are entitled to safe and sanitary
housing accommodations at rentals such persons can afford, and such
low-rental housing accommodations are in extremely short supply and
overcrowded and congested housing will eventuate from such a shortage
and thereby impair public safety and economic values. The shortage of
such safe and sanitary housing for low-income senior citizens cannot be
totally relieved through private enterprise and that, therefore, new and
rehabilitated construction of housing projects and facilities would not be
competitive with private enterprise, and it is a governmental function to
all inspections and, in appropriate cases, issue, through the
construction official, all the required documentation and certification.
c. The agency shall carry adequate liability insurance to each person
within its employ to satisfy claims and/or judgments for property
damage and/or personal injury arising out of the failure of its employees
to properly discharge their duties and responsibilities and to indemnify
the Township of Lyndhurst from all liability and responsibility.
d. The agency shall further process and return all documents, plans and
specifications and applications within the time period requirements
specified by the Uniform Construction Code.
e. The agency shall further provide technical assistance in the preparation
of a construction permit application as requested by the construction
official.
f. The agency shall perform all required inspections and reinspection.
g. The agency shall give testimony, as required, at all hearings or court
proceedings as requested by the construction official.
h. The agency shall further provide and prepare all reports or
documentations for the construction official as are promulgated and
required by the department of community affairs or as may be required
by the construction official from time to time in carrying out its
responsibilities under the Act and regulations.
i. All inspections including emergency inspections made by the on-site
electrical inspection agency shall be made in a timely manner but in no
event more than 72 hours from the time of notice.
§ 8-2.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 8-3.1
1:364
seek public monies to acquire property and construction and/or rehabilitate
or lease housing facilities for low-income senior citizens.
The township is desirous of having its territorial area included in the area
of operation of "The Housing Authority of Bergen County."
§ 8-3.2. Purpose. [Ord. #1580, § 1]
The township desires to participate in the area of operations of the Housing
Authority of Bergen County throughout its territorial boundary and the
jurisdiction of its board of commissioners for the purpose of alleviating the
shortage of safe and sanitary housing for low-income senior citizens.
§ 8-3.3. Consent of Township. [Ord. #1580, § 2]
The township does hereby consent to its inclusion in the area of operation
of the Housing Authority of Bergen County.
§ 8-3.4. Filing of Copies. [Ord. #1580, § 3]
The clerk is hereby authorized and directed to file a certified copy of this
section with the Commissioner of the State Department of Conservation and
Economic Development and with the Secretary of the Housing Authority of
Bergen County.
§ 8-4. RENT CONTROL.26
§ 8-4.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2052, § 1; Ord. #2781]
As used in this section:
a. Housing space shall mean and include that portion of a dwelling, rented
or offered for rent for living and dwelling purposes to one individual or
family unit together with all privileges, services, furnishings, furniture,
equipment, facilities and improvements connected with the use or
occupancy of such portion of the property.
b. Dwelling shall mean and include any building or structure rented or
offered for rent for the purpose of housing space. Exempt from this
section are one-family, two-family, and three-family homes, motels,
hotels and similar type buildings. New constructed dwellings covered
by this section which are rented for the first time are exempted, and the
initial rent may be determined by the landlord. All subsequent rents
shall be subject to the provision of this section.
c. Capital improvement shall mean an improvement which is depreciable
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code of the United States, and rules
and regulations promulgated thereunder and allowed as a depreciable
item by the Internal Revenue Service. A "capital improvement" increase
26.Editor’s Note: Ordinance Nos. 1578, 1590, 1805, 1831, 1968 and 1998 previously codified
herein were superseded in entirety by Ordinance No. 2052.
§ 8-3.1 GENERAL § 8-4.1
1:365
§ 8-4.2. Establishment of Rents. [Ord. #2052, § 11; Ord. #2130]
Establishment of rents between a landlord and a tenant to whom this act is
applicable shall hereafter be determined by the provisions of this section.
At the expiration of a lease or at the termination of a periodic tenancy,
no landlord may request or receive a percentage increase in rent which is
greater than 5.5% of the current per annum rent. No tenant shall suffer
or be caused to pay any rent increase in any calendar year which exceeds
5.5% of the preceding month period, except as provided herein. No tenant
shall experience a rent increase until that tenant has been renting for at
may be granted to a landlord only once during any calendar year for
any particular unit or units. In no event shall an increase pursuant
to this paragraph be greater than 10% of the base rental amount.
The amount of the monthly increase which a landlord may charge
shall be determined as follows: The total amount of the cost of the
capital improvement as allowed by the Internal Revenue Service shall
be divided by the depreciation period allowed by the Internal Revenue
Service. That annual amount so obtained shall be surcharged pursuant
to the provisions of subsection 8-4.4 and apportioned among the
tenants in the building in accordance with one of the following
methods:
1. If the capital improvement(s) benefits certain housing spaces only,
then the allowable cost of such improvement shall be surcharged to
only those units;
2. If the capital improvement(s) benefits all housing spaces but in
varying degrees according to the amount of living area contained in
each housing unit, then the allowable cost of such improvement
shall be surcharged according to the number of square feet in the
housing space in proportion to the total rentable area in the
building;
3. If the improvement(s) is/are equally beneficial to all housing spaces
regardless of the living area within each unit, then the allowable
cost of such improvement will be surcharged according to the
number of housing spaces within the building.
Any such increase allowed under this subsection shall be charged
for no period greater than the original depreciation period of said
improvement without regard to subsequent adjustment on the
basis of the dwelling housing space. The total cost for the purposes
of this definition shall not include any interest charged or paid in
the event monies are borrowed in order to apply for said capital
improvement.
d. Multiple family dwelling shall mean and include any structure rented or
offered for rent for the purpose of housing space consisting of more
than three residential units.
§ 8-4.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 8-4.2
1:366
least a twelve-month period counted from the date the tenancy began. This
provision shall not apply to hardship increase granted to a landlord, nor to
a capital improvement and tax increase surcharge.
§ 8-4.3. Rent Increases. [Ord. #2052, § 111]
§ 8-4.4. Notification of Increase. [Ord. #2052, § IV]
Any landlord seeking an increase in rent shall notify the tenant of the
allowable rent increase up to 5.5% of the preceding 12 months rent, 30
days before the expiration of the lease or tenancy. Notice shall be by any of
the following methods: (1) certified mail; (ii) personal service upon tenant
or his representative evidenced by a signed receipt obtained from the
tenant or representative. If service cannot be effectuated by either (i) or
(ii) above, then the tenant may be notified by regular mail and the landlord
or his representative shall certify by affidavit and retain the affidavit in his
records, that he mailed the notice to the tenant.
§ 8-4.5. Hardship Rent Increases. [Ord. #2052, § V; Ord. #2540, § 1]
a. Any rental increase at a time other than at the expiration of a lease or
termination of a periodic tenancy shall be void, except if hardship or
capital improvement increases are granted under subsections 8-4.5 or
8-4.6. Any rental increase in excess of that authorized by the provision
of this section shall be void.
b. In the event a landlord causes the rent to be increased either as a result
of an annual increase or a hardship increase the landlord shall notify all
tenants affected by such increase no later than 30 days prior to the
effective date of such increase. Said notice shall be in accordance with
subsection 8-4.4.
c. No owner or landlord shall increase the rental of any dwelling unit as
permitted in subsection 8-4.2 more than once in any twelve-month
period, provided, however, said right to annual increase shall not be
affected by any hardship increase granted to the landlord during the
preceding year by the rent leveling board.
d. Any notice requirements shall be in accordance with the provisions of
subsection 8-4.4 except that notice of a hardship appeal shall be 20
days before the date of the scheduled hardship appeal hearing.
Appellant shall notify all tenants that may be affected by such appeal in
accordance with subsection 8-4.4.
a. In the event that a landlord claims not to be receiving a just and
reasonable return on his property, he may appeal to the rent leveling
board for increased rental. The board may grant the landlord a rental
increase over and above that permitted by subsection 8-4.2 provided
that the landlord submits to the board such information as the board
requires to determine the actual return received by the landlord on his
property, and a hearing for all interested parties is held. After the filing
§ 8-4.2 GENERAL § 8-4.5
1:367
§ 8-4.6. Capital Improvements. [Ord. #2052, § VI; Ord. #2130]
of the appeal to the board, but prior to the hearing by the board,
a landlord must post in the lobby of each building, or if no lobby is
present, in a conspicuous place in and about the premises, the notice
of appeal, date, place and time of the hearing, at least 20 days prior to
the hearing; this is in addition to the notice requirements of subsections
8-4.3 and 8-4.4.
b. A landlord requesting a hardship rental increase shall prove to the rent
leveling board that he has owned title to the property in question and
operated same for at least one full year immediately prior to the date of
the hearing before the rent leveling board for said increase. This shall
be in addition to all other proofs required by the rent leveling board.
c. If a landlord owning more than three but less than 50 rental units, files
a hardship appeal, the required technical data submitted to the board
shall be reviewed and investigated by a professional accountant or a
real estate appraiser designated by the board. The cost of such
professional review shall be deposited by the landlord simultaneously
with the filing of the appeal, which deposit shall be in the amount of
$300. If the cost of the audit is less than $300, the difference shall be
refunded to the landlord.
d. If a landlord owning 50 or more rental units, files a hardship appeal, the
amount required to be deposited simultaneously with the filing of the
application, shall be in the amount of $800. If the cost of the audit is
less than $800, the difference shall be refunded to the landlord.
e. The method of determination of a "fair rate of return" shall be in
accordance with the guideline set forth in Exhibit "A" herein.27
f. All hardship appeals shall be heard and decided by the rent leveling
board no later than 75 calendar days after such appeal has been
perfected by the applicant with the rent leveling board.
a. A landlord may seek additional rental for capital improvements. The
landlord must notify each tenant as provided in subsections 8-4.4 and
8-4.6 of the total cost of the completed capital improvements or service,
the number of years of useful life of the improvement as claimed by the
landlord for the purpose of depreciation for income tax purposes, the
average cost of the improvement, the total number of square feet of all
of the dwelling units combined, the total square feet occupied by each
tenant and the capital improvement surcharge he is seeking from each
tenant. The landlord seeking a capital improvement shall apply for said
increase to the rent leveling and control board and present proof of
expenditures for capital expenditures. If said increase is granted, it
shall not be considered rental and not calculated in the allowable
increase, but shall be considered a surcharge. In any event, no increase
27.Editor’s Note: Exhibit “A” can be found at the end of this Section 8-4.
§ 8-4.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 8-4.6
1:368
§ 8-4.7. Maintenance of Premises. [Ord. #2052, § VII]
A landlord shall only be entitled to a hardship rent increase or capital
improvement increase provided herein if he maintains the premises in
accordance with this section and the other ordinances of the township or
state codes providing for the construction, health, maintenance or zoning of
said property.
§ 8-4.8. Vacancy Decontrol. [Ord. #2052, § VIII; Ord. #2540, § 2]
authorized by this subsection shall exceed 10% of the tenant's rent. A
landlord shall not be permitted a capital improvement increase for any
items required to be corrected or repaired pursuant to any state or local
building or health codes.
b. The rent leveling board shall take into consideration any cost saving in
operation of the building that will inure to the benefit of the landlord as
a result of such capital improvement.
c. The landlord may, in advance of starting a capital improvement, apply
to the board for a determination as to whether or not a capital
improvement increase will be granted. The same procedure shall be
followed as in subsection 8-4.5, except that certified cost estimates
shall be submitted along with the other required data. In the event the
board determines that a capital improvement increase will be granted,
the amount so granted shall not exceed the original estimate as
submitted to the board for an advance determination.
a. Notwithstanding any limitations upon permissible rent increases under
any other provisions of this chapter, upon the voluntary, uncoerced
vacating of any apartment, the landlord shall have the right to fix the
rent for such vacated apartment at such sum as he deems appropriate
provided there has been no rent increase under this subsection within a
five-year period and said increase does not exceed 20% of the prior
tenants rent. The decontrol provision of this subsection shall only apply
to dwelling units which are physically vacated subsequent to the
effective date of this subsection.
b. Upon vacating of any apartment hereafter, the landlord shall file a
statement with the rent leveling board, certifying to the board: (i) the
apartment and building numbers of such dwelling unit, (ii) the rent paid
by the vacating tenant, (iii) the maximum rent increase which would be
permissible under the other provisions of this chapter, (iv) the number
of days such apartment remains vacant, (v) the rent agreed to by the
new tenant for such apartment, and (vi) that the vacating of such
apartment was the voluntary act of the vacating tenant. The statement
filed herein shall be accompanied by a $25 filing fee.
c. The rent leveling board shall submit yearly reports to the board of
commissioners summarizing the number of apartments vacated during
each year and the difference, if any, between the permissible rent
§ 8-4.6 GENERAL § 8-4.8
1:369
§ 8-4.9. Certificate of Occupancy. [Ord. #2052, § IX; Ord. #2540, § 3;
Ord. #2781]
increases under the other provisions of this chapter compared to the
increases in rent due to the application of this section. Such yearly
reports shall also include the statement of the number of complaints
received by the board with respect to alleged coercion by landlords for
the purpose of forcing tenants to vacate apartments.
d. Any landlord who is the owner of property within the Township of
Lyndhurst which is affected by provisions of this Rent Leveling
Ordinance shall file with the rent leveling board on a yearly basis, no
later than the 15th day of January, a written report on forms to be
designated by the rent leveling board, which report shall contain the
following information:
1. All changes in occupancy of any rental unit in such property during
the previous calendar year;
2. In the event of such changes in occupancy, the name or names of
the former tenant, the name or names of the new tenant, the term
of the new tenancy, the amount of the new rent on a monthly basis
and the amount of the former rent on a monthly basis;
3. In the event of no change in occupancy, a statement to that effect.
In the event a landlord fails to file such reports, or in the event the
landlord files a report which is knowingly or willfully false, such
failure to file or filing such false report, shall be deemed a separate
violation of this section, punishable pursuant to the provisions of
this section.
e. The rent leveling board shall appoint a person annually to serve as an
enforcement officer. The enforcement officer shall have the power to
enforce this section by issuing complaints in the municipal court for
violation of this section.
The board shall give both landlord and tenant reasonable opportunity
to be heard before making any determination as to the issuance of a
complaint in the township municipal court.
The enforcement officer shall make initial investigations as to all
violations of this section, reporting the same back to the board for
action. The enforcement officer shall have such other and further duties
as may be determined by the rent leveling board.
a. When Required. No owner or operator of a multiple family dwelling
shall permit the occupancy of a dwelling unit by a tenant not previously
occupying the dwelling unit without first obtaining a certificate of
occupancy from the construction code official. All inspections required
hereunder shall be made from the owner or operator.
§ 8-4.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 8-4.9
1:370
b. When Not Required. No certificates of occupancy shall be required for
the following:
1. For 12 months after issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a new
dwelling unit.
2. If a certificate of occupancy had been issued for an existing
apartment within the previous 12 months.
3. In the event that the construction code official has not issued the
certificate of occupancy, or in the alternative cited violations as
required herein, within 10 days of a request of same, the rent
leveling board may assume that the housing space in question is in
substantial compliance with this section and other applicable laws
of the Township of Lyndhurst, and State of New Jersey.
c. Issuance of Certificate. A certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the
construction code official only after examination of the dwelling unit
and favorable findings as to matters which are embraced in this chapter
and other applicable laws of the Township of Lyndhurst and State of
New Jersey. A $25 fee per unit shall be charged for the issuance of the
certificate of occupancy required herein.
1. If, in the opinion of the construction code official, minor violations
are found to exist after inspection which can be corrected within 30
days a new occupant may be permitted to conditionally occupy the
dwelling unit. Where a dwelling unit is occupied prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the owner or operator shall
make all required repairs within 30 days after the mailing of the
written notification from the construction code official. Such
occupancy, however, shall at all times, be subject to the issuance of
a certificate of occupancy.
2. Where occupancy has been permitted under this provision the
owner or operator shall obtain a signed statement from the
occupant acknowledging that such occupancy is subject to a
certificate of occupancy and granting the construction official to
enter into the premises at a later date for the purpose of
reinspection.
3. Minor violations shall be construed to mean repairs not exceeding a
total cost of $200, and which do not present an immediate danger
to the health, safety or welfare of the occupant.
d. Failure to Obtain Certificate. If any owner or operator of a multiple
family dwelling fails to apply for a certificate of occupancy and permits
a tenant to occupy the dwelling unit without first obtaining a certificate
of occupancy, the owner or operator shall be subject to the following
fines and penalties:
1. For a first offense a penalty in the amount of $100.
§ 8-4.9 GENERAL § 8-4.9
1:371
§ 8-4.10. Establishment of Rent Leveling Board. [Ord. #2052, § X;
Ord. #2097, § X]
The rent leveling and control board, created by Ordinance No. 2052 shall
continue to function, except said board shall consist of seven members
and two alternates. The members of said board and the alternates shall
be appointed by the governing body and their terms of office shall be
for a period of three years each, with each member serving without
compensation.
After the initial appointment of three years for the seven members and two
alternates, the next appointment shall be as follows: Two members for a
period of three years, two members for a period of two years, and three
members and two alternates for a period of one year. Thereafter, all seven
members shall be appointed for a three year term.
Two members of the rent leveling and control board shall be the owner of
a multi-family dwelling (defined as any dwelling subject to rent control),
and two members shall be tenants in a rent controlled dwelling. All other
members shall be owners of non-rent controlled dwellings and must be
residents of the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 8-4.11. Powers of Board. [Ord. #2052, § XI]
The rent leveling and control board is hereby granted, and shall have
and exercise, in addition to other powers herein granted, all the powers
necessary and appropriate to carry out and execute the purposes of this
section, including but not limited to the following:
2. For a second offense within a three year period after the first
offense a penalty in the amount of $500.
3. For a third and subsequent offense within a three year period after
the last offense a penalty in the amount of $1,000.
e. Identification and Conduct of Inspectors. The construction code official,
or his delegate acting as an inspector, shall be supplied with official
identification and shall exhibit such identification when entering any
dwelling unit building or part thereof, subject to this chapter. Such
persons making inspections shall conduct themselves as to avoid
intentional embarrassment or inconvenience to the occupant.
a. To issue and promulgate such rules and regulations as it deems
necessary to implement the purposes of this act, which rules and
regulations shall have the force of law until revised, repealed or
amended from time to time by the board in the exercise of its discretion,
providing that such rules are filed with the township clerk.
b. To supply information and assistance to landlords and tenants to insure
compliance with the provisions of this section.
§ 8-4.9 LYNDHURST CODE § 8-4.11
1:372
§ 8-4.12. Appeals to the Board of Commissioners. [Ord. #2052,
§ XII]
The determination by the board shall be final unless a timely appeal is
made to the board of commissioners by either party within 20 days from
the date of said determination. In the event an appeal is filed, the appellant
shall notify all the tenants and landlord within 10 days of the filing of the
appeal, in accordance with subsection 8-4.4. All appeals to the board of
commissioners of a determination of the rent leveling board shall be heard
by the commissioners on the basis of the record before the rent leveling
board, and without recourse to a de novo hearing. The applicant shall be
solely responsible for the cost and preparation of the transcript of the rent
leveling board proceeding.
§ 8-4.13. Standards of Services by Landlord. [Ord. #2052, § XIII]
During the term of this section, the landlord shall maintain the same
standards of service, maintenance, furnishings and equipment in the
housing space and dwelling as he provided or was required to do so by law
or lease at the date the lease or tenancy was entered into.
§ 8-4.14. Effective Date Immediately. [Ord. #2052, § XIV]
This section shall become effective immediately.28
§ 8-4.15. Initial Rent. [Ord. #2052, § XV]
The owner of any housing space being rented for the first time shall not be
restricted in the initial rent he charged. Any subsequent rental increases,
however, shall be subject to the provision of this section.
§ 8-4.16. Violation and Penalties. [Ord. #2052, § XVI; Ord. #2781]
Except as provided in this section, a violation of any provision of this section
including, but not limited to, the filing with the rent leveling and control
board of any material misstatement of fact, shall be punishable by a fine
of not more than $500, and/or imprisonment for not more than 90 days or
both. A violation affecting more than one leasehold shall be considered a
separate violation as to each leasehold.
c. To conduct hearings and adjudicate applications from landlords for
rental increase as herein before provided.
d. To appoint legal counsel to represent the rent leveling board. Such
counsel's compensation shall be determined by the board of
commissioners.
28.Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 2052 was adopted on January 12,1988.
§ 8-4.11 GENERAL § 8-4.17
1:373
§ 8-4.17. Base Rent. [Ord. #2052, § XVII]
The base rent shall be deemed to be the lawful rent for the housing space
which was in effect on the effective date of this section.
§ 8-4.18. Real Estate Tax Rebates or Reductions. [Ord. #2052,
§ XVIII]
In the event that a landlord perfects a successful tax appeal, the tenant shall
be entitled to and shall receive a rebate only in the event the landlord's tax
reduction for the current year results in a lower tax obligation than existed
in the prior taxable year. Any such allowable rebate under this subsection
shall be applied on a pro rata basis according to the tenant's living space
so leased, after deducting all reasonable expenses incurred by the landlord
perfecting the tax appeal. Payment to the tenant may be made in the form
of a credit against monthly rent next ensuing or a check made payable to
the tenant all within 60 days of the date landlord receives such a rebate.
§ 8-4.19. Severability. [Ord. #2052, § XIX]
If any provisions of this section or the application of such provision to any
person or circumstances is declared invalid, such invalidity shall not affect
other provisions of applications of this act which can be given effect and to
this and the provisions of this act are declared to be severable.
§ 8-4.20. Waivers and Private Agreements. [Ord. #2052, § XX]
There shall be no waiver or avoidance of the provisions of the within
section by private agreement directly or indirectly. However, where a tenant
requests a personalized service, furnishings, equipment, facility, alteration
or improvement, to his housing space, which is unique and has negotiated a
mutually satisfactory agreement with the landlord as to price and terms of
payment therefor, such agreement shall not be deemed as part of rent and
shall not require prior approval of the rent leveling and control board.
§ 8-4.21. Inconsistent Ordinances Are Void. [Ord. #2052, § XXI]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions of
this section are hereby repealed and this section shall take effect upon final
passage and publication according to law. Ordinance No. 1578 entitled "An
Ordinance to Regulate, Control, Stabilize Rents of Multiple Dwellings and
to Create a Rent Control Board within the Township of Lyndhurst" is hereby
repealed in its entirety.
§ 8-4.22. Tenant's Monthly Tax Surcharge. [Ord. #2130]
Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, a tenant's monthly tax
surcharge shall not be greater than 20% of the prior month's rent.
§ 8-4.17 LYNDHURST CODE § 8-4.23
1:374
§ 8-4.23. Real Property Tax Increase Rent Adjustment. [Ord. #2097,
§ XXII]
A landlord shall be entitled to a rent increase from a tenant because of
an increase in the municipal real property tax levied on the real property
in which any multiple-dwelling housing space is situated, subject to the
provision, however, that only one-half of the total amount of such municipal
real property tax increase levied on such real property for any calendar year
shall be passed on to the tenant. No such tax base rent adjustment shall
exceed the amount computed in accordance with the following provisions
of this subsection. Municipal real property tax shall include all amounts
normally and customarily included in a municipal tax bill including, but not
limited to county, district school, regional school, and local taxes, but does
not include added assessments.
A landlord whose real property shall qualify for the tax base rent adjustment
provided for herein shall subtract from the total municipal real property tax
levied on such real property for the calendar year in which such increase
occurs, the total amount of the tax levied thereon for the preceding calendar
year. The landlord shall be permitted to pass through one-half of the amount
by which the present calendar year property tax exceeds the previous
calendar year real property tax.
The allowable pass through shall be divided by the total number of square
feet contained in the multiple dwelling building situated on such real
property. The quotient thus produced shall be the tax increase per square
foot. It shall be unlawful for any landlord to require a tenant to pay a tax
base rent adjustment in excess of the product realized by multiplying the
number of square feet contained in the dwelling unit occupied by the tenant
by the allowable tax increase per square foot.
The total dollar amount of the tax base rent adjustment for which any tenant
may be liable under the foregoing terms of this subsection shall be divided
by 12 and the quotient shall be the tax base rent adjustment which shall be
added to and become a part of the monthly base rent for the dwelling unit
affected.
Any landlord whose real property shall qualify for the tax base rent
adjustment herein provided for and who shall seek to pass through such
an adjustment pursuant to the provisions of this subsection, shall notify
all of the tenants affected thereby by written notice mailed by certified
mail, return receipt requested, mailed 60 days prior to the date the rent
increase will be effective. Such notice shall set forth all of the calculations
utilized in computing the tax base rent adjustment, including the amount
of the municipal real property tax levied on the real property in question
for the calendar year in which such tax increase occurs, the total amount
of the tax levied thereon for the preceding calendar year, the total number
of square feet contained in the multiple dwelling situated on said real
property, the tax increase per square foot, the number of square feet
contained in the dwelling unit occupied by the tenant and the amount of
the maximum allowable tax base rent adjustment. The landlord shall also
§ 8-4.23 GENERAL § 8-4.23
1:375
certify in said written notice that the municipal real property tax levied on
the real property in question for the calendar year in which said tax increase
occurred exceeded the prior calendar year property tax.
EXHIBIT "A"
(Section 8-4, Rent Control)
Fair Rate of Return
In order to determine whether an owner is entitled to a hardship
adjustment, former and current operating expenses and gross rental income
must be compared.
Gross operating income, for a base period is compared with current gross
operating income.
The landlord is entitled to a hardship adjustment if current gross operating
income has decreased compared to the base period gross operating income.
The landlord is entitled to a hardship adjustment sufficient to raise the
current year's gross operating income to a sum equal to the gross operating
income for the base period.
Base period gross operating income shall be defined as the average gross
operating income for three consecutive calendar years or fiscal years
beginning one full year preceding the year of landlord's hardship appeal,
any adjustment to same achieved through any provisions of this section
shall be considered in calculating the base period gross operating income.
Gross operating income shall be computed by subtracting operating
expenses from gross rental income (gross operating income = gross rental
income minus operating expenses).
The board shall grant an added adjustment for inflation to the current
adjusted rent, measured by the change in the New York, Northern New
Jersey, Consumer Price Index for All Consumer Users, (CPI-U), for the
preceding year of the application.
For purposes of this section, gross rental income shall be defined as and
include the following items: All income resulting directly or indirectly from
the operation of the multiple dwelling or dwellings, including but not limited
to all rent received or collectible but not received, including any rent
from less than arms length transaction, the landlord's share of interest
on security deposits, all earnings from commissions, vending machines,
coin operated telephones, coin operated laundry facilities, deductions from
security deposits, late fees, parking fees, including garage rentals, pool
fees, key charges, finders fees, income from rebates and prior hardship
increases. No allowance shall be permitted for a vacancy, except as the
same may be adequately demonstrated to be the result of market conditions
and/or deteriorated physical conditions of the dwelling unit which the
landlord-applicant adequately shows to be unavailable for rental as a result
of the said deteriorated conditions.
§ 8-4.23 LYNDHURST CODE § 8-4.23
1:376
For purposes of this section, operating expenses shall be defined as and
include all valid, reasonable and necessary expenses incurred and paid
by the landlord in connection with the operation of the multiple dwelling
or dwellings during the period or periods referenced under this section,
computed in accordance with the provisions and limitations contained in
this section.
In computing reasonable and necessary operating expenses under this
section, the following limitations shall apply in all cases:
a. Taxes shall be limited to amounts actually paid, including those in
escrow for appeal.
b. Repairs and maintenance shall be limited to arms length transactions
and shall be reasonable and necessary so as not to cause over
maintenance of the premises. Cost of service contracts shall be
prorated over the period covered. Painting costs shall be prorated over
the number of years of actual painting cycle in the building, but in no
event shall painting be prorated over a period of less than three years
for the interior of the dwelling units or five years for the exterior and
common areas.
c. Expenses incurred in connection with the purchase of new equipment,
and not otherwise allowed to be capitalized over the useful life of the
equipment pursuant to Internal Revenue Service regulations, shall be
allowed as an expense under this section and reflected and prorated
over the useful life of the item or items.
d. Legal and auditing expenses shall be limited to reasonable and
necessary costs of the operation of the property. No legal expenses or
audit expenses shall be allowed as a deduction that do not directly
result from the landlord-tenant relationship. A landlord may not deduct
expenses incurred in litigating any declaratory or injunctive relief as to
his rights under any state, local or federal law except for actions in the
nature of a writ of mandamus. All costs shall be itemized on the
application. Attorney's fees, accountant's fees or application fees
incurred by a landlord in connection with any application to the board
shall be included in determining whether a landlord is entitled to any
rent increase.
e. Management fees shall be limited to actual services performed and
paid, including the resident manager's salary, telephone expenses,
postage, office supplies, stationary and the value of the apartment
provided if included in the income of the recipient. In no event shall
management fees exceed 4% of gross income, including commercial
and professional space income.
f. Salaries not included in management fees shall be limited to actual
services performed, and amounts for similar positions in the area,
including rental value, if included in income, and expenses and wages
and benefits paid.
§ 8-4.23 GENERAL § 8-4.23
1:377
§ 8-5. HOUSE NUMBERING.
§ 8-5.1. Owner to Affix Proper Number. [Ord. #1424, § 7]
§ 8-5.2. Boundary of Township. [Ord. #1424, § 7]
For the purposes of this section, Rutherford Avenue shall be taken as the
northerly base or boundary of the township.
§ 8-5.3. Numbering All Streets Intersecting Southwesterly Side of
Rutherford Avenue; Odd and Even Number Placement. [Ord. #1424,
§ 7]
The numbering upon all streets intersecting, or if extended would intersect,
the southwesterly side or line of Rutherford Avenue shall commence at
the side of Rutherford Avenue and shall continue in the southerly or
southwesterly direction to the end thereof, provided that the lowest number
upon the aforesaid streets, which do not extend to Rutherford Avenue shall
be at the point nearest Rutherford Avenue the same as though actually
extended to the Avenue, and that upon all the streets so intersecting, or
if extending would intersect Rutherford Avenue, the odd numbers shall be
g. Advertising expenses shall be limited to actual costs that are
reasonable to ensure occupancy only. Where waiting lists exist,
advertising expenses shall not be allowed.
h. Utilities, including but not limited to gas, electric, water and oil, shall
derive from arms length transactions, and the landlord shall
demonstrate that all reasonable efforts to conserve energy and fuels
have been used.
i. Insurance premiums shall derive from all arms length transactions and
shall not include landlord's life, medical or other personal policies.
j. No penalties, fines, depreciation, interest, mortgage amortization or
mortgage service fees, mortgage application fees, points, tax service
fees, or any other fees and expenses incident to the mortgage financing
or application, for any reason shall be allowed.
k. The history of the income and expenses shall be consistent with the
application or fully documented as to any changes. [Ord. #2052,
Exhibit A; Ord. #2097, Exhibit A]
a. The owner, occupant or occupants of each and every dwelling house,
store or other building which now fronts, or hereafter may front, upon
any street or public place within the township shall cause the same to
be properly numbered in accordance with the directions and
requirements of this section.
b. The figures used in numbering shall be at least 2 1/2 inches in height
and placed conspicuously on the front of each dwelling house, store or
other building.
§ 8-4.23 LYNDHURST CODE § 8-5.3
1:378
placed on the right hand or westerly side of the street and the even numbers
on the left hand or easterly side thereof, and shall so continue to the end.
§ 8-5.4. Numbering All Streets Intersecting Easterly Side of
Riverside Avenue; Odd and Even Numbering; Lowest Number. [Ord.
#1424, § 7]
The numbering upon all streets intersecting, or which if extended would
intersect the easterly side or line of Riverside Avenue, shall begin at their
intersection with the side or line of Riverside Avenue and shall continue
eastwardly until the end thereof, and that the lowest or first number of
all such streets, and that the lowest or first number on all such streets,
roads and avenues at the side of Riverside Avenue shall be 100 and that
the even numbers shall be placed on the right hand or southerly side of
the streets, and the odd numbers on the left hand or northerly side, and
shall so continue to the end thereof, provided that the lowest number upon
the streets which do not extend to Riverside Avenue shall be at the point
nearest Riverside Avenue the same as though actually extended to that
Avenue.
§ 8-5.5. Numbers to Correspond with Assessment Maps; Exception.
[Ord. #1424, § 7]
Any person desiring to place numbers upon their respective lots, dwellings,
stores or other buildings shall before so doing apply to the assessor of the
township and obtain from him the proper number for his lot, dwelling, store
or other building, which number so to be given by the assessor shall be
the same as the number now endorsed upon a map entitled "Assessment
Maps of the Township of Lyndhurst 1959", provided, however, that in case
there be no number on the map applicable to the lot or building, then
the assessor shall refer the matter to the board of commissioners, and
the township board of commissioners shall then by resolution give such
applicant a proper number for his, her or their lot, dwelling, store or other
building and thereupon the assessor shall write the number upon the map
in front of the plot upon which the building is located.
§ 8-6. USE OF UNVENTED COMBUSTION HEATERS IN
RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS PROHIBITED.
§ 8-6.1. General. [Ord. #1980, § I]
The use of unvented combustion heaters is hereby prohibited in all
residential dwellings within the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 8-6.2. Enforcement. [Ord. #1980, § II]
Services held or used in violation of this section may be confiscated by the
fire official, fire inspectors, police officers, or code enforcement officials in
the discharge of their official duties. Confiscated heaters may be returned
§ 8-5.3 GENERAL § 8-6.2
1:379
to their owners at the end of heating season upon payment by the owner of
a storage fee of $50 to the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 8-7. SMOKE DETECTORS REQUIRED IN RESIDENTIAL
DWELLINGS.
§ 8-7.1. General. [Ord. #1985, § I]
Every single family and two family dwellings in the Township of Lyndhurst
shall be equipped with automatic smoke detectors as provided herein. This
provision shall be in effect for all dwellings, regardless of the applicable
code requirements in force at the time of construction.
§ 8-7.2. Exceptions. [Ord. #1985, § II]
One and two family dwellings constructed in compliance with the New
Jersey Uniform Construction Code and having properly maintained
automatic smoke detectors in accordance with that code shall be exempted
from the requirements of this section. In no case shall existing levels of
protection be reduced below those specified in the Uniform Construction
Code in dwellings built under that code.
§ 8-7.3. Required Protection. [Ord. #1985, § III]
Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a minimum of one approved
automatic smoke detector installed in the primary sleeping area as
approved by the fire official. When activated the detector shall provide an
alarm suitable to warn the occupants within the dwelling unit. The detector
may be the single station, battery operated type in the dwellings retrofitting
under this section. Replacement installations in dwelling built under the
Uniform Construction Code must be made in accordance with that code.
§ 8-7.4. Compliance. [Ord. #1985, § IV]
§ 8-7.5. Maintenance. [Ord. #1985, § V]
All automatic smoke detectors installed in accordance with this section or
any other code or regulation shall be maintained operable at all times.
a. Owners of one or two family dwellings within the township shall
complete and return a "Smoke Detector Ordinance Compliance" card as
provided by the township, the card shall be signed by the owner or his
designee stating the status of the subject property with respect to
smoke detector requirements. Willful misstatements or failure to return
the card shall be in violation of this section.
b. Inspections for compliance with this section shall be carried out
through the fire prevention bureau upon request by the owner or
occupant, and by other code enforcement officials of the township
during the discharge of their official duties.
§ 8-6.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 8-8
1:380
§ 8-8. FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS.29
§ 8-8.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2173]
FALSE ALARM — Shall mean any fire alarm causing direct notification to a
fire department through an alarm panel, switch board or alarm lines, in a
case where no fire exists.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — Shall mean a system containing automatic
detecting device(s) which actuate an alarm signal, requiring a response by
fire suppression forces. It includes Protective Signaling Systems or devices
designed to transmit alarms and supervisory and trouble signals necessary
for the protection of life and property.
§ 8-8.2. Alarm System Permit. [Ord. #2173]
Any person or business desiring to install an alarm system on the premises
shall apply for an alarm system permit by writing to the construction
official.
§ 8-8.3. Application and Issuance. [Ord. #2173]
a. Application forms issued by the construction official or fire subcode
official shall include the following information:
b. The owner shall be responsible for transmitting the following
information in writing or on forms provided to the fire agency to which
the alarm or signal is sent:
1. The owner's name and the address of the location of the alarm
system.
2. A description of the alarm system.
3. An acknowledgment that the applicant consents to municipal/fire
department inspection of the system and the premises where the
system is installed in addition to that permitted or required by state
law or regulation.
4. An agreement to test the fire alarm system in the fire agency
representative's presence either annually or as required following
transmission of a false alarm.
5. An acknowledgment that the system may not be used unless
appropriate approval is granted.
c. A permit shall be issued upon presentation of the permit application if
the equipment is in conformance with the above provisions and upon
payment of the alarm system permit fee.
29.Editor’s Note: See also Chapter 4, § 4-1, for additional regulations on alarm systems.
§ 8-8 GENERAL § 8-8.4
1:381
§ 8-8.4. Revocation of Permit. [Ord. #2173]
The issuing authority may revoke any alarm system permit issued pursuant
to this section if the authority determines the alarm system has been
operated or maintained in violation of these provisions, or for failure to pay
the required fee.
The owner of the alarm system must receive written notice of the violation
and an opportunity to be heard.
§ 8-8.5. Inspection of Alarm System. [Ord. #2173]
A fire official qualified by a local enforcing agency shall annually inspect
the fire alarm system to ensure said system complies with the operational
requirements set forth herein.
Any violation as set forth in the following section, or defects in the alarm
system shall be noted by the fire official and a copy of the citation given to
the owner. The owner shall have 10 days to correct the violation.
The owner of the alarm system shall maintain on the premises an accurate
log of the location and number of alarm systems installed, and defects in, or
modifications and repairs to the said alarm systems, and shall make this log
available to the enforcing agency for inspection and evaluation.
§ 8-8.6. Equipment Maintenance. [Ord. #2173]
The fire alarm system and protective equipment shall be tested monthly by
the owner.
The owner shall notify the fire official reasonably in advance of any test and
within 24 hours of any defect in or malfunction of the alarm system.
§ 8-8.7. Registration/Operation. [Ord. #2173]
No individual or business shall install, operate or maintain any alarm system
unless he has applied for and been granted a permit for such system as
follows:
a. An alarm system shall be deemed registered at such time as a permit is
issued therefor.
b. In successive years, an alarm system shall be deemed registered when
the owner of the building in which the system is installed files a
completed registration form with fire official.
c. No further permit shall be required unless or until there is a material
change in any of the information previously submitted. The owner of the
building shall file a revised, amended or supplemental application, at no
additional charge, containing accurate current information, within 10
days of the change in the original information submitted to the
municipality.
§ 8-8.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 8-8.8
1:382
§ 8-8.8. Schedule of Fees. [Ord. #2173]
The fee for an alarm system permit shall be $25 payable annually. Said fee
shall be prorated on a quarterly basis if an alarm system is installed during
the course of the year.
§ 8-8.9. False Alarms. [Ord. #2173]
In the case of a false alarm, the local fire official shall investigate or
cause to be investigated and keep a record of said alarm on file. If an
investigation disclosed that the false alarm was due to misuse, accident,
improper supervision, or equipment malfunction and was not due to an
unpreventable, unavoidable outside cause the fire official shall provide
notice and order corrective action or that the alarm system be disconnected
for a specified period of time. The first such occurrence shall not be
chargeable under the penalties section.
The fire official shall serve on the owner of the building a written order
stating the nature of the violations and the date by which the violations must
be corrected.
§ 8-8.10. Penalties. [Ord. #2173]
Any person who, after receiving notice of the malfunction of the alarm
system, and an order and an opportunity to correct, refuses or neglects
to comply shall be subject to a penalty as set forth below in addition
to any other penalties issued under state law or regulation for improper
installation or maintenance:
§ 8-9. SHORT-TERM RENTAL PROPERTY.
§ 8-9.1. Rental for Certain Time Periods Prohibited. [Ord. No.
2963-17]
a. For the first false alarm following a notification a penalty not to exceed
$50.
b. For the second false alarm within a three calendar year period a penalty
of at least $75 but not to exceed $150.
c. For the third false alarm within a three calendar year period a penalty
of at least $170 but not to exceed $250.
d. For the fourth and subsequent false alarms within a three calendar year
period a penalty of at least $300 but not to exceed $500 and, or
disconnecting of the system or imprisonment not to exceed five days.
a. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Township of
Lyndhurst Code, it shall be unlawful for an owner, lessor, sub-lessor, any
other person(s), or entity(ies) with possessor or use right(s) in a
dwelling unit, their principals, partner or shareholders, or their agents,
employees, representatives and other person(s) or entity(ies), acting in
§ 8-8.8 GENERAL § 8-9.1
1:383
§ 8-9.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2963-17]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVERTISE or ADVERTISING — Shall mean any form of solicitation,
promotion and communication for marketing, used to solicit, encourage,
persuade, or manipulate viewers, readers, or listeners into contracting
for goods and/or services in violation of this section, as same may be
viewed through various media, including, but not limited to, newspapers,
magazines, flyers, handbills, pamphlets, commercials, radio, direct mail,
internet websites, or text or other electronic messages for the purpose of
establishing occupancies or uses of rental property, for consideration, which
are prohibited by this section.
CONSIDERATION — Shall mean soliciting, charging, demanding, receiving
or accepting any legally recognized form of consideration, including a
promise or benefit, a quid pro quo, rent, fees, other form of payment, or
thing of value.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean any structure, or portion thereof, whether
furnished or unfurnished, which is occupied, in whole or in part, or
intended, arranged or designed to be occupied for sleeping, dwelling,
cooking, gathering and/or entertaining, as a residential occupancy, by one
or more persons. This definition includes an apartment, condominium,
building, cooperative, converted space, or portions thereof, that are offered
to use, made available for use, or are used for accommodations, lodging,
cooking, sleeping, gathering and/or entertaining of occupants and/or
guest(s), for consideration, for a period of 30 days or less.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — Constitutes a family-type situation involving one
or more persons living together that exhibit the kind of stability,
permanency and functional lifestyle equivalent to that of a traditional family
unit, as further described in the applicable reported and unreported
decisions of the New Jersey Superior Court.
OCCUPANT — Shall mean any individual using, inhabiting, living,
gathering, entertaining, being entertained as a guest, or sleeping in a
dwelling unit, or portion thereof, or having other permission or possessory
right(s) within a dwelling unit.
OWNER — Shall mean any person(s) or entity(ies), association, limited
liability company, corporation, or partnership, or any combination, who
legally use, possess, own, lease, sublease or license (including an operator,
principal, shareholder, director, agent, or employee, individually or
concert or a combination thereof, to receive or obtain actual or
anticipated consideration for soliciting, advertising, offering, and/or
permitting, allowing, or failing to discontinue the use or occupancy of
any dwelling unit, as defined herein, for a period of 30 days or less.
b. Nothing in this section will prevent formation of an otherwise lawful
occupancy of a dwelling unit for a rental period of more than 30 days.
§ 8-9.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 8-9.2
1:384
collectively) that has charge, care, control, or participates in the expenses
and/or profit of a dwelling unit pursuant to a written or unwritten
agreement, rental, lease, license, use, occupancy agreement or any other
agreement.
PERSON — Shall mean an individual, firm, corporation, association,
partnership, limited liability company, entity, and any other person(s) and/
or entity(ies) acting in concert or any combination thereof.
RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY — Shall mean the use of a dwelling by an
occupant(s).
§ 8-9.3. Permitted Uses. [Ord. No. 2963-17]
The residential occupancy of an otherwise lawful and lawfully occupied
dwelling unit for a period of 30 days or less by any person who is a member
of the housekeeping unit of the owner, without consideration, such as house
guests, is permitted.
§ 8-9.4. Advertising Prohibited. [Ord. No. 2963-17]
It shall be unlawful to advertise, solicit or promote by any means actions in
violation of this section.
§ 8-9.5. Enforcement; Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2963-17]
a. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Building Code
Official, Fire Official, Health Department, other Subcode, Code Official,
or law enforcement agent of the Lyndhurst Police Department, as their
jurisdiction may arise, including legal counsel for the Township or other
persons designated by the Township of Lyndhurst to issue municipal
civil infractions directing alleged violators of this Ordinance No.
2963-17 to appear in court or file civil complaints.
b. A violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, a
nuisance per se, and is hereby further found and declared to be
offensive to the public health, safety and welfare.
c. Any person found to have violated any provision of this section, without
regard to intent or knowledge, shall be liable for maximum civil penalty,
upon adjudicated violation or admission, of a fine not exceeding $1,000.
Each day of such violation shall be a new and separate violation of this
section.
d. The penalty imposed herein shall be in addition to any other remedies
that may accrue under any other law, including, but not limited to,
eviction proceedings and/or injunction, reasonable attorney's fees or
other fees and costs, in the Township's Municipal Court or the Superior
Court of New Jersey in the vicinage of Bergen County, or in such other
court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction, by either summary
disposition or by zoning or construction code municipal proceeding.
§ 8-9.2 GENERAL § 8-9.6
1:385
§ 8-9.6. Severability. [Ord. No. 2963-17]
If any section, provision or clause of this section or the application thereof
to any person or circumstances is judicially held invalid, a reviewing Court
may "blue pencil" the section (Ordinance No. 2963-17) to correct such
invalidity and carry out the intent of this section. Such invalidity shall not
affect any remaining portions or application of this section which can be
given full effect, without the invalid portion or application.
§ 8-9.7. Effect on Other Provisions. [Ord. No. 2963-17, adopted
March 15, 2017]
This section shall supersede and replace any other provisions of the
Ordinances of the Township of Lyndhurst, now or later enacted, which
have or may be construed to have differing or contrary terms or conditions
relating to the subject of this Ordinance No. 2963-17. This Ordinance No.
2963-17 is not intended to alter the current or later enacted amendments to
the Township's ordinances.
§ 8-9.8. When Effective. [Ord. No. 2963-17]
This Ordinance No. 2963-17 (Section 8-9) shall become effective after
second reading, March 15, 2017, and 30 days after being published in a
newspaper of general circulation within the Township.
Chapter 9
ANIMALS
[Editor's Note: Ordinance Nos. 1424, 1502, 1517, 1585 and 1764
previously contained herein were superseded in their entirety by
Ord. No. 2042.]
§ 9-1. DOGS AND CATS.
§ 9-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2042]
As used in this chapter:
BITE — Shall mean to seize with teeth or jaws so as to enter, nip or grip the
person or thing seized; also to cut, wound, pierce or to impress deeply the
person or thing seized.
CAT — Shall mean any male or female cat, spayed, or otherwise.
DOG — Shall mean any male or female dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OR CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Shall mean any dog or cat which has
attained the age of seven months or which possesses a set of permanent
teeth.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Shall be deemed to include those animals native
to the region which are tame by nature or from time immemorial have
been accustomed to the social association of humans, have been subjected
§ 8-9.6 LYNDHURST CODE § 9-1.1
1:386
to their will and have no disposition to escape domain. Farm and wild
animals as defined hereafter shall be excluded from this designation. For
the purposes of this section fish, water breathing animals, birds and rabbits
shall be excluded in this category.
FARM ANIMALS — Shall be deemed to include those domesticated animals
which have historically been used in, by or for the production of agricultural
income or products, or which are generally assumed by prevailing
community standards to be associated with farm or agricultural uses,
without regard to whether a specific animal is considered a pet or
domesticated by its keeper or possessor. By way of example and not by
limitation farm animals shall include sheep, goats, cattle, swine, horses,
chickens and ducks.
KENNEL — Shall mean any establishment wherein or whereon the business
of boarding, breeding or selling dogs or cats or breeding dogs or cats for
sale is carried on, except a pet shop.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog or cat, includes
every person having a right to property in such dog or cat and every person
who has such dog or cat in his keeping.
PENNED — Shall mean any enclosed area outdoors to which an animal is
restricted.
PET GROOMING AND SERVICING ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean any
establishment where dogs and cats are cared for, groomed, clipped and the
like.
PET SHOP — Shall mean any room or group of rooms, store or stores, cage
or exhibition pen, not part of a kennel, wherein dogs, cats or other animals
for sale are kept and/or displayed.
POUND — Shall mean any establishment for the confinement of dogs or cats
seized either under the provisions of this chapter or any other law, or to
which dogs and cats may be delivered by the owner.
SHELTER — Shall mean any establishment where dogs or cats are received,
housed and distributed with or without charge.
WILD ANIMALS — Shall be deemed to include those members of the animal
kingdom wild by nature, which because of habitat, mode of life or natural
instinct, are not customarily tame, and require the exercise of art, force or
skill to keep them in subjection, without regard to whether a specific animal
is considered a pet or domesticated by its keeper or possessor.
§ 9-1.2. Licensing. [Ord. #2042; Ord. #2475, § I]
a. No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog or cat within the township
except in compliance with the provision of this chapter, and unless they
first obtain a license and official metal registration tag therefor issued
by the health department upon application by the owner and payment
of the prescribed fee.
§ 9-1.1 GENERAL § 9-1.3
1:387
§ 9-1.3. Annual License and Registration Tag Required; Placing Tag
on Dog or Cat. [Ord. #2042; Ord. #2475, § I]
Any person who shall own, keep or harbor a dog or cat of licensing age
in the township shall, in the month of January in each year, show proof
of rabies inoculation covering the full yearly licensing time period, apply
for and procure from the health department a license and official metal
registration tag for each such dog or cat so owned, kept or harbored,
and shall place upon each such dog or cat a collar or harness with the
registration tag securely fastened thereto.
§ 9-1.4. License and Tag for Newly Acquired Dog or Cat, or for Dog
or Cat Attaining Licensing Age. [Ord. #2042]
The owner of any newly acquired dog or cat of licensing age or of any dog or
cat which attains licensing age, shall apply for a license and registration tag
for such dog or cat within 10 days after such acquisition or age attainment.
§ 9-1.5. Dogs or Cats Brought Into Township; Exception. [Ord.
#2042]
§ 9-1.6. Exemption from Licensing and Tag Requirements. [Ord.
#2042]
Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing year
for any dog or cat owned in New Jersey, and such license and tag issued
by any other municipality of this State shall be accepted by the township as
evidence of compliance with subsections 9-1.2, 9-1.3 and 9-1.7.
§ 9-1.7. Application for License; Contents; Registration Numbers;
Information to State Department. [Ord. #2042; Ord. #2475, § I]
a. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the township
any dog or cat licensed in another state for the current year, and
bearing a registration tag, and shall keep the same or permit the same
to be kept within the township for a period of more than 60 days, shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog
or cat.
b. Any person who shall bring or cause to be brought into the township
any unlicensed dog or cat and shall keep the same or permit the same to
be kept within the township for a period of more than 10 days, shall
immediately apply for a license and registration tag for each such dog
or cat.
a. The application shall state: the breed, sex, age, color and markings of
the dog or cat for which the license and registration are bought, and
whether it is of a long-haired or short-haired variety; the name,
telephone number, street and post office address of the owner and the
person who shall keep or harbor such dog or cat.
§ 9-1.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 9-1.7
1:388
§ 9-1.8. Fees; Expiration Date of License; "Seeing Eye" Dogs;
Exemption from Payment of Fees. [Ord. #2042; Ord. #2048; Ord.
#2149 § I; Ord. #2475, § I; Ord. #2662, § 1]
§ 9-1.9. Reduction in Fees for Senior Citizens. [Ord. #2042; Ord.
#2662, § 1]
If at the time of registration the record owner of the dog or cat is 62 years
of age or older, the owner of a dog shall pay $5 for the dog license fee if the
dog is spayed or neutered; the owner of a cat shall pay $3 for the cat license
if the cat is spayed or neutered.
b. Registration numbers shall be issued in the order of the application.
c. The information on the application and the registration number issued
for the dog or cat shall be preserved for a period of three years by the
health department. In addition, the health department shall forward to
the State Department an accurate account of registration numbers
issued or otherwise disposed of.
a. License Fees for Dogs. The person applying for the license and
registration tag shall pay to the health department a fee of $10 for the
licensing of each spayed or neutered dog and $15 for each unspayed or
unneutered dog. Each license and tag shall be renewed annually in
January, and for each annual renewal, the fee for the license and for the
registration tag shall be the same as for the original license and
registration tag. Said licenses, registration tags and renewals thereof
shall expire on the last day of January in each year.
b. Proof of Spaying. In order to qualify as a spayed or neutered dog or cat,
an owner must show a certificate of same, or sign an affidavit stating
that the animal is spayed.
c. "Seeing Eye" Dogs. Dogs used as guides for blind persons and
commonly known as "seeing eye" dogs shall be licensed and registered
as other dogs as hereinabove provided for, except that the owner or
keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay any fee therefor.
d. License Fees for Cats. The annual license fee for cats over seven
months of age shall be $5 for each spayed or neutered cat, and $10 for
each unspayed or unneutered cat. The fees collected under this
paragraph d shall be deposited in the general fund of the township.
e. Potentially Dangerous Dog. The annual license fee for a dog ruled to be
potentially dangerous pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-17 et seq. shall be $700.
f. Late Fees. Unless an owner can submit satisfactory proof to the Health
Department that a dog or cat was acquired no more than 15 days prior
to the application, a late fee of $10 shall be added to the license fee if
the annual license fee is -not paid by January 31, and a summons of
$100 shall be issued, together with the license and late fees, if the
annual license fee is not paid by March 1.
§ 9-1.7 GENERAL § 9-1.10
1:389
§ 9-1.10. Disposition of Fees Collected. [Ord. #2042; Ord. § 2475]
§ 9-1.11. License Forms and Tags to Be Furnished by Township.
[Ord. #2042; Ord. #2475]
License forms and uniform official metal registration tags designed by the
State Department of Health shall be furnished by the health department and
shall bear the year of issuance and the name of the township.
§ 9-1.12. Removal of Tag or Attaching to Another Dog or Cat
Forbidden. [Ord. #2042]
No person, except an officer in the performance of his duties, shall remove
a registration tag from the collar of any dog or cat without the consent of
the owner, nor shall any person attach a registration tag to a dog or cat for
which it was not issued.
§ 9-2. ANIMAL CONTROL.
§ 9-2.1. Animal Canvassers; Dog and Cat Catchers; Appointment;
Duties. [Ord. #2042]
a. License fees and other monies collected or received under the
provisions of this chapter, except registration tag fees, shall be
forwarded to the township treasurer within 30 days after collection or
receipt.
b. Such fees and other monies shall be placed in a separate account from
any of the other accounts of the township, and shall be used only for the
purposes permitted by R.S. 4:19-15.11.
c. The registration tag fees shall be forwarded by the health department,
within 30 days after collection, to the State Department of Health, as
prescribed by R.S. 4:19-15.11.
a. The commissioners of the department of public affairs with the approval
of the board of commissioners, shall have the power to appoint annually
an animal canvasser.
b. The duties of the animal canvasser shall be to enforce the provisions of
this chapter and to impound dogs running at large in violation of
subsections 9-3.2 or dogs and cats running at large in violation of
subsections 9-2.3 and 9-3.4 or Section 9-5, paragraph g.
c. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed as limiting the
authority of the health officer or chief of police or members of the police
department to enforce the provisions of this chapter when in the
interest of health and safety they deem it necessary.
§ 9-1.10 LYNDHURST CODE § 9-2.2
1:390
§ 9-2.2. Annual Canvass of Dogs and Cats; Report. [Ord. #2042]
The chief of police of the township, animal canvasser or such other person
designated for the purposes by resolution of the commissioner, shall cause a
canvass to be made of all dogs and cats owned, kept or harbored within the
limits of the township shall, on or before September 1 of each year, make
reports to the township clerk, the department of health of the township, and
the state department of health of the result thereof, setting forth in separate
columns:
§ 9-2.3. Enforcement; Seizure and Impounding. [Ord. #2042]
The chief of police, animal canvasser or any other person authorized or
employed by the township for that purpose, shall have the authority to issue
and sign summons and complaints for any violations under this chapter and
to take into custody and impound or cause to be taken into custody and
impounded, the following:
§ 9-2.4. Destruction or Other Disposal of Dogs or Cats; Grounds;
Notice Requirements. [Ord. #2042]
a. The names and addresses of persons owning, keeping or harboring
such dogs or cats;
b. The number of licensed dogs or cats owned, kept or harbored by each of
said persons, together with the registration numbers of each of the
dogs or cats;
c. The number of unlicensed dogs or cats owned, kept or harbored by each
of said persons, together with the complete description of each of the
unlicensed dogs or cats.
a. Any dog or cat off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the dog, which the official or his agent or agents has reason
to believe is a stray dog or cat;
b. Any dog or cat off the premises of the owner or of the person keeping or
harboring the dog or cat, without a current registration tag on his
collar;
c. Any female dog or cat in season off the premises of the owner or of the
person keeping or harboring the dog or cat;
d. Any dog running at large in violation of subsection 9-3.2.
a. If any dog or cat is seized as provided in paragraphs a to c and any dog
seized as provided in paragraph d of subsection 9-2.3 wears a collar or
harness having inscribed thereon or attached thereto the name and
address of any person, or a registration tag, or if the owner or the
person keeping or harboring the dog or cat is otherwise known, the
chief of police, animal canvasser or any person authorized by him in
that behalf shall forthwith serve or cause to be served on the person
§ 9-2.2 GENERAL § 9-2.4
1:391
§ 9-2.5. Entry Upon Premises for Seizure. [Ord. #2042]
Any person or agent authorized to or empowered to perform any duty under
this chapter is hereby authorized to go upon any premises to seize for
impounding any dog or dogs, cat or cats which he may lawfully seize and
impound when he is in immediate pursuit of such dog or dogs, cat or cats
except upon the premises of the owner of the dog or cat, if the owner is
present and forbids the same.
§ 9-2.6. Interference. [Ord. #2042]
No person shall hinder, molest or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this chapter.
§ 9-3. REGULATIONS.
§ 9-3.1. General Regulations. [Ord. #2042; Ord. #2048]
whose address is given on the collar, or on the owner or on the person
keeping or harboring the dog or cat, if known, a notice in writing
stating that the dog or cat has been seized and will be liable to be
disposed of or destroyed if not claimed within seven days after the
service of the notice.
b. The notice referred to in paragraph a of this subsection may be served
either by delivering it to the person on whom it is to be served, or by
leaving it at the person's usual or last known place of abode, or at the
address given on the collar, or by forwarding it by post in a prepaid
letter addressed to the person at his usual or last known place of abode
or to the address given on the collar.
c. When any dog or cat seized in accordance with paragraphs a to c and
any dog seized in accordance with paragraph d of subsection 9-2.3 has
been detained for seven days after notice, when notice can be given as
above set forth, or has been detained for seven days after seizure, when
notice has not been and cannot be given as above set forth, and if the
owner or person keeping or harboring the dog or cat has not claimed
the dog or cat and paid all expenses incurred by reason of its detention,
including maintenance not exceeding the daily rate charged by the
health officer, animal canvasser or other authorized person by the
township in accordance with the terms of the contract and resolution
relating to the keeping and holding of dogs or cats, entered into by the
township for the year within which the dog or cat is impounded, and if
the dog or cat be unlicensed at the time of the seizure and the owner or
person keeping or harboring the dog or cat has not produced a license
and registration tag for the dog or cat, the chief of police, animal
canvasser or any person authorized by him in that behalf or authorized
by the township may cause the dog or cat to be destroyed in a manner
recommended by the American Veterinarian Medical Association.
§ 9-2.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 9-3.1
1:392
§ 9-3.2. Dogs at Large. [Ord. #2042]
a. No person shall keep or harbor any dog or cat in the township except in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
b. No more than four dogs or cats of licensing age shall be kept,
maintained or harbored at one time for any length of time in any
residential housing unit or on its grounds, or in any business
establishment or on its grounds, except that no animals, other than
seeing eye dogs, are permitted in any licensed retail food
establishments. This restriction shall not apply to properly licensed
kennels, pet shops, pounds and shelters. The provisions of this
subsection shall become effective after passage and publication as
prescribed by law.
c. No person owning or having the care, custody or control of any dog
shall suffer or permit such dog to soil or defile or to commit any
nuisance upon any sidewalk, passageway, street, or thoroughfare, in or
upon any public park, play area, or any place where people congregate
or walk, or other public place of public property, or in or upon the
property of persons other than the owner or person having the care,
custody or control of such dog. The above mentioned restrictions shall
not apply to that portion of the street lying immediately adjacent to the
curb line or street edge, which portion shall be used to curb said dog
under the following conditions:
1. The person who so curbs such dog shall immediately remove all
feces deposited by such dog by any sanitary method approved by
the local health authority.
2. The feces removed from the aforementioned designated area shall
be disposed of by the person owning, harboring, keeping, or in
charge of any dog curbed, in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection, in a sanitary manner approved by the local health
authority.
d. No person owning or having the care, custody or control of any dog or
cat shall suffer or permit such dog or cat to:
1. Cause any injury to any person.
2. Bark, cry, whine, howl, or otherwise disturb the peace and quiet of
the neighborhood or sleep of any person for any unreasonable
length of time.
3. Be or become a public nuisance or to create a condition hazardous
to safety and health.
e. The habitual barking, howling, whining or crying of a dog or dogs or the
howling of a cat or cats in the Township of Lyndhurst is hereby declared
to be a disturbing noise within the meaning of N.J.S.A. 40:48-1,
Subsection 8, and a nuisance.
§ 9-3.1 GENERAL § 9-3.2
1:393
§ 9-3.3. Cruelty to Dogs or Cats or Other Animals Prohibited. [Ord.
#2042]
§ 9-3.4. Vicious Dogs or Cats. [Ord. #2042]
a. No person owning, keeping, harboring or having the care, custody, or
control of any dog shall suffer or permit it to run at large. Every dog
shall be led by a chain, cord or other leash in the hands of a person
capable of leading and controlling such dog.
a. No person shall be cruel or inhumane to a dog or cat, said cruelty and
inhumanity consisting of beating, torturing, mutilating, cruelly killing
or clearly failing to provide food, drink or shelter for a dog or cat or
abandoning any dog or cat of which he has charge either as owner or
otherwise.
b. No person owning, keeping, harboring or having the care, custody or
control of any dog or cat shall abandon such a maimed, sick, infirm or
disabled animal or creature to die.
a. Any dog or cat which has attacked or bitten any human being, or which
habitually attacks other dogs or cats or domestic animals, is hereby
presumed to be a vicious dog or cat for the purposes of this subsection,
until further determination of facts are made as hereinafter provided.
b. It shall be the duty of the chief of the department, animal canvasser, or
any person authorized by him or the governing body of the township, to
receive and investigate complaints against dogs or cats, and when any
dog or cat complained against shall be deemed by such chief of the
police department or animal canvasser to be a vicious dog or cat, as
herein defined, the said officer shall file a complaint in the municipal
court of the township, which shall thereupon cause the owner or person
harboring such dog or cat to be notified in writing of the complaint, and
to appear before the municipal court judge at a stated time and place.
Pending the disposition of the complaints, the chief of police, animal
canvasser, or such other authorized person may order the dog or cat
muzzled and leashed while being walked, and at all other times
confined.
c. The municipal court judge, at the time set for such hearing, shall
inquire into the facts and give all interested persons an opportunity to
be heard, under oath, and to be represented by counsel, and the
municipal court judge shall decide in accordance with such evidence
before him, and if the municipal court judge shall decide that such dog
or cat complained of is a vicious dog or cat, as defined by this
subsection, notice of such decision shall be given to the owner or
person harboring such dog or cat.
d. No dog or cat which has been so determined to be a vicious dog or cat
shall be permitted to run at large, or be upon any street or public place
in the township, except while securely muzzled and under leash, and
§ 9-3.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 9-3.4
1:394
§ 9-4. REGARDING THE KEEPING OF ANIMALS.
§ 9-4.1. Wild Animals. [Ord. #2042]
The keeping of any wild animal is prohibited, unless issued a license by fish
and game department.
§ 9-4.2. Farm Animals. [Ord. #2042; Ord. #2738, § 1]
§ 9-4.3. Domestic Animals. [Ord. #2042]
the owner or person harboring any such vicious dog or cat who shall
suffer or permit such dog or cat to be upon any street, public place or
private property in the township, other than the property of the owner
or person harboring such dog, while not securely muzzled and under
leash, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.
a. The keeping of any farm animal is prohibited unless a special revocable
permit covering the premises is issued by the health officer and such
permit, if granted, shall place such restrictions as to number and care
as the health officer deems appropriate and reasonable. The permit
shall designate a particular premises and shall not be transferable. No
permit is to be granted to any person when the keeping or raising of the
animal, because of the nature or characteristics thereof, would be
detrimental to the general health or peace and quiet of the residents of
the neighborhood wherein the premises are located.
b. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in paragraph a of this
subsection above, any person who owns, operates, establishes, or
maintains a chicken coop in the township shall apply to the health
officer for a license for such purpose commencing in 2010. The chicken
coop shall be subject to annual inspections by the health inspector. The
annual license fee shall be $25.
a. The keeping of more than four domestic animals of the same species is
prohibited unless a special revocable permit covering the premises is
issued by the health officer and such permit, if granted, shall place such
restrictions as the number and care as the health officer deems
appropriate and reasonable. The permit shall designate a particular
premises and shall not be transferable. No permit is to be granted to
any person when the keeping or raising of the animal, because of the
nature or characteristics thereof, would be detrimental to the general
health or peace and quiet of the residents of the neighborhood wherein
the premises are located.
b. The numerical limitation shall not apply to fish or other water breathing
animals.
c. The numerical limitation referred to shall not apply to carrier and
homing pigeons presently registered with the Lyndhurst Homing Club,
so long as they remain registered at their present premises.
§ 9-3.4 GENERAL § 9-4.4
1:395
§ 9-4.4. Regulations Regarding the Keeping of Animals. [Ord.
#2042; Ord. #2048]
a. No animal shall be allowed to run at large outdoors. When outdoors, all
animals shall be restrained within the owner's property lines.
b. Whenever a dog or cat is kept indoors, no more than two dogs or cats is
permitted per 800 square feet of living space.
c. All animals, excluding fish and water breathing animals, kept outdoors
shall be provided with suitable housing located no closer than five feet
from the property line and having and providing the following minimal
characteristics:
1. Roofed;
2. Protection from elements;
3. Hard, dry, elevated floor;
4. Bedding;
5. Ventilation;
6. Area of housing required for penned animals;
(a) Each pigeon or fowl shall have a minimum of three square feet
of usable space;
(b) Each dog shall have a minimum of 48 square feet of usable
floor or enclosure, including house;
(c) Each rabbit shall have a minimum of six square feet of usable
floor space;
7. Cleaned weekly;
8. Disinfected.
d. The health officer or animal canvasser may at any reasonable time,
enter the premises where any animal is kept or housed.
e. When the health officer or animal canvasser shall hereafter have reason
to believe that a wild animal is being kept, maintained, harbored or
possessed by any person within the township, without proper permits,
he shall thereupon cause to be issued a notice to such person of
classification of such animal as wild. Such notice shall be sent by
certified mail to such person, at the post office address of the place
wherein or where-upon such animal is being kept, maintained,
harbored or possessed. Such person shall thereupon have 15 days from
the date of mailing of such notice within which to cause the removal of
such wild animal from the township.
f. Any license or permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be
revoked at any time by the health officer for just cause, or if the
§ 9-4.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 9-4.4
1:396
§ 9-5. RABIES CONTROL. [Ord. #2042]
permittee, or any of the employees, agents or servants of such
permittee shall violate:
1. Any of the provision of this chapter;
2. The Sanitary Code of the State Department of Health, specifically
applicable to the subject matter for or upon which such permit was
issued.
Before a permit may be revoked, the holder thereof shall be given
a hearing and an opportunity to be heard on the complaint made
or the violation charged against them. The time and place for such
hearing shall be fixed at the discretion of the health officer. Notice
of the time and place of any hearing held under this section shall be
given by the health officer to the holder of the permit so involved
personally or sent to them by registered mail, addressed to them
at the address stated in the permit. A licensee or permittee who
fails to appear at the time and place fixed for such hearing shall not
be entitled to any further hearing and in that event his license or
permit may, as a matter of course, be forthwith revoked.
a. No person shall own, harbor or keep any dog or cat within the township
which is not currently inoculated against rabies, provided, however,
that animals which have not attained the age of six months shall not be
required to be inoculated and further provided that any animal may be
exempt from the requirements of such inoculation, for a specified
period of time, by the department of health, upon the presentation of a
certificate from a veterinarian stating that because of identity or other
physical condition, the inoculation of such animal for the specified
period of time shall be deemed inadvisable by the veterinarian.
b. Inoculations shall be made by a duly licensed veterinarian of the State
of New Jersey or such other person permitted by law to make the same
and approved by the township board of health.
c. Whenever a dog, cat or other animal is infected with rabies or
suspected of being infected with rabies, or has been bitten by an animal
infected with rabies or suspected of being infected with rabies, the
person owning or having the care, custody or control of any such
animal, or any person having knowledge or suspicion of such infection,
shall notify the township board of health and/or the chief of police of the
township or the person in charge of the police department at the given
time immediately. Any such report shall be reduced to writing at the
request of the board of health of the township.
d. If a dog or cat or other animal is known or believed to have rabies or has
been bitten by a dog or cat or other animal known or suspected of
having rabies, the owner of such animal shall be notified in writing to
have the animal confined for a period of not less than six months, or
§ 9-4.4 GENERAL § 9-5
1:397
§ 9-6. QUARANTINE FOLLOWING ANIMAL BITE.
§ 9-6.1. Action to Be Taken Following an Animal Bite. [Ord. #2669,
§ 1]
When any person is bitten or attacked by a dog, cat, or other animal subject
to rabies or other like contagious or dangerous disease, such person, his
parents or guardian if he is a minor, the owner of the animal, or the person
having possession or control thereof, the physician who treats the bite
or wound and any veterinarian or lay person having knowledge of such
bite or wound shall immediately notify the police department, which upon
request of such notification, shall notify the health department to conduct
an investigation.
§ 9-6.2. Disease Investigation. [Ord. #2669, § 1]
such lesser period of specified by the state department of health, and
placed under observation of a veterinarian at the expense of the owner
for such period.
e. Any animal confined under order of the township board of health shall
not be released until a certificate of release has been issued by the said
Board.
f. Whenever it becomes necessary to safeguard the public from the
danger of rabies, the mayor, upon recommendation of the township
board of health, shall issue a proclamation ordering every person
owning or keeping a dog, cat or other animal to confine it securely on
his premises unless such animal shall have a muzzle and leash of
sufficient strength to prevent the biting of any person.
g. Any such animal running at large during the time of the proclamation
shall be seized and impounded, unless noticeably infected with rabies.
h. All dogs or cats or other animals so noticeably infected with rabies and
displaying vicious propensities shall be killed by the warden or chief of
police, or any other authorized person, after a written diagnosis of
infection by a veterinarian of the State of New Jersey.
i. The animal canvasser or chief of police, or any other authorized person,
shall promptly notify in writing the township department of health and
the owner, if known, of the killing and reason for killing of any dog, cat
or other animal in accordance with the provisions of this subsection.
a. The disease investigation of the human victims shall be performed by
the nurse, or by the health administrator in the nurse's absence.
b. The disease investigation of the animal shall be conducted by the health
inspector.
§ 9-5 LYNDHURST CODE § 9-6.3
1:398
§ 9-6.3. Responsibility of Owner or Keeper of Animal. [Ord. #2669,
§ 1]
When the owner or keeper of an animal becomes aware that his or her dog,
cat or other animal has caused a bite, injury or attack, the owner or keeper
of the animal shall in addition to notifying the Police Department, comply
with the following procedures:
§ 9-7. KENNELS, PET SHOPS, POUNDS, SHELTERS, PET
GROOMING AND SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 9-7.1. License Required for Kennel, Pet Shop, Pound, Shelter, Pet
Grooming and Service Establishments. [Ord. #2042; Ord. #2669,
§ 1]
§ 9-7.2. Contents of Application. [Ord. #2042; Ord. #2669, § 1]
The application for a license under this chapter shall describe the premises
where the establishment is located or is proposed to be located, the purpose
a. The offending animal shall be kept in quarantine at the owner's home or
at a kennel for a minimum of 10 days. The health inspector shall
determine the length of quarantine. The owner or keeper shall be
responsible for all costs involved in the quarantine process.
b. The offending animal shall be examined by a licensed veterinarian of
the State of New Jersey on the fifth day after the bite, attack or injury.
Proof of such examination shall be provided to the health inspector
within 24 hours. If the health inspector is available, the health
inspector's examination of the offending animal will be sufficient for
this fifth day examination, and if necessary, the examination at the time
halfway through the quarantine period.
c. The offending animal shall be reexamined by a licensed veterinarian of
the State of New Jersey at the end of the ten day quarantine. If the
required quarantine is a longer length than 10 days, the owner or
keeper shall have the offending animal reexamined by the veterinarian
halfway through the quarantine and then again at the conclusion of the
quarantine.
d. A written report to end the quarantine period shall be submitted and
signed by the veterinarian and sent to the township's health
department within 24 hours.
a. Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, pet
shop, shelter, pound or pet grooming and service establishment in the
township shall apply to the township clerk for a license entitling him to
keep or operate such establishment.
b. Any person holding such license as is referred to in paragraph a of this
subsection shall not be required to secure individual licenses for dogs
owned by such licensee and kept at such establishments.
§ 9-6.3 GENERAL § 9-7.2
1:399
or purposes for which it is to be maintained, and shall be accompanied by
the written approval of the department of health of the township, showing
compliance with the local and state rules and regulations governing location
of and sanitation at such establishments.
§ 9-7.3. Contents of License; Expiration; Revocation. [Ord. #2042;
Ord. #2669, § 1; Ord. #2806-11]
§ 9-7.4. License Fees. [Ord. #2042; Ord. #2248, § II; Ord. #2669,
§ 1]
The annual license fee for a kennel providing accommodations for ten or
less dogs shall be $25, and for more than 10 dogs, $50. The annual license
fee for a pet shop shall be $25. The annual license fee for a pet grooming
and service establishment shall be $200. No license fee shall be charged for
a shelter or pound.
§ 9-7.5. Permitting Dogs or Cats Off Premises. [Ord. #2042; Ord.
#2669, § 1; Ord. No. 2806-11]
No dog or cat kept in a kennel, pet shop, shelter, pound or pet grooming
and service establishment shall be permitted off such premises, except on a
leash or in a crate or other safe control.
§ 9-7.6. Regulations. [Ord. No. 2806-11]
a. All licenses issued under this chapter for a kennel, pet shop, shelter,
pound or pet grooming and service establishment shall state the
purpose for which the establishment is maintained, and shall not be
transferable to another owner or different premises. Such licenses shall
expire on the last day of December of each year.
b. All such licenses shall be subject to revocation by the commissioners on
recommendation of the state department of health or the department of
health of the township, for any failure to comply with the rules and
regulations of the state department of health or the department of
health of the township governing the same after the owner has been
afforded a hearing by either the state department of health or the
department of health of the township.
a. Any person or entity which operates or establishes a kennel, pet shop,
pound or shelter shall be subject to and comply with the requirements
and regulations established under the New Jersey Administrative Code
with respect to Animal Facility Operation, N.J.A.C. 8:23A-1.1 et seq.,
and by the County of Bergen and Township of Lyndhurst health
department.
b. Pet grooming and service establishments shall be subject to and comply
with the following requirements and regulations:
§ 9-7.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 9-7.6
1:400
§ 9-7.7. Information to State Department. [Ord. #2042; Ord. #2669,
§ 1; Ord. #2806-11]
The township clerk shall forward to the state department of health a list of
all kennels, pet shops, shelters or pounds licensed by the township within
30 days after the licenses therefor are issued, which list shall include the
name and address of the licensee and the kind of license issued.
§ 9-8. PENALTIES. [Ord. #2042; Ord. #2669, § 1; Ord. #2806-11]
1. A file on each pet groomed must be kept and maintained on site for
a period of three years, which file shall include the following
information: the pet's name, age and breed; the owner's name,
address and telephone number; documentary proof that the pet's
rabies and immunization vaccines and inoculations are current;
and dates of pet grooming services, description of services
performed and price charged for such service.
2. A daily log of all pets groomed shall be kept and maintained on site
for a period of three years.
3. No pet shall be kept at the establishment's premises at any time
other than the day it is being groomed.
4. All pets shall be protected from injury and predators, and shall be
provided with food and water, as necessary.
5. No pet shall be permitted on the premises unless such pet has
received its first rabies shot and documentation of such is on
premises.
6. No foster pet shall be permitted on the premises.
7. All federal, state, county and local requirements and regulations.
a. Any person who fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of
subsections 9-1.2, 9-1.3, 9-1.4, 9-1.5, 9-1.13, 9-2.6, 9-3.1, 9-3.3, 9-5,
9-7.1, or 9-7.5 or 9-7.6 of this chapter or with the rules and regulations
promulgated by the state department of health governing the sanitary
conduct and operation of kennels, pet shops, shelters, pet grooming
and service establishments and pounds to preserve sanitation therein
and to prevent the spread of rabies and other diseases of dogs, cats or
other animals within and from such establishments, shall be liable for a
penalty of not less than $50, nor more than $500 for each offense, to be
recovered by and in the name of the township in the municipal court.
Any person who violates, fails or refuses to comply with the provisions
of Section 9-6 of this chapter shall be liable for a penalty not to exceed
$1,000 for each offense. A person who refuses or neglects to pay
forthwith the amount of a judgment rendered against him and the costs
and charges incident thereto may be committed by the judge of the
municipal court for a period not exceeding 10 days in the case of a first
§ 9-7.6 GENERAL § 9-8
1:401
§ 9-9. EFFECTIVE DATE. [Ord. #2042; Ord. #2669, § 1]
The effective date of this chapter shall be July 1, 1987 except for
subsections 9-1.8 and 9-1.9, involving fees, shall become effective January
1, 1988.
§ 9-10. FERAL CAT PROGRAM, TRAP, NEUTER, RETURN (TNR).
§ 9-10.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2957-16]
As used in this Section:
ANIMAL CONTROL PROVIDER — Shall mean any agency contracted or
hired by the Township to coordinate and monitor the TNR Program.
CAREGIVER — Shall mean any person who provides food, water and shelter
to or otherwise cares for a cat.
CODE OFFICIAL — Shall mean any person or agency employed by the
Township of Lyndhurst or appointed by the Township who is authorized
to investigate violations of laws, regulations concerning cats, and to issue
citations in accordance with New Jersey law and this section.
DOMESTICATED CAT — Shall mean a cat that is socialized to humans and
is appropriate as a companion for humans.
EAR-TIPPING — Shall mean a straight-line cutting of the tip of the left ear
of a cat by a licensed veterinarian while the cat is anesthetized.
FEEDING — Shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter
any edible material.
FERAL CAT — Shall mean a cat which is completely or substantially
unsocialized to humans. The usual and consistent temperament of a feral
cat is extreme fear and resistance to contact with humans. Feral cats are
either born in the wild, the offspring of tame or feral cats and not socialized;
or formerly tame cats who have been abandoned and have reverted to an
untamed state.
FERAL CAT COLONY — Shall mean an individual feral cat or a group of
cats which congregate together outside as a unit. Any non-feral cats who
congregate with a multiple-cat colony shall be deemed part of it.
conviction, and, in the case of a second, subsequent or continuing
violation, for a term not exceeding 30 days.
b. Any persons who violate or refuse to comply with the provisions of
subsection 9-3.4, upon conviction thereof, in the municipal court shall
be punished by a fine not to exceed $500, or, by imprisonment, for a
term not exceeding 30 days or both for the first offense, and by a fine
not less than $500 and not to exceed $1,000 or to imprisonment in the
county jail for up to 90 days or both for each subsequent offense.
§ 9-8 LYNDHURST CODE § 9-10.1
1:402
NUISANCE — Shall mean disturbing the peace by habitually or continually
howling, crying or screaming, or the unreasonable destruction, desecration
or soiling of property against the wishes of the owner of the property.
OWNER — Shall mean any person, firm, corporation, partnership,
association, trust, estate, or any other legal entity.
STRAY CAT — Shall mean a cat which is regularly off the property of the
owner, is not under physical control and restraint of the owner and is not
regularly provided with food by the owner.
SUITABLE SHELTER — Shall mean shelter that provides protection from
rain, sun and other elements that is adequate to protect the health of the
cat.
TAME CAT — Shall mean a cat which is socialized to humans and is
appropriate as a companion for humans.
TNR — Shall mean Trap, Neuter and Return.
TNR COMMITTEE — Shall mean any person or entity appointed by the
Township Commission who will perform the duties and responsibilities as
established in this section.
TNR PROGRAM — Shall mean a program pursuant to which feral and stray
cats are trapped, neutered or spayed, vaccinated against rabies, ear-tipped
and returned to the location where they congregate.
§ 9-10.2. Feral Cat Colonies. [Ord. No. 2957-16]
Feral cat colonies shall be permitted and caregivers shall be entitled to
maintain them in accordance with the terms and conditions of this section.
§ 9-10.3. Animal Control Provider Responsibilities. [Ord. No.
2957-16]
It shall be the duty of the animal control provider to:
§ 9-10.4. TNR Committee Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 2957-16]
It shall be the duty of the TNR Committee to:
a. Provide training for the cat colony caregivers;
b. Help resolve any complaints over the conduct of a cat colony caregiver
or of cats within a colony;
c. Be responsible for any cost as provided in the Township's agreement
with reference to TNR Program.
a. Help resolve any complaints over the conduct of a colony caregiver or
of cats within a colony;
§ 9-10.1 GENERAL § 9-10.4
1:403
§ 9-10.5. Feral Cat Caregiver Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 2957-16]
It shall be the duty of the feral cat caregivers to:
b. Maintain records provided by colony caregivers on the registration, size
and location of the colonies, as well as the vaccination and spay/neuter
records of cats in the caregiver's colonies;
c. Report semiannually in writing to the Township's Code Official on the
status of the colony, including data on the number and gender of all cats
in the colony, the number of cats who died or otherwise ceased being a
part of the colony during the prior six-month period, the number of
kittens born to colony cats and their disposition, the number of cats and
kittens spayed and neutered and the number of cats and kitten placed
in permanent homes as companion cats.
d. Provide the semi-annual report forms to caregivers and provide
assistance on request by the caregiver in the preparation of the forms.
a. Register the feral cat colony with the TNR Committee;
b. Take steps to vaccinate the colony population for rabies and update the
required vaccination protocols whenever possible; take steps to get all
cats in the colony population spayed/neutered by a licensed
veterinarian;
c. Maintain digital photos of each cat in the colony and copies of
documents evidencing that the cats have been vaccinated, spayed/
neutered and ear-tipped; providing food, water and, if feasible, suitable
shelter for colony cats;
d. Observe the colony cats and keep a record of any illnesses or unusual
behavior noticed in any colony cats;
e. Obtain the written approval of owners of any property to which the
caregiver requires access to provide colony care;
f. Take steps, in the event that kittens are born to a colony cat, to remove
the kittens from the colony after they have been weaned, and place the
kittens in homes, foster homes, or with animal shelter, rescue
organizations or veterinary offices for the purpose of subsequent
permanent placement;
g. Report semiannually in writing to the TNR Committee on the status of
the colony the total number of cats in the colony, including data on the
number and gender of all cats in the colony, the number of cats who
died or otherwise ceased being a part of the colony during the prior sixmonth
period, the number of kittens born to colony cats and their
disposition, the number of cats and kittens spayed and neutered and the
number of cats and kittens placed in permanent homes as companion
cats;
§ 9-10.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 9-10.5
1:404
§ 9-10.6. Exemptions from Restrictive Ordinances. [Ord. No.
2957-16]
The following Ordinances of the Township of Lyndhurst shall not apply
to feral cat colonies managed by the TNR Program or to any person or
organization that is providing care for a feral cat colony and as taking steps
to trap and sterilize the animals:
§ 9-10.7. Cat Colony Caregivers Registration-Ownership Exemption.
[Ord. No. 2957-16]
Any person undertaking the duties and responsibilities of a cat colony
caregiver shall first be registered with the Committee at no cost. A
registered caregiver shall not be considered an owner in or be subject to
regulations governing ownership or control of an animal, except as specified
in this section.
§ 9-10.8. Enforcement Rights of Township. [Ord. No. 2957-16]
The Township shall retain the following rights:
h. Obtaining proper medical attention for any colony cat who appears to
require it;
i. Undergoing training for themselves and their responsible substitutes in
the property management of a colony as developed and verified by the
Animal Control;
j. Setting up consistent and monitored feeding schedules. Feeding shall
be limited to daylight hours. All remaining food must be removed daily;
k. "Ear-tip" all cats with a single cut preferably on the left ear.
a. Licensing
b. Control and Maintenance of Cats.
a. The right to seize or remove from a colony cats which have not been
vaccinated against rabies and who are demonstrating signs of disease.
b. The right to seize or remove from a colony a cat which is creating a
nuisance after the caregiver and sponsor have been given 60 days to
resolve the complaint or remove and relocate the cat and have failed to
do so.
c. The right to seize or remove a colony of cats when the caregiver
regularly fails to comply with the requirements of this section and the
TNR Committee has not been able to obtain a replacement or substitute
caregiver within 60 days of the Town's notice to the Committee of the
caregiver's failure to comply with this section.
§ 9-10.5 GENERAL § 9-10.8
1:405
§ 9-10.9. Nuisance Complaints. [Ord. No. 2957-16]
The requirements of this section notwithstanding, Code Officials and Police
Officers may investigate any nuisance complaint. If a Code Official or Police
Officer determines that an ear-tipped feral cat colony cat is causing a
nuisance as defined by this section, the Code Official or Police Officer
shall contact the TNR Committee and allow the TNR Committee 60 days
to resolve the complaint or remove the cat before the officer takes further
action. The caregiver or TNR Committee must begin nuisance abatement
procedures within 48 hours after being notified of a nuisance and must
take all reasonable steps to resolve the nuisance in as short a time period
as possible, not to exceed 60 days. If the TNR Committee fails to resolve
the nuisance or remove the cat with the 60 days, the Code Official may
remove the cat. If a Code Official or Police Officer reasonably determines
that a cat is injured or poses a significant threat to public health, the Code
Official or Police Officer may reduce the time that the TNR Committee has
to resolve the complaint, as necessary to protect the cat and public health,
before taking further action. In the case of an emergency, the Code Official
or Police Officer may remove the cat, but within 24 hours the Township must
provide the TNR Committee with notice of the cat's whereabouts and allow
the TNR Committee an opportunity to retrieve the cat for treatment, return
or relocation.
§ 9-10.10. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2957-16]
This section shall be enforced by the Code Official or Police Department
and any other Department hereinafter designated by the Township
Commissioners.
§ 9-10.11. Study and Review. [Ord. No. 2957-16; Ord. No. 2960-17]
Not later than June 30, 2017, the Township shall study the effectiveness of
the TNR Program and review the continuance of this section. This section,
however, shall continue as provided until specifically rescinded or amended.
Chapter 10
CABLE COMMUNICATIONS
[Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ord. Nos.
1606 and 2200.]
§ 10-1. PURPOSE OF THE CHAPTER. [Ord. #2703, § 1]
The municipality hereby grants to Comcast renewal of its nonexclusive
municipal consent to place in, upon, across, above, over and under
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, easements, public ways and public
d. The right to replace or remove a caregiver who fails to comply with the
responsibilities and requirements of this section after reasonable notice
is provided to the caregiver of noncompliance.
§ 9-10.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 10-1
1:406
places in the municipality, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors, fixtures, apparatus and
equipment as may be necessary for the construction, operation and
maintenance in the Municipality of a cable television and communications
system.
§ 10-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #2703, § 2]
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Such meaning or
definition of terms is supplemental to those definitions of the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") rules and regulations, 47 CFR 76.1 et
seq., and the Cable Communications Policy Act, 47 U.S.C. § 521 et seq., as
amended, and the Cable Television Act, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1 et seq., and shall in
no way be construed to broaden, alter or conflict with the federal and state
definitions:
§ 10-3. STATEMENT OF FINDINGS. [Ord. #2703, § 3]
Public hearings conducted by the municipality, concerning the renewal of
municipal consent herein granted to the company were held after proper
public notice pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act and the
regulations of the Board adopted pursuant thereto. Said hearings, having
been fully open to the public, and the municipality, having received at said
public hearings all comments regarding the qualifications of the company
a. Town or Municipality shall mean the Township of Lyndhurst, County of
Bergen, State of New Jersey.
b. Company shall mean the grantee of rights under this chapter and is
known as Comcast of the Meadowlands, LLC.
c. Act or Cable Television Act shall mean Chapter 186 of the General Laws
of New Jersey, and subsequent amendments thereto, N.J.S.A. 48:5A-1,
et seq.
d. FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.
e. Board or BPU shall mean the Board of Public Utilities, State of New
Jersey.
f. Office or OCTV shall mean the Office of Cable Television of the Board.
g. Basic cable service shall mean any service tier, which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals as defined by the
FCC.
h. Application shall mean the company's application for renewal of
municipal consent.
i. Primary service area or PSA shall mean and consist of the area of the
municipality currently served with existing plant as set forth in the map
annexed to the company's application for municipal consent.
§ 10-1 GENERAL § 10-3
1:407
to receive this renewal of municipal consent, the municipality hereby finds
that the company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character,
financial and other qualifications and that the company's operating and
construction arrangements are adequate and feasible.
§ 10-4. DURATION OF FRANCHISE. [Ord. #2703, § 4]
The nonexclusive municipal consent granted herein shall expire 15 years
from the date of expiration of the previous certificate of approval issued by
the Board.
In the event that the municipality shall find that the company has not
substantially complied with the material terms and conditions of this
chapter, the municipality shall have the right to petition the OCTV, pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-47, for appropriate action, including modification and/
or termination of the certificate of approval; provided however, that the
municipality shall first have given the company written notice of all alleged
instances of noncompliance and an opportunity to cure same within 90 days
of that notification.
§ 10-5. FRANCHISE FEE. [Ord. #2703, § 5]
Pursuant to the terms and conditions of the Act, the company shall, during
each year of operation under the consent granted herein, pay to the
municipality 2% of the gross revenues from all recurring charges in the
nature of subscription fees paid by subscribers for cable television
reception service in the municipality or any higher amount required by the
Act or otherwise allowable by law, whichever is greater.
§ 10-6. FRANCHISE TERRITORY. [Ord. #2703, § 6]
The consent granted under this chapter to the renewal of the franchise
shall apply to the entirety of the municipality and any property subsequently
annexed hereto.
§ 10-7. EXTENSION OF SERVICE. [Ord. #2703, § 7]
The company shall be required to proffer service to any residence or
business along any public right-of-way in the primary service area, as set
forth in the company's application. The company's line extension policy, as
set forth in the company's application, shall govern any extension of plant
beyond the primary service area.
§ 10-8. CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
§ 10-8.1. Restoration. [Ord. #2703, § 8]
In the event that the company or its agents shall disturb any pavement,
street surfaces, sidewalks, driveways, or other surface in the natural
topography, the company shall, at its sole expense, restore and replace such
§ 10-3 LYNDHURST CODE § 10-8.1
1:408
places or things so disturbed in as good a condition as existed prior to the
commencement of said work.
§ 10-8.2. Relocation. [Ord. #2703, § 8]
If at any time during the period of this consent, the municipality shall alter
or change the grade of any street, alley or other way or place the company,
upon reasonable notice by the municipality, shall remove, re-lay or relocate
its equipment, at the expense of the company.
§ 10-8.3. Removal or Trimming of Trees. [Ord. #2703, § 8]
During the exercise of its rights and privileges under this franchise, the
company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places of the municipality so as
to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the
wires and cable of the company. Such trimming shall be only to the extent
necessary to maintain proper clearance of the company's wire and cables.
§ 10-9. CUSTOMER SERVICE. [Ord. #2703, § 9]
In providing services to its customers, the company shall comply with
N.J.A.C. 14:18-1 et seq. and all applicable state and federal statutes and
regulations. The company shall strive to meet or exceed all voluntary
company and industry standards in the delivery of customer service and
shall be prepared to report on it to the municipality upon written request of
the municipality administrator or clerk.
§ 10-10. MUNICIPAL COMPLAINT OFFICER. [Ord. #2703, § 10]
The Office of Cable Television is hereby designed as the complaint officer
for the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:5A-26(b). All complaints shall
be received and processed in accordance with N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.5. The
a. The company shall continue to comply fully with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding credit for outages, the
reporting of same to regulatory agencies and notification of same to
customers.
b. The company shall continue to fully comply with all applicable state and
federal statutes and regulations regarding the availability of devices for
the hearing impaired and the notification of same to customers.
c. The company shall use every reasonable effort to meet or exceed
voluntary standards for telephone accessibility developed by the
National Cable Television Association (NCTA).
d. Nothing herein shall impair the right of any subscriber or the
municipality to express any comment with respect to telephone
accessibility to the complaint officer, or impair the right of the
complaint officer to take any action that is permitted under law.
§ 10-8.1 GENERAL § 10-10
1:409
municipality shall have the right to request copies of records and reports
pertaining to complaints by municipality customers from the OCTV.
§ 10-11. LOCAL OFFICE. [Ord. #2703, § 11]
During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the company
shall maintain a business office or agent in accordance with N.J.A.C.
14:15-5.1 for the purpose of receiving, investigating and resolving all local
complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and
similar matters. Such a business office shall have a publicly listed toll-free
telephone number and be open during standard business hours, and in no
event (excepting emergent circumstances) less than 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
§ 10-12. PERFORMANCE BONDS. [Ord. #2703, § 12]
During the life of the franchise the company shall give to the municipality
a bond in the amount of $25,000. Such bond shall be to insure the faithful
performance of all undertakings of the company as represented in its
application for municipal consent incorporated herein.
§ 10-13. SUBSCRIBER RATES. [Ord. #2703, § 13]
The rates of the company shall be subject to regulation as permitted by
federal and state law.
§ 10-14. PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL AND GOVERNMENTAL ACCESS.
[Ord. #2703, § 14]
§ 10-15. COMMITMENTS BY THE COMPANY. [Ord. #2703, § 15]
a. The company shall continue to provide residents with a system-wide
public access channel maintained by the company. Qualified individuals
and organizations may utilize public access for the purpose of
cablecasting noncommercial access programming in conformance with
the company's published public access rules.
b. The company shall continue to provide a system-wide leased access
channel maintained by the company for the purpose of cablecasting
commercial access programming in conformance with the company's
guideline and applicable state and federal statutes and regulations.
c. The company shall take any steps that are necessary to ensure that the
signals originated on the access channels are carried without material
degradation, and with a signal whose quality is equal to that of the
other standard channels that the company transmits.
a. The company shall provide standard installation and basic cable
television service on one outlet at no cost to each school in the
municipality, public and private, elementary, intermediate and
secondary, provided the school is within 200 feet of active cable
§ 10-10 LYNDHURST CODE § 10-15
1:410
§ 10-16. EMERGENCY USES. [Ord. #2703, § 16]
The company will comply with the Emergency Alert System ("EAS") rules in
accordance with applicable state and federal statutes and regulations.
The company shall in no way be held liable for any injury suffered by the
municipality or any other person, during an emergency, if for any reason
the municipality is unable to make full use of the cable television system as
contemplated herein.
§ 10-17. LIABILITY INSURANCE. [Ord. #2703, § 17]
The company shall at all times maintain a comprehensive general liability
insurance policy with a single limit amount of $1,000,000 covering liability
for any death, personal injury, property damages or other liability arising
out of its construction and operation of the cable television system, and an
excess liability (or "umbrella") policy in the amount of $5,000,000.
distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid
for on a materials/equipment plus labor basis by the school requesting
service. Monthly service charges shall be waived on all additional
outlets. Conversion of non-company authorized outlets to company
standards, including wiring, equipment and installation charges shall
be paid by the requesting school.
b. The company shall provide standard installation and basic cable
television service at no cost on one outlet to each police, fire,
emergency management facility and public library in the municipality,
provided the facility is located within 200 feet of active cable
distribution plant. Each additional outlet installed, if any, shall be paid
for on a materials/equipment plus labor basis by the municipality.
Monthly service charges shall be waived on all additional outlets.
Conversion of non-company authorized outlets to company standards,
including wiring, equipment and installation charges shall be paid by
the municipality.
c. The company shall continue to provide standard installation and one
free non-networked high speed Internet connection and service (one
outlet at each location) at the public library and all public and private
schools. Connections are to be located in areas accessible to student
and community use, and cannot be restricted to administrative use. All
facilities must be located within 200 feet of active cable plant.
d. The company will provide to allow for scheduling up to four hours of
programming per week on the system-wide access channel for the
municipality, provided that new programming is provided monthly by
the municipality and that time is available on the channel schedule.
e. Within six months of the issuance of a renewal certificate of approval
(COA) by the Board, the company shall provide to the municipality a
one-time grant for local access related needs in the amount of $30,000.
§ 10-15 GENERAL § 10-18
1:411
§ 10-18. INCORPORATION OF THE APPLICATION. [Ord. #2703,
§ 18]
All of the statements and commitments contained in the Application or
annexed thereto and incorporated therein, and any amendments thereto,
except as modified herein, are binding upon the company as terms and
conditions of this consent. The application and other relevant writings
submitted by the company shall be annexed hereto and made a part hereof
by reference provided same do not conflict with applicable state or federal
law.
§ 10-19. COMPETITIVE EQUITY. [Ord. #2703, § 19]
Should the municipality grant a franchise to construct, operate and
maintain a cable television system to any other person, corporation or entity
on teams materially less burdensome or more favorable than the terms
contained herein, the company may substitute such language that is more
favorable or less burdensome for the comparable provision of this chapter
subject to the provisions of N.J.A.C. 14:17-6.7.
§ 10-20. SEPARABILITY. [Ord. #2703, § 20]
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court or
federal or state agency of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be
deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and its validity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of
the chapter.
§ 10-21. THIRD PARTY BENEFICIARIES. [Ord. #2703, § 21]
Nothing in this franchise or in any prior agreement is or was intended to
confer third-party beneficiary status on any member of the public to enforce
the terms of such agreements or franchise.
§ 10-22. EFFECTIVE DATE. [Ord. #2703, § 22]
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon issuance of a renewal
certificate of approval from the BPU.
Chapter 11
FIRE PREVENTION
[Editor's Note: See also Chapter 8, § 8-6, prohibiting combustion
heaters, and § 8-7, requiring smoke detectors in residential
dwellings.]
§ 11-1. UNIFORM FIRE CODE.
§ 10-18 LYNDHURST CODE § 11-1.1
1:412
§ 11-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1424 § 9; Ord. No. 1984 § II; Ord.
No. 2953-16]
As used in this chapter:
All technical words and terms shall have the same meaning given to them
in the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, N.J.A.C. 5:70-1.1, et seq., and the
International Fire Code, Section 101, et seq. Whenever the word
municipality is used in the Fire Prevention Code or the New Jersey Uniform
Fire Code, it shall be held to mean the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 11-1.2. Adoption of New Jersey Uniform Fire Code and
International Fire Code. [Ord. $1424, § 9, Ord. #1757; Ord. #1895,
§ I; Ord. #1929, § I; Ord. #1984, § III; Ord. #2053, § II; Ord. #2092,
§ I; Ord. #2881-13; Ord. No. 2953-16]
The Township of Lyndhurst Bureau of Fire Safety shall adopt and enforce
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Safety Act, as amended, the New Jersey
Uniform Fire Code, as amended, and the International Fire Code, as
amended, and all regulations adopted therein, in all buildings, structures
and premises within the boundaries of the Township of Lyndhurst, other
than owner-occupied one- and two-family dwellings, and shall faithfully
comply with the requirements of both the Act and the Codes.
§ 11-1.3. Intent: Bureau of Fire Prevention. [Ord. #1424, § 9; Ord.
#1757; Ord. #1962, § 13; Ord. #2881-13]
It is the intention and purpose of this chapter to incorporate by reference
the Fire Prevention Code recommended by the International Code Council
(ICC).
§ 11-1.4. Amendments to the Fire Prevention Code. [Ord. #1424,
§ 9; Ord. #1757; Ord. #1778; Ord. #1895, § II; Ord. #1928, § 1; Ord.
#1982, § I; Ord. #2033, § I; Ord. #2053, § I; Ord. #2228, § I; Ord.
#2418, § I; Ord. #2505, § I; Ord. #2584; Ord. #2596; Ord. #2821-11;
Ord. No. 2918-15 § 4]
a. The Bureau of Fire Prevention in the township fire department is
established and shall be operated under the supervision of the fire
official.
b. The fire official shall be the chief of the bureau of fire prevention and
shall be appointed by the director of public safety.
c. The fire official shall recommend to the director of public safety the
employment of technical advisors, such as building, plumbing and
electrical inspectors when deemed necessary.
a. Fire Hydrants.
1. All fire hydrants shall be kept clear on the curb side of the
hydrants. No encumbrances such as refuse, flowers, hedges or
§ 11-1.1 GENERAL § 11-1.4
1:413
§ 11-1.5. Modifications. [Ord. #1424, § 9]
The bureau of fire prevention shall have the power to modify any of the
provisions of the Fire Prevention Code upon application in writing by the
owner or, lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided
trees shall be maintained within eight feet of either side of the
hydrant. Private property owners shall not move snow to, or pile
snow, within five feet of fire hydrants at the curb or street edge
abutting private property.
2. Occupants of abutting property (see 31.01) shall remove snow from
this hydrant as per 31.01.
3. All fire hydrants on Business or Industrial Properties shall be
maintained by the owner or tenant, subject to inspection and
approval of the Fire Prevention Bureau.
4. No fire hydrant on private property shall be shut down, without
notification to the Fire Department.
b. Parking Prohibitions for Fire Zones and Lanes.
1. Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the Fire Zones and Lanes
designated in Schedule A.30.
2. The fine for violation of parking in fire zones or lanes shall be $35.
c. Key Box Rapid Entry System.
1. Key Boxes Required. The Fire Official shall require a key box to be
installed in an accessible location where immediate access is
necessary to verify the existence of a fire or other emergency in
these buildings equipped with or required to be equipped with, fire
detection or fire suppression systems or equipment.
2. Type, Contents, Installation. The key box shall be of a type
approved by the Fire Official; shall contain keys to gain necessary
access as required by the Fire Official, and shall be installed in a
manner approved by the Fire Official. The Fire Official shall require
a key box tamper switch connected to the building's fire alarm
system.
3. FDC CAPS. FDC CAPS shall be required to be installed on all Fire
Department Sprinkler connections, and Fire Department Stand
pipes.
4. Penalties. Any building owner violating the requirements of this
subsection 11-1.4, after receiving due notice by the Fire Official
shall be subject to a fine up to $500.
30.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 11-1.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 11-1.5
1:414
that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and
substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications when granted
or allowed and the decision of the bureau of fire prevention thereon shall
be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be
furnished the applicant.
§ 11-1.6. Establishment of Limits of Districts in Which Storage of
Flammable Liquids in Outside Above Ground Storage Tanks Is to Be
Prohibited. [Ord. #1424, § 9; Ord. #1757; Ord. #2596]
§ 11-1.7. Establishment of Limits of Districts in Which Bulk Storage
of Liquefied Petroleum Gases Is to Be Restricted. [Ord. #1424, § 9;
Ord. #1757; Ord. #2596]
The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code in which bulk storage
of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established as follows:
Districts "A," "B," "C," Residential; Business; and Light Manufacturing and
C-G1 zones as shown in the Zoning Ordinance.
§ 11-1.8. New Materials, Processes or Occupancies Which May
Require Permits. [Ord. #1424, § 9]
The director of public safety, the chief of the fire department and the chief
of the bureau of fire prevention shall act as a committee to determine
and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any
new materials, processes or occupancies which shall require permits, in
addition to those now enumerated in the code. The chief of the bureau of
fire prevention shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and
distribute copies thereof to interested persons.
§ 11-1.9. Penalties for Violations. [Ord. #1424, § 9; New]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention
Code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or
fail to comply with any order or regulation made thereunder, shall severally
and for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be
subject to a penalty as stated in Chapter 3, § 3-1. The imposition of one
penalty for any violation of this chapter shall not excuse the violation or
permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct
or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and, when
a. The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code in which storage of
flammable liquids in outside above ground tanks is prohibited, are
hereby established as follows: Districts "A," "B," "C," Residential;
Business; Light Manufacturing and C-G1 Zones as shown in the Zoning
Ordinance.
b. The limits referred to in the Fire Prevention Code in which new bulk
plants for flammable liquids are prohibited, are hereby established as
follows: Districts "A," "B," "C," Residential; Business; Light
Manufacturing and C-G1 Zones as shown in the Zoning Ordinance.
§ 11-1.5 GENERAL § 11-1.9
1:415
not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained
shall constitute a separate offense. The application of the above penalties
shall not hold to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
§ 11-1.10. Fees for Issuance of a Certificate of Fire Code Status.
[Ord. #1424, § 9; Ord. #1757; Ord. #1840, § I; Ord. #1927, § I; Ord.
#1983, §§ I — II; Ord. #2418, § I; Ord. #2505, § I; Ord. #2596]
The fee for issuance of a certificate of fire code status shall be $50.
§ 11-2. TAX LIENS ON FIRE DAMAGED PROPERTIES.31
§ 11-2.1. Payment by Insurance Companies. [Ord. #1839, § 1; Ord.
#2596]
Every insurance company is prohibited from paying an insured, any claim
in excess of $2,500 for fire damages on any real property located within
the township pursuant to any fire insurance policy issued or renewed after
the effective date of this section and after the filing of this section with
the state commissioner of insurance, until such time as the insured person
submits an official certificate of search for municipal liens pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 54:5-12 certifying that all taxes, assessments or other municipal
liens or charges, levied and assessed, and due and payable, against the
insured property have been paid either by the owner of such real property,
or by the insurance company pursuant to subsection 11-2.2, or the township
submits a certified copy of a resolution adopted pursuant to subsection
11-2.2. The official certificate of search may be altered, by the bonded
official responsible for preparing such certificates, in order to correct any
errors or omissions or to add any municipal liens or related charges due and
payable subsequent to the preparation of the official certificate.
§ 11-2.2. Resolution of the Board of Commissioners. [Ord. #1839,
§ 1; Ord. #2596]
Unless the resolution, referred to in subsection 11-2.1 above, is received
by an insurance company pursuant to subsection 11-2.3, an insurance
company is hereby authorized and required, prior to the payment of any
claims for fire damages in excess of $2,500 to pay to the township the
amount of the liens appearing on the official certificate and such other
recorded liens or related charges as may be certified to the insurance
company; provided, however, that if an appeal is taken on the amount
of the lien or charge, other than an appeal on the assessed valuation or
real property pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:3-21, the insurance company shall
withhold 75% of the full amount of the lien or charge contested, pending
termination of all proceedings, at which time such moneys and all interest
accruing thereon at a rate paid on interest bearing accounts in banking
31.Editor's Note: Former Section 11-2, Storage of Volatile Liquids, previously codified herein
and containing portions of Ordinance Nos. 1424 and 1599 was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance No. 2596. See Chapter 25, Hazardous Chemicals.
§ 11-1.9 LYNDHURST CODE § 11-2.2
1:416
institutions or savings and loan associations in the state, shall be disbursed
in accordance with the final order or judgment of the court.
§ 11-2.3. Agreement with Owner. [Ord. #1839, § 1; Ord. #2596]
The board of commissioners may enter into, or may authorize the tax
collector by resolution to enter into agreement with the owners of any
fire damaged property to pay in full all delinquent taxes, assessments or
other municipal liens by installments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19, or for
redemption of the tax sale lien by installment payments pursuant to Article
7 of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of N.J.S.A., if the board of commissioners is
satisfied that the claim for fire damages is to be used to restore or improve
the fire damaged property. An insurance company receiving a certified copy
of such resolution adopted by the board of commissioners is authorized to
make full payment on the claim to the insured person.
§ 11-3. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF THE UNIFORM
FIRE SAFETY CODE. [Prior ordinance history includes portions of
Ordinance Nos. 1957, 1962, 2418, 2505 and 2596.]
§ 11-3.1. Local Enforcement. [Ord. #2811-11]
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383),
the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70.1 et seq.) shall be locally
enforced in the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 11-3.2. Agency Designation. [Ord. #2811-11; Ord. #2881-13]
The local enforcing agency shall be the bureau of fire prevention.
§ 11-3.3. Duties. [Ord. #2811-11]
§ 11-3.4. Organization. [Ord. #2811-11; Ord. #2881-13]
a. The local enforcing agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Code in all
buildings, structures and premises within the established boundaries of
the Township of Lyndhurst other than one and two unit owner-occupied
dwellings used exclusively for dwelling purposes and buildings,
structures and premises owned or operated by the Federal
Government, Interstate Agencies of the State of New Jersey.
b. The local enforcing agency shall faithfully comply with all the pertinent
requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and the Uniform Fire Code.
a. The bureau of fire prevention, designated by subsection 11-3.2 of this
section as the local enforcing agency, shall be part of the department of
public safety and shall be under direct supervision and control of the
director of public safety.
b. The local enforcing agency shall have no more than one part-time paid
fire official and not more than three part-time paid fire inspectors.
§ 11-2.2 GENERAL § 11-3.5
1:417
§ 11-3.5. Appointments, Qualifications, Term of Office, Removal.
[Ord. #2811-11; Ord. #2857-12]
§ 11-3.6. Life Hazard Uses. [Ord. #2811-11]
The Lyndhurst Fire Department, designated by subsection 11-3.2 of this
section as the local enforcing agency, shall carry out the periodic
inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire Code on behalf
of the Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs.
a. Creation, Appointment and Qualifications of Fire Official. There is
hereby created the part-time paid position of fire official. The fire
official shall be certified by the State of New Jersey and appointed by
the commissioner of public safety, whose sole discretion exists as to the
appointment.
b. Appointment and Qualifications of Fire Inspectors. There is hereby
created the part-time paid position of fire inspector. In addition to the
fire official, there shall be up to three part-time paid fire inspectors
appointed. All fire inspectors shall have the appropriate certifications
from the state. Any such fire inspectors shall be appointed by the
commissioner of public safety.
c. Fire Official and Fire Inspector Positions Salary and Benefits. The
positions of fire official and fire inspector created by this section are
part-time positions. Individuals appointed to these positions are not
entitled to any health, dental, medical and/or any other fringe benefits.
There shall be up to one part-time fire official appointed and up to three
part-time fire inspectors appointed. The total combined salary for all of
these positions shall not exceed $1,200 per week. The individuals
appointed to these positions shall only be paid for work actually
performed. In any week where no work is performed by the fire official
and/or fire inspector(s), they shall not be paid.
d. Appointment of Legal Counsel. The township attorney or other assigned
township attorney shall be appointed as legal counsel to assist the
agency in enforcing the Uniform Fire Code.
e. Term of Office. The fire official and fire inspectors shall serve at the
pleasure of the commissioner of public safety. Any vacancy shall be
filled for the unexpired term.
f. Removal from Office. The fire official, fire inspectors and any other
employees of the local enforcing agency shall be subject to removal by
the commissioner of public safety for any reason which does not violate
federal, state or local laws. Before removal from office, all persons shall
be afforded an opportunity to be heard by the governing body or a
hearing officer designated by the governing body.
§ 11-3.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 11-3.7
1:418
§ 11-3.7. Non-Life Hazard Uses. [Ord. #2811-11]
In addition to the registrations, inspections and fees required by the
Uniform Fire Code, non-life hazard uses shall register with the bureau of
fire prevention. Those uses shall be inspected once per year and pay an
annual fee as set forth in subsection 11-3.11 below.
§ 11-3.8. Permits and Certificate of Fire Code Status. [Ord.
#2811-11; Ord. #2881-13]
§ 11-3.9. Board of Appeals. [Ord. #2811-11]
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcing agency shall have the right to
appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of Bergen County.
§ 11-3.10. Enforcement, Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #2811-11]
Enforcement, violations and penalties shall be managed in conformity with
the Uniform Fire Safety Act, the Uniform Fire Code and all other laws of the
State of New Jersey.
§ 11-3.11. Additional Required Inspection and Fees (Life Hazard
and Non-Life Hazard Uses). [Ord. #2811-11; Ord. #2881-13]
In addition to the inspection and fees required pursuant to the act and
the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, the following
additional inspections and fees shall be required:
a. The application fees for the permits listed in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.7 shall be
as provided by state regulation (N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9). Those fees are
currently as follows: [Amended 8-14-2018 by Ord. No. 2998-18]
Type 1 $54
Type 2 $214
Type 3 $427
Type 4 $641 (There shall be no fee for Type 4 permits for storage or
activity at a premises registered as a life hazard use)
Type 5 (Reserved)
The above-listed fees shall reflect the fees as set forth in the state
regulations. If the fees are increased in the regulation, the fees listed
above shall automatically increase in the same amount.
b. The cost of the issuance of a certificate of fire code status shall be $50.
a. All building types or uses (except owner-occupied one-and two-family
dwellings) that are not required to be registered as a life hazard use in
§ 11-3.7 GENERAL § 11-3.11
1:419
accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code, shall be subject to
an annual registration and fee as follows:
1. Use Group R-2 (multiple dwellings and mixed use with any
residential use):
(a) One to three dwelling units: $90.
(b) Four dwelling units and up: $90 up to three dwelling units and
$15 per each additional dwelling unit.
2. Use groups A (Assembly), B (Business), E (Educational), F (Factory/
Industrial), I (Institutional), M (Mercantile) and S (Storage/
Warehouse) based upon the gross floor area of building or tenant
space:
(a) Up to 3,000 square feet: $90.
(b) 3,000 square feet and greater: $90 and $19 for every
additional 1,000 square feet or part thereof. (See attached Fee
Computation Chart.)
3. Use Group H (not life hazard use): $500.
4. Use Group T (Temporary structure): $150.
5. Owners of non-owner occupied structures, including vacant
structures, of all Use Groups, excepting R-2, shall register with the
bureau of fire safety and pay an annual registration fee of $50.
b. Additional Fees. The following fees are hereby established for certain
services extended and material distributed by the bureau of fire safety:
1. Copies of all fire incident reports: $35.
2. Copies of all photographs of a fire incident: $5 per photograph.
c. Exemptions from Fees. The following uses and entitles shall be exempt
from the payment of annual registration and inspection fees hereunder:
1. Nonprofit, charitable and service organizations;
2. Governmental agencies, including the board of education
Fee Computation Chart
Use Groups A, B, E, I, M, S & F
Up to 3,000 $90
3,001 to 4,000 $109
4,001 to 5,000 $128
5,001 to 6,000 $147
6,001 to 7,000 $166
§ 11-3.11 LYNDHURST CODE § 11-3.11
1:420
§ 11-3.12. Fire Watches. [Ord. No. 2811-11; Ord. No. 2953-16]
Fee Computation Chart
7,001 to 8,000 $185
8,001 to 9,000 $204
9,001 to 10,000 $223
10,001 to 11,000 $242
11,001 to 12,000 $261
12,001 to 13,000 $280
13,001 to 14,000 $299
14,001 to 15,000 $318
a. Request or Order for Fire Watch.
1. A request for a fire watch shall be made in writing to the Fire
Official at least 10 days prior to an event where practicable, unless
an emergent situation is present.
2. The Fire Official shall have the authority to order a fire watch for an
emergent situation or for an event for which the Fire Official
determines a fire watch is necessary.
b. Conditions of Employment of Fire Watch Personnel. All fire prevention
officers or firefighters of the Township as fire watch personnel shall be
treated as employees of the Township provided, however, that wages
earned for such employment shall not be applied toward the pension
benefits of regular full-time Township employees serving as fire watch
personnel, and all hours worked in such employment shall not be
compensable as overtime.
c. Assignment of Fire Watch Personnel. The Fire Official shall determine
the number of personnel necessary for each event or emergent
situation for which a fire watch is required. The fire watch personnel
shall be selected from employees serving in the Township's Bureau of
Fire Prevention, or members of the Fire Department.
d. Payment for Fire Watch Services by Property Owners. Payment for a
fire watch on private property shall be made by the property owner in
accordance with the following:
1. Compensation for each employee assigned to the fire watch: $45
per hour.
2. Administrative fee: $50.
3. Payments for a non-emergent fire watch shall be made in advance
in accordance with a statement issued by the Township. The
statement shall include the administrative fee and an estimate of
§ 11-3.11 GENERAL § 11-3.12
1:421
§ 11-3.13. Mobile Food Vehicle Safety. [Ord. No. 2953-16]
compensation to be paid to employees. If the actual amount of
compensation to employees exceeds the estimate, a supplemental
statement shall be issued by the Township. If the estimate exceeds
the actual amount of compensation to employees, the property
owner shall be reimbursed for the overpayment.
4. Payments to fire watch personnel shall be made after receipt by the
Township of vouchers properly executed and documented by such
personnel, and approved by such personnel's supervising officer, if
applicable.
5. The Fire Official shall have the discretion to waive payment for a
fire watch in appropriate circumstances.
a. Definitions.
As used in this subsection:
FOOD CART — Shall mean a cart or other movable device used on the
public sidewalks or in public places or roadways, which uses propane
or similar fuel for its operation, and is not licensed as a food truck or
food trailer.
FOOD TRAILER — Shall mean a non-motorized vehicle designed to be
towed by a motorized vehicle registered and able to be operated on
the public roadways of the State of New Jersey, in which ready to eat
food is cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed or portioned for sale or
distribution.
FOOD TRUCK — Shall mean a motorized vehicle registered and able to
be operated on the public roadways of the State of New Jersey, in which
ready to eat food is cooked, wrapped, packaged, processed or portioned
for sale or distribution.
FOOD VEHICLE — Shall mean a food truck, food trailer or food cart.
FOOD VENDOR or VENDOR — Shall mean the owner, owner's agent or
representative, or operator of a food vehicle.
SPECIAL EVENT — Shall mean a private or public sporting, cultural,
business, charitable or other type of unique activity, including but not
limited to, a party, celebration, fair, festival, fundraiser, promotion,
show, concert, presentation, entertainment or film production,
occurring for a limited or fixed duration.
b. Inspection Required.
1. No food vehicle shall be operated without first having filed an
application for an inspection which has been approved by the
Bureau of Fire Prevention.
§ 11-3.12 LYNDHURST CODE § 11-3.13
1:422
2. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall issue a checklist containing the
specific requirements for approval of an application for an
inspection. The checklist shall be made available to the public.
3. Nothing contained in this subsection shall limit the authority of the
Bureau of Fire Prevention to inspect a food vehicle at any time to
determine if it meets the specific requirements contained in the
checklist.
c. Application for Annual Inspection: Certificate of Approval.
1. A food vendor shall apply to the Bureau of Fire Prevention for an
inspection.
2. The application fee shall be $50. Payment of the fee shall be made
at the time the application is filed.
3. If a vendor's application is denied for failure to satisfy inspection
requirements, the vendor may file an application for a reinspection.
No fee will be required for the first reinspection, provided that the
application is filed within 30 days of the denial. An application fee
shall be required for all other reinspections.
4. A certificate of approval shall be issued to a vendor whose
application for an inspection has been approved by the Bureau of
Fire Prevention. The certificate of approval shall be valid until
December 31 of the year in which it was issued.
5. A certificate of approval shall be displayed prominently in or on the
food vehicle.
6. An application for an inspection to renew a certificate of approval
shall be filed with the application fee prior to December 31 of the
year in which it was issued. A vendor will be entitled to continue
the operation of a food vehicle during the period that a timely
application for renewal is pending.
d. Special Events.
1. A food vehicle for which an inspection is required shall not be
operated at a special event unless an application for an inspection
with the application fee is filed no later than 14 days before the
event and a certificate of approval is issued before the day of the
event.
2. The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have the discretion to accept
an application for an inspection for a special event that is filed later
than 14 days before the event, provided that the vendor pays an
additional late service fee of $50. The Bureau of Fire Prevention
shall have the discretion to waive the late service fee in appropriate
circumstances.
e. Checklist Requirements for Food Vehicle Inspection.
§ 11-3.13 GENERAL § 11-3.13
1:423
1. A vendor shall satisfy the following inspection requirements which
shall appear on a checklist issued by the Bureau of Fire Prevention:
(a) Fire Extinguisher.
(1) The fire extinguisher required to be mounted in a food
vehicle shall be an ABC type, minimum of one five lb.
extinguisher.
(2) A K type of fire extinguisher shall be required and
mounted in the food vehicle if the vendor is using any oils
or anything that could cause a grease vapor.
(b) Hood Suppression System. A hood suppression system that
meets or exceeds National Fire Protection Association
standards for ventilation control and fire prevention (NFPA 96)
shall be required for any food vehicle that creates or emits
grease vapors.
(c) Propane Storage and Appliances.
(1) Propane hoses shall be free of leaks.
(2) Propane cylinders mounted on the outside of a food vehicle
shall be placed and secured in a storage cabinet.
(3) A "no smoking" sign shall be prominently displayed in the
area of propane cylinders.
(d) Generator.
(1) A generator shall be free of leaks or sparks emanating
from the exhaust system.
(2) A generator shall discharge exhausts in a satisfactory
manner.
(3) Exhausts shall not back up into the food vehicle.
(e) Smoke Detectors in Food Trucks.
(1) Smoke detectors shall be placed between the cooking area
and the driver's cab.
(2) Smoke detectors shall be in operation while the food truck
is in motion.
(f) Carbon Monoxide (CO) Detectors in Food Trucks and Food
Trailers.
(1) Food truck: The CO detector shall be mounted between the
cooking area and driver's cab.
(2) Food trailer: The CO detector shall be mounted in the area
where the generator is located.
§ 11-3.13 LYNDHURST CODE § 11-3.13
1:424
§ 11-4. IDENTIFICATION AND MARKING OF BUILDINGS OF TRUSS
TYPE CONSTRUCTION.
§ 11-4.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2103, § I; Ord. #2596]
The purpose of this section is to identify and mark buildings of truss type
construction in order to safeguard the occupants and emergency personnel
in the event of fire or other hazardous conditions. The provisions of this
section shall apply to the owner/occupant of any building or structure of
truss type construction as determined by the fire official.
§ 11-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2103, § II; Ord. #2418, § I; Ord. #2596]
As used in this section:
BUILDING STRUCTURE — Shall mean used or intended for supporting
or sheltering any and every use or occupancy educational, governmental,
residential and any other place of public assembly.
FIRE OFFICIAL — Shall mean the Township of Lyndhurst's fire official or his
designated representative as defined by N.J.A.C. 5:70 Uniform Fire Code.
OWNER — Shall mean any natural person, partnership, corporation,
governmental agency or any other entity holding title to the property in
question.
TRUSS TYPE CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean a single plane framework
of individual structural members connected at their ends to form a series
(3) The CO detector shall be in operation at all times.
(g) Propane Gas Sensor.
(1) Food trucks and trailers: A propane gas sensor shall be
mounted in the area of the propane cylinders and inside of
the cooking area.
(2) Nothing contained in this subsection shall limit the
authority of the Bureau of Fire Prevention to supplement
checklist requirements in a particular case in the interest
of public safety.
f. Violations.
1. Violation of any provision of this subsection shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $2,000, imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 90 days, or community service for a period
not to exceed 90 days, or any combination thereof, as determined
by the Municipal Court of the Township.
2. Each day that a violation of this subsection exists shall be
considered a separate offense, and shall be subject to a separate
penalty for each day of the violation as determined by the
Municipal Court of the Township.
§ 11-3.13 GENERAL § 11-4.2
1:425
of triangles to span a distance greater than would be possible with the
individual members on their own.
§ 11-4.3. General Regulations. [Ord. #2103, § III; Ord. #2596]
§ 11-4.4. Fees. [Ord. #2103, § IV; Ord. #2596]
§ 11-4.5. Penalties. [Ord. #2103, § V; Ord. #2418, § I; Ord. #2596]
§ 11-5. IDENTIFICATION AND MARKING OF BUILDINGS WITH
PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV) SYSTEMS SOLAR PANELS.
§ 11-5.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2881-13]
The purpose of this section is to identify and mark buildings with PV
systems installed on roofs in order to safeguard the occupants and
emergency personnel in the event of fire or other hazardous conditions. The
provisions of this section shall apply to the owner/occupant of any building
or structure of truss type construction as determined by the fire official.
a. The section shall be enforced by the fire official as required by the
board of commissioners of the Township of Lyndhurst.
b. Upon inspection and identification of a building of truss type
construction, the owner shall be notified by the fire official of the
requirements of this section in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code
of the State of New Jersey.
c. Upon notification, the owner shall be required to permanently affix an
approved 12 inch by 18 inch reflective truss construction identification
logo on the building. The exact location shall be determined by the fire
official. The identification logo shall be properly installed within 10 days
of receipt of written notice. The initial identification logo will be
supplied by the fire official's office.
d. The owner shall be required to maintain the identification logo at the
designated location on the building. Missing or damaged identification
logos shall be reported to the fire official immediately. Replacement
shall be made within 10 days of written notice from the fire official.
a. One time registration fee shall be $75.
b. Replacement logos shall be based on the current cost per unit.
c. The board of commissioners by resolution may waive fees for nonprofit
and charitable organizations.
a. Penalties shall be assessed in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code,
State of New Jersey N.J.A.C. 5:70, "Failure to Comply."
b. Noncompliance, $100 per day in addition to initial penalty assessment.
§ 11-4.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 11-5.2
1:426
§ 11-5.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2881-13]
As used in this section:
BUILDING STRUCTURE — Shall mean used or intended for supporting
or sheltering any and every use or occupancy educational, governmental,
residential and any other place of public assembly.
FIRE OFFICIAL — Shall mean the Township of Lyndhurst's fire official or his
designated representative as defined by N.J.A.C. 5:70 Uniform Fire Code.
OWNER — Shall mean nay natural person, partnership, corporation,
governmental agency or any other entity holding title to the property in
question.
PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEMS — Shall mean systems which use solar panels to
convert sunlight into electricity. A system is made up of one or more solar
panels, usually a controller or power converter, and the interconnections
and mounting for the other components. A small PV system may provide
energy to a single consumer, or to an isolated device like a lamp or a
weather instrument. Large grid-connected PV systems can provide the
energy needed by many customers.
§ 11-5.3. General Regulations. [Ord. #2881-13]
§ 11-5.4. Fees. [Ord. #2881-13]
a. The section shall be enforced by the fire official as required by the
board of commissioners of the Township of Lyndhurst.
b. Upon inspection and identification of a building upon which PV systems
are installed, the owner shall be notified by the fire official of the
requirements of this section in accordance with the Uniform Fire Code
of the State of New Jersey.
c. Upon notification, the owner shall be required to permanently affix an
approved twelve-inch by eighteen-inch reflective PV system
identification logo on the building. The exact location shall be
determined by the fire official. The identification logo shall be properly
installed within 10 days of receipt of written notice. The initial
identification logo will be supplied by the fire official's office.
d. The owner shall be required to maintain the identification logo at the
designated location on the building. Missing or damaged identification
logos shall be reported to the fire official immediately. Replacement
shall be made within 10 days of written notice from the fire official.
a. One time registration fee shall be $75.
b. Replacement logos shall be based on the current cost per unit.
c. The board of commissioners by resolution may waive fees for nonprofit
and charitable organizations.
§ 11-5.2 GENERAL § 11-5.5
1:427
§ 11-5.5. Penalties. [Ord. #2881-13]
Chapter 12
SEWER AND WATER
[Editor's Note: See also § 2-29, Sewer Utility.]
§ 12-1. WATER DEPARTMENT.
§ 12-1.1A. (Reserved)32
§ 12-1.1B. Created. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord. #1746; Ord. #2809-11]
A water department is hereby created and established in and for the
Township of Lyndhurst in the County of Bergen.
The department shall be under the supervision, management and control of
the township board of commissioners. Such supervision, management and
control is hereby assigned as follows:
§ 12-1.2. Definitions. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord. #1746; Ord.
#2911-15]
As used in this section:
AWWA — Shall mean the American Water Works Association.
CONSUMER — Shall mean a person, firm or corporation including an
association or combination of persons, firms or corporations, by which, or
for which, application is made to the water department for water service;
or which, according to the records of the water department or because
of ownership of property, is responsible for use of water and distribution
facilities at a location to which water is now or thereafter being furnished
by the township.
CORPORATION COCK — Shall mean a valve installed at a water main to
control the flow of water in a water service connection.
a. Penalties shall be assessed in accordance with the Uniform Fire Safety
Code, State of New Jersey N.J.A.C. 5:70, "Failure to Comply."
b. Noncompliance, $100 per day in addition to initial penalty assessment.
a. Finance and accounts to the director of revenue and finance; and
b. Operation, construction and maintenance to the director of public
works.
32.Editor’s Note: Former subsection 12-1.1A, Water Utility, containing portions of Ordinance
No. 2809-11 was deleted by Ord. No. 2911-15.
§ 11-5.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 12-1.2
1:428
CURB STOP — Shall mean a valve with valve box to be installed on the
water service line between the curb and the sidewalk where such a space
exists, for ease of turn on and turn off during emergency repairs.
DISCONTINUANCE OF WATER SERVICE — Shall mean the physical
disconnecting of the water service connection to the premises.
MAIN or MAINS — Shall mean all pipes other than supply pipes and service
pipes used for conveying water to or distributing water in the township.
METER RATES — Shall mean rates or prices to be charged for water based
upon the quantity consumed as measured by an approved water meter.
OWNER — Shall mean any person, firm, corporation or association, owning
any property or premises which is or prospectively can be supplied with the
township water, or its duly authorized agent.
PREMISES — Shall mean a building used for either business or residential
purposes or both, together with the land appurtenant thereto, and such
outbuildings as are used exclusively in connection therewith or any part of
a building with the land appurtenant thereto when sold as a separate unit.
PRIVATE FIRE HYDRANT — Shall mean a fire hydrant located on privately
owned property which private water main is supplied by the Township's
water supply.
PRIVATE FIRE SERVICE — Shall mean piping extending from the water
supply main in the street to the premises for purposes of fire protection or
fire sprinklers.
PRIVATE WATER MAIN — Shall mean water mains not owned by the
Township of Lyndhurst supplying water to privately owned property
including industrial complexes which are connected to the Township owned
water supply.
SERVICE PIPE — Shall mean a pipe extending from curb stop into privately
owned property for supplying water.
WATER METER — Shall mean a device for measuring the quantity of water
passing through a pipe at a given location.
WATER SERVICE CONNECTION — Shall mean and consist of a connecting
pipe between a street main and between the adjacent curb and sidewalk,
together with a main corporation cock and a curb stop valve and valve box.
WATER SUPPLY MAINS — Shall mean water main pipes used for convoying
and distributing water throughout the Township of Lyndhurst.
WATER SYSTEM OPERATOR — Shall mean a duly licensed W-3 operator as
determined by the state department of health.
§ 12-1.3. Nonliability for Damages. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord. #1746]
The water department reserves and has the right to suspend temporarily
water service under emergency conditions or to make repairs. Under such
conditions the consumers to be affected by such suspension shall be notified
so far as it is practicable to do so but the water department shall assume
§ 12-1.2 GENERAL § 12-1.3
1:429
no responsibility for damages or inconveniences resulting from such
suspension or be liable therefor.
§ 12-1.4. Fee; Water Turned On, Turn Off. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord.
#1746; Ord. #2911-15]
The water shall be turned on and admitted into the premises of consumers
only by the water operator or someone under his direction, and when the
supply shall have been cut off for any purpose except repairs not chargeable
to the consumer, it shall not be turned on again until all bills in arrears,
and all other charges are paid, including a fee of $10. The Township of
Lyndhurst Water Department shall not be required to shut off water services
and the Lyndhurst Water Department shall not maintain or repair any
valves, mains, service connections or apparatus located on or in private
water mains.
§ 12-1.5. Prohibition Against Tampering. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord.
#1746; Ord. #2620, § 1]
No person shall in any manner, without a permit from the water
department, connect or disconnect, tamper or interfere with any property of
the water department such as pipes or conduits, meters, hydrants, valves,
instruments or other accessories or property. Any person tampering with
a meter, service pipe connection or fire hydrant, or willfully injuring any
property of the township belonging to the water supply system shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $2,000, plus the cost
of repair, or by imprisonment for any term not exceeding 90 days or both.
§ 12-1.6. Right of Access to Premises; Right to Terminate Water
Supply for Failure to Repair or Relocate. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord.
#1746; Ord. #2911-15]
a. The water department shall have a right of access to any consumer's
premises and to all equipment and property of the water department at
reasonable times for the purpose of reading meters or inspecting,
repairing or replacing equipment used in connection with the supply of
water or for the removal of equipment or property.
b. The consumer shall obtain from the water department all necessary
permissions from tenants or others needed for access to equipment or
property. Consumers shall not permit access to meters or other water
department property except by authorized employees of the water
department or other authorized state or local inspectors. If any meter in
excess of 5/8 inches is found to be out of order or if any meter is in an
inaccessible location the water operator shall immediately notify the
consumer to repair or relocate accessibility and if such meter is not
repaired or relocated by the owner within seven days from the date of
such notice the township water department is authorized to shut off the
water until necessary repairs or relocating are made. The water meter
shall be located at an outside wall of the structure.
§ 12-1.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 12-1.7
1:430
§ 12-1.7. Water Supply to Be Metered. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord.
#1746; Ord. #2216, § 111]
§ 12-1.8. Meter Accuracy; Fee to Consumer for Test; Determination
of Consumption by Previous Average Registration. [Ord. #1424,
§ 19; Ord. #1746; Ord. #2124, § 1; Ord. #2216, § IV; Ord. #2279, § 1;
Ord. #2474, § I; Ord. #2590, § I; Ord. #2659, § 1; Ord. #2911-15]
a. All water supplied to each consumer by the township, including
temporary service which can only be obtained upon the express
approval of the water department, shall be metered.
b. A water meter shall be installed and a fee paid pursuant to Chapter
12-1.24a before water is made available for regular use.
a. A consumer may test the accuracy of a meter at any time by drawing
water until the meter registers one or more cubic feet. Each cubic foot
of water equals approximately 7 1/2 gallons and weighs 62 1/2 pounds.
b. Tests at the request of a consumer will be made for accuracy of water
meters by the water department upon payment of a fee based upon the
following schedule for such tests:
Meter Size Test Fee Additional
5/8" $65
3/4" and 1" $90
1 1/2" and 2" $125
3" and greater $500 per inch $300 for meter in vault
or pit
Flow tests of fire hydrants shall be done upon payment of a fee of $350
per such test.
c. All meters shall be tested periodically by the water department. Meters
having a size of three inches or greater will be tested annually by the
Township of Lyndhurst on site. All other meters will be tested and
replaced every 10 to 15 years as is necessary. All repairs and
replacements of the meters will be performed by the Township of
Lyndhurst.
d. Testing, replacement or repair of water meters may be ordered at any
time at the discretion of the water operator.
e. No water meter shall be placed in service or remain in service if, after
test, it registers more than 102% or less than 98% of AWWA rating.
f. In case of a disputed water bill which involves the accuracy of the water
meter, such meter shall be promptly tested. If an error in the
registration in excess of 2% is found to exist, then the water bill will be
adjusted accordingly, but the adjustment shall apply only to the water
used since the date of the water meter reading. Where a meter has
§ 12-1.7 GENERAL § 12-1.8
1:431
§ 12-1.9. Location of Meters, Outside Remote Meter Reader. [Ord.
#1424, § 19; Ord. #1746; Ord. #2620, § I; Ord. #2911-15]
§ 12-1.10. Water Rates Established by the Township of Lyndhurst
Board of Commissioners. [Ord. #1621; Ord. #1716; Ord. #1746;
Ord. #1825, § 1; Ord. #2026, § 1; Ord. #2123, § I; Ord. #2292, § I;
Ord. #2379, § I; Ord. #2465, § 1; Ord. #2590, § I; Ord. #2620, § I;
Ord. #2659, § I; Ord. #2890-13; Ord. #2896-13; Ord. #2905-14;
amended 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2979-17]
ceased to register altogether, water consumption may be determined by
the previous average registration while the water meter was in working
order or upon the best information available.
a. The location provided by a property owner for a meter shall be readily
accessible for reading and maintenance purposes and shall provide
adequate protection against damage to the meter. All meters hereafter
placed in buildings shall be located on an exterior wall of the structure,
or on the cellar floor as near as possible to the point of entrance of the
service, in a clean, safe, dry place, not subject to variation in
temperature, easily accessible for maintenance, installation or
disconnecting and for reading, and of a type suitable for the purpose
and location. When no suitable location for the meter can be obtained in
a building or when a building is distant from the street line or curb line,
the consumer may be required to provide a watertight pit, chamber or
vault for the meter near the property line. The consumer shall take all
proper precaution to protect the meter from injury, frost and damage
from hot water or steam. The owners of the premises shall be liable for
all damages or loss to the township from failure to properly care for and
protect the meters.
b. Plumbing at the meter shall be arranged so that the water department
will not be required to do any pipe fittings but will only have to connect
the meter by means of unions already in place. The union connection
and any other piping required for installing the meter shall be installed
at the expense of the owner and shall remain as part of the permanent
piping of the building.
c. A stopcock or gate valve shall be placed in the service line on the street
side of and near the meter, and a stopcock or gate valve on the opposite
thereof. A suitable check valve shall be placed between the stopcock or
gate valve and the meter if required by the water department.
d. The size and make of a given water meter shall be determined by the
owner or their representative.
e. All new property owners in the township shall install a new outside
remote water meter reader at his expense and all work to be done by a
licensed plumber. All water meters and outside remote readers shall be
installed before final plumbing and occupancy approvals are issued.
§ 12-1.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 12-1.10
1:432
a. Rates.
1. Effective January 1, 2018, all water taken or consumed through the
Township of Lyndhurst Water Utility shall be charged at a rate of
$3.90 per hundred cubic feet per each three-month period,
provided that the minimum quarterly water charge to any one
consumer shall not be less than $33 for each three-month period.
The minimum quarterly water charge shall include a minimum
consumption charge of a minimum of $12 per quarter or 3.077
hundred CF consumption (at $3.90 in 2018 and thereafter), and
said minimum water charge shall also include the capital
maintenance charge pursuant to Subsection b below.
2. Effective January 1, 2019, all the water taken or consumed through
the Township of Lyndhurst Water Utility shall be charged at a rate
of $4 per hundred cubic feet per each three-month period, provided
that the minimum charge to any one consumer shall not be less
than $35 for each three-month period, subject to the Township
Board of Commissioners making a change to the rate at any time by
ordinance or resolution.
3. Effective January 1, 2019, the minimum quarterly water charge
shall include a minimum consumption charge of $13 per quarter or
3.25 hundred CF (at $4 in 2019 and thereafter), and said minimum
water charge of $35 per quarter shall include the capital
maintenance charge pursuant to Subsection b below.
b. In addition to the above charge for water taken or consumed, there
shall be levied an annual capital and maintenance charge, to be billed
quarterly, in accordance with the schedule set forth below. In
consideration for levying such service charge, the Township assumes
full cost for the maintenance and repair of any water mains (the piping
system in the public right-of-way) and water meters without any
additional cost to the consumer for maintenance and repair, but shall
not include meter replacement costs.
Minimum Charge for Maintenance and Repair (Quarterly-
Residential)
Meter Size
(inches) Current
Effective
January 1,
2018
Effective
January 1,
2019
5/8 $19 $21 $22
3/4 $21 $23 $24
1 $28 $30 $31
1 1/2 $160 $165 $170
2 $250 $260 $270
3 $500 $510 $525
§ 12-1.10 GENERAL § 12-1.10
1:433
§ 12-1.11. Separate Meters for Lawn Sprinkler Systems. [Ord.
#1424, § 19; Ord. #1746; Ord. #2911-15]
Water supplied to self-contained or permanent lawn sprinkling systems,
whether above or below the surface of the ground, shall be separately
metered. Such systems shall be divided into zones so that no more than
50 gallons per minute shall be permitted to flow into the system at any
one time. The installation and cost of the new water meter shall be at the
owner's expense and installed by a licensed plumber.
§ 12-1.12. Bills Rendered Quarterly; Fine for Late Payment; Time
Allowed and Manner of Objection. [Ord. #1600; Ord. #1746; Ord.
#1846, § I; Ord. #1855, §§ I, II; Ord. 2379, § II]
All bills for water shall be rendered four times each year for all water
consumed during the preceding three-month period and if the same not
be paid on or before the 30th day after the date stamped on the bill
interest equal to 18% per annum will be added. The three-month period
shall end on the first day of April, July, October and January in each year.
Any consumer objecting to a bill rendered must communicate his objection
in writing to the water department within 15 days after the date of the bill
and any complaint made thereafter the expiration of the 15 days will not
be considered. Where a water service connection has been installed by the
water department and has not been previously paid for, the full cost of the
service connection shall be paid for by the owner when service is desired.
The water department shall determine if any previously installed service
connection is adequate for a new homeowner service, and if not, a fee will
be required for the installation of a new service.
Minimum Charge for Maintenance and Repair (Quarterly-
Residential)
Meter Size
(inches) Current
Effective
January 1,
2018
Effective
January 1,
2019
4 $765 $800 $815
6 $1,650 $1,700 $1,735
Note: The above quarterly minimum maintenance and repair charge
shall be added to the minimum quarterly water consumption charge,
$12 for 2018 and $13 for 2019, to determine the total minimum
quarterly water charge (for example, $33 for 2018 and $35 for 2019).
c. There shall be levied and collected annually by the collector of taxes at
the same time and in the same manner as the money raised in the
township for other purposes as are assessed, levied and collected, a
hydrant tax equal to $15 for each hydrant in the township which tax
shall be paid to the collector of taxes and be, by him, placed to the
credit of the water system.
§ 12-1.10 LYNDHURST CODE § 12-1.13
1:434
§ 12-1.13. Complaints in Writing. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord. #1746;
Ord. #2620, § 1]
Complaints concerning the character of the service furnished or the reading
of meters or of bills rendered shall be made to the water department in
writing. A record of complaints will be maintained by the water department
to show the names and addresses of complainants, dates and nature of
complaints and the action taken thereon.
§ 12-1.14. Single Curb Box; No Interconnection Allowed Between
Water Supplied and Water from Another Source. [Ord. #1424, § 19;
Ord. #1746; Ord. #2620, § 1]
§ 12-1.15. Prohibition Against Unauthorized Use of Hydrant. [Ord.
#1424, § 19; Ord. #1746; Ord. #2620, § 1; Ord. #2659, § 1; Ord.
#2911-15]
§ 12-1.16. Prohibition Against Tapping Mains; Nonliability for Any
Leak, Break or Failure Beyond Control of Water Department. [Ord.
#1424, § 19; Ord. #1746; Ord. #2620, § 1]
a. Only one house and its appurtenances will be supplied from a single
curb box and when the service pipe has been laid to the curb box in
front of any specified premises, it shall not be diverted therefrom the
supply any other premises even when the ownership may be the same.
b. No cross connection or interconnection between the pipe lines or other
facilities of the water department and other pipe lines or facilities
supplied with water from other sources shall be permitted without the
consent of the director of public works and the water operator. For any
violation of the provisions of this section the supply of water will be cut
off.
a. No person shall take the water from a public fire hydrant hose plug,
street washer or fountain pipe except for fire fighting purpose or use by
the fire department. No public fire hydrant shall be used for sprinkling
streets or lawns, flushing sewers or gutters, or for any other purposes
not connected with the fighting of the fire except with the approval of
the water operator. It shall be unlawful to cover, hide or obstruct any
fire hydrant with shrubs, fences, snow or objects. Any person found
violating this subsection shall be punished by a fine up to $1,000.
b. Private fire hydrants shall be inspected at least once a year and a flow
test shall be performed every five years. Inspection and flow tests shall
be done in accordance with the AWWA Installation, Field Testing and
Maintenance of Fire Hydrants (M17) manual. The Township of
Lyndhurst Fire Official shall have authority to enforce this testing and
flow test section.
a. No one except the water department employees shall tap the water
mains or the supply pipes and no one except the water operator or some
§ 12-1.13 GENERAL § 12-1.16
1:435
§ 12-1.17. Discontinuance of Service for Tampering; Fee to Restore
Service. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord. #1746; Ord. #2620, § 1]
The tampering with or interfering with, the operation of any water meter
will be regarded as an act of bad faith and the water will be shut off for
violation of this subsection and will not again be turned on until the water
therefor used shall be paid for besides a fee of $10 for turning the water on
or off and assurance satisfactory to the water operator, be given that the act
will not be repeated. No person shall have or maintain a connection with the
water main unless his premises be supplied with an approved water meter.
Violation of this subsection not to exceed $500.
§ 12-1.18. Notification of Discontinuance Required; Reasons for
Discontinuance. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord. #1476; Ord. #2344, § 1;
Ord. #2620, § 1]
person under his direction shall turn the water on or off at any curb box.
No agent or employee of the water department shall have the authority
to bind it by any promise, agreement, or representation which is in
violation of the rules and regulations set forth herein or any other rules
and regulations hereinafter promulgated.
b. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall, on
conviction of the first offense, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500
or by imprisonment for any term not exceeding 90 days or both.
c. The water department undertakes to use reasonable care and diligence
in providing a constant supply of water through its pipes, but it does not
undertake to render any special service or to maintain any fixed or
definite quantity or pressure. In the event of the occurrence of any leak,
break or failure in the water system or any accident or injury connected
with the system caused by the act of God, the public enemy or by other
cause without the fault and beyond the control of the water department,
the township shall not be liable for damages resulting therefrom.
a. Should a consumer for any reason wish to have water service
discontinued, the water department must be notified in writing at least
two working days in advance of the discontinuance of service, except in
case of emergency.
b. Water service may be discontinued by the water department for any of
the following reasons without prior notice:
1. Vacation of the premises.
2. Neglect to make or renew advance deposits as required.
3. Interference with or molesting any municipally owned pipe, meter,
valve, or other property.
§ 12-1.16 LYNDHURST CODE § 12-1.18
1:436
§ 12-1.19. Charges for Discontinuance of Service. [Ord. #1424, § 19;
Ord. #1746; Ord. #2474, § I; Ord. #2620, § 1; Ord. #2911-15]
Charges by the water department for discontinuance of water services at
the request or upon the fault of the consumer shall be $100. No water
account shall be made inactive until the discontinuance of water service is
completed and the water meter removed.
Water supply shall be renewed when the reason for discontinuance shall
have been removed and upon payment of any unpaid charges due from a
consumer.
§ 12-1.20. Plumbing System to Conform to Plumbing Code. [Ord.
#1424, § 19; Ord. #1746; Ord. #2620, § 1]
The consumer's plumbing system starting at the curb box shall conform to
the requirements of the plumbing code of the township.
§ 12-1.21. Prohibition Against Use of Nonrecirculating Air
Conditioning Systems. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord. #1746; Ord. #2620,
§ 1]
The use of air conditioning systems utilizing water without the provisions
for recirculation is prohibited.
§ 12-1.22. Application; Water Supply for Construction Purposes;
Number of Connections Per Unit. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord. #1746;
Ord. #2474, § I; Ord. #2620, § 1; Ord. #2659, § 1; Ord. #2911-15]
4. Refusal of access to the water department for purpose of inspection
or reading of meters or the removal, repair or replacement of
meters on any other property.
5. Failure on the part of the consumer to maintain in proper working
order that portion of the water system for which the consumer is
responsible.
6. Where two or more consumers are supplied through a single
service line, any violation of the rules of the water departments
with reference to either or any of such consumers shall be deemed
in violation as to all, and the water department may take such
action as is appropriate in the case of a single consumer.
7. Access must be gained a minimum of once a year for meter reading.
a. An application shall be made in writing to the water department and a
prescribed fee paid before such connection with meter shall be
installed. Upon approval of the application and the payment of the fee
the water department shall install the new connection.
The applicant shall consult with the water department regarding the
size of a new water service connection.
§ 12-1.18 GENERAL § 12-1.22
1:437
§ 12-1.23. Installation Fee. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord. #1746; Ord.
#2216, § 1; Ord. #2474, § 1; Ord. #2504, § I; Ord. #2512, § I; Ord.
#2562, § 1; Ord. #2620, § 1; Ord. #2659, § 1; Ord. #2727, § 1; Ord.
#2911-15]
b. Water for construction purposes, except on a plot of ground or on
premises already supplied with metered water, shall be applied for and
such fees as may be prescribed shall be paid prior to the use of any
water. Water for building construction shall not be taken from the fire
hydrants of the township without written approval from the water
department. Water for construction purposes shall not be taken directly
from the curbstop but at a point at least 10 feet inside the curb line. The
consumer shall protect and be responsible for protecting the curbstop
and curb box from damage at all times.
c. A flat rate, depending upon the type and size of construction shall be
made for water used in building construction with a charge of $20 per
week for residential construction and $200 per week for commercial
construction or tank filling.
d. A division of water may regulate the purpose for which the water is
used during construction, and may require the water to be metered.
e. Only one service connection shall be supplied to a single building or to a
group of buildings occupied as a unit, provided however that any
business establishment occupying street level premises and having a
separate entrance thereto may be supplied with a separate service
connection. For the purpose of this section double houses having a
solid, vertical partition wall shall be considered as two separate
buildings. Water meters shall be located on an exterior wall of
structure.
a. The township water department shall charge the fees set forth below
for the installation of new service lines to be installed by the water
department of the township:
Size
Short Tap w/out
Excavation
Long Tap w/out
Excavation
3/4" $1,260 $1,440
1" $1,500 $1,680
1 1/2" $1,740 $1,920
2" $1,980 $2,160
Water taps above two inches shall be the responsibility of the contractor
for the property owner who shall also be subject to a reasonable
inspection fee charged by the township engineer.
§ 12-1.22 LYNDHURST CODE § 12-1.23
1:438
Size
Short Tap with
Excavation
Long Tap with
Excavation
3/4" $4,455 $4,620
1" $4,675 $4,840
1 1/2" $4,895 $5,060
2" $5,115 $5,280
Water taps on pipes greater than two inches shall be the responsibility
of the contractor for the property owner who shall also be subject to
a reasonable inspection and plan review fee charged by the township
engineer. An escrow account shall be established prior to the
commencement of work.
Meters - All Remote
5/8" with couplings $160
3/4" with couplings $190
1" with flanges $260
1 1/2" with flanges $480
2" with flanges/strainer $630
3" with flanges/strainer $3,190
4" with flanges/strainer $4,620
6" with flanges/strainer $6,550
8" with flanges/strainer $8,200
10" with flanges/strainer $9,000
b. In addition to the charges in the schedule of fees, the water department
shall determine the cost incurred by the township for removing and
replacing of concrete and asphalt on state highways, county roads, and
municipal roads together with any special equipment, which costs shall
be paid by the owner of the premises wherein the water service shall be
installed. The water department shall have the exclusive right to
determine whether any previously installed service connection is
adequate for the new service. If not, the water department may
determine that a new service must be installed and a fee be paid at the
rate set forth hereinabove. The full cost of any meter not listed herein
shall be paid for by the customer.
c. In newly developed areas where water service connections have been
installed by the developer, a fee shall be charged by the water
department for connecting the service, which fee shall be determined
by resolution of the board of commissioners.
d. No hydrant where possible shall be moved or removed, at a property
owner's request until a fee to be determined by the water department
§ 12-1.23 GENERAL § 12-1.23
1:439
for such removal or new installation be paid for to the water
department.
e. Road Opening Permit. No road shall be opened for a sewer, gas, water
or any underground utility connection until after the expiration of two
years from the date that the township paved said road. In addition to
the above charges, the owner shall be charged the sum of $400 to open
the road. The excavator is responsible for closing the road and applying
appropriate asphalt or concrete upon completion of the work. The
excavator shall pave the street from the center line thence 10 feet in
either direction of the trench to the curbline. All backfill shall be
completed with quarry process or crushed stone compacted every two
feet depth with appropriate compacting equipment. The contractor
shall post with the township a performance and maintenance bond
totaling $5,000 which shall be refunded to the contractor one year after
the completion of the work provided that no maintenance and/or
repairs were required to the site.
f. Commercial meter maintenance fees. The owners of commercial
property shall be charged a monthly maintenance fee based upon the
following schedule. In addition to the water consumption fee, of $3.90
for 2018 and $4 for 2019 per hundred CF, stipulated in Subsection
12-1.10 a and b, commercial water users shall pay the following
maintenance fee: [Amended 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2979-17]
Minimum Charge for Maintenance and Repair (Quarterly-
Commercial)
Meter Size
(inches) Current
Effective
January 1,
2018
Effective
January 1,
2019
5/8 $30 $32 $34
3/4 $45 $47 $49
1 $68.40 $71 $73
1 1/2 $136.80 $150 $165
2 $216 $240 $270
3 $396 $420 $450
4 $684 $720 $750
6 $1,368 $1,450 $1,490
8 $2,160 $2,210 $2,260
Note: Previously the above charge was stated as a monthly charge.
The Township shall be responsible for the maintenance, repair and
replacement of all commercial meters. The monthly charge shall be
included in the periodic water bill to the property owner and shall be a
lien on the real property.
§ 12-1.23 LYNDHURST CODE § 12-1.24
1:440
§ 12-1.24. Right to Refuse to Connect. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord.
#1746; Ord. #2427, § I; Ord. #2620, § 1]
§ 12-1.25. Repairs to Be Made by Owner. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord.
#1746; Ord. #2620, § 1; Ord. #2911-15]
§ 12-1.26. Application Gives Consent for Inspection. [Ord. #1424,
§ 19; Ord. #1746; Ord. #2620, § 1]
The application for a water connection herein provided for, shall be taken in
all cases to be a consent by the applicant, owner or occupant to enter the
premises for inspection of the meter, pipes and appliances leading thereto
by the water department or other agent of the township.
§ 12-1.27. Laying of Service Connections. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord.
#1746; Ord. #2620, § 1]
All service connections shall be laid in a trench not less than 3 1/2 feet deep
from the main to the curb box and also from the curb box to the foundation
of the house or other structure. All service connections and water boxes
a. The water department may refuse to connect to any consumer's piping
system or to supply water to a system, if such system has not been
designed or installed in accordance with the plumbing code of the
township or if any parts of the piping system have not been installed at
sufficient depth to prevent freezing.
b. The water department shall not be responsible for any inadequacy of
water service, should the consumer make alterations, changes, or
additions to an existing system without notifying the water department
in advance of any proposed alterations, changes or additions.
c. The owner of any property to be used for residential purposes,
including multi-family dwellings shall be required to replace the
existing water service pipe and water service connection and install a
new water service pipe and connection from the building to the water
main located in the street. This section shall not apply to existing
residential or multi-family uses but shall be effective upon new
construction or major renovation of existing buildings.
a. The service pipe is to be kept in repair by the owner together with the
meters in excess of 5/8 inch, that there may be no leakage or
unnecessary waste. Where leaks exist the water operator will turn off
the water without notice, thought to be necessary, otherwise notice will
be given. If such leaks are not immediately repaired the water will
remain turned off until repairs are made.
b. Commercial service pipes and private fire service shall be the
responsibility of the premises owners to make the necessary repairs to
the pipes from the water supply mains to the premises at the owner's
expense.
§ 12-1.24 GENERAL § 12-1.27
1:441
shall be placed so as to be free from obstruction by vehicles, driveway, and
trees. No service connection or connections shall be laid from one house to
another.
§ 12-1.28. No Partial Payments Even if More Than One Occupant.
[Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord. #1746; Ord. #2620, § 1]
When more than one occupant of a building is supplied with water through
a single service connection, the bill for the whole supply furnished by such
single connection will be made to the owner in one amount and no partial
payments therefor accepted. In case of non-payment the water may be
shut off notwithstanding one or more of the occupants may have paid his
proportionate share to the owner.
§ 12-1.29. No Connection with Service Pipes Between the Main and
Meter. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord. #1746; Ord. #2620, § 1]
No connection whatever shall be made with the service pipes between
the main and the meter; after violation service will be discontinued to be
renewed only upon the terms made by the commissioner of department of
public works and/or water operator.
§ 12-1.30. Private Fire Service Connections. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord.
#1746; Ord. #2474, § I; Ord. #2620, § 1; Ord. #2659, § 1]
Private fire service. When in the judgment of the water department it is
practical, private fire service connections may be allowed for hydrants, hose
connections or fire sprinkler systems on private property. (A valve shall be
installed at the curb lines on all fire line services.) The property owner shall
pay a monthly charge to the township as follows:
Size of Service Monthly Charge
2" $13.20
4" $52.80
6" $120
8" $204
10" $300
12" $420
The monthly charge shall be included in the periodic water bill to the
property owner and shall be a lien on the real property.
§ 12-1.31. Prohibition Against Thawing, Fee for Inspection. [Ord.
#1424, § 19; Ord. #1746; Ord. #2620, § 1]
a. No company or person shall undertake the thawing of water service
pipes or mains by use of electric current without authorization and
supervision of the water department.
§ 12-1.27 LYNDHURST CODE § 12-1.31
1:442
§ 12-1.32. Installation of Outside Remote Water Meter Readers.
[Ord. #1679; Ord. #1746; Ord. #2216, § II; Ord. #2620, § 1; Ord.
#2911-15]
§ 12-2. DROUGHT AND WATER SHORTAGES.
§ 12-2.1. Finding and Purpose. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord. #1746]
By reason of the long continued unprecedented droughts that occur from
time to time in this area of the state which result in a dangerous lowering
of the township's potable water supply and because experience has
demonstrated that appeals for voluntary aid in water conservation are not
as effective as necessary, the board of commissioners find that the adoption
of this section is necessary for the public health and welfare and in public
interest.
§ 12-2.2. Water Emergency; Regulations. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord.
#1746]
Whenever the average amount of water in the reservoirs supplying the
township in any one month falls 20% below the average amount of water in
storage for the corresponding months of the five year period immediately
b. The services of the water department inspector shall be paid for at the
rate of $50 per hour by the company or individual to whose work he is
assigned.
a. Meter Reader to Be Purchased by Water Department. No outside
remote water meter readers shall be installed on any building or
structure in the township unless the outside remote water meter reader
shall have been purchased from the township water department.
b. Application for Purchase; Installation. Prior to the installation of a
remote water meter reader, the water consumer or licensed plumber
shall make application to the water department for the purchase of an
appropriate size outside remote water meter reader at a cost to be
determined by the water department. The remote outside water meter
reader may be installed by the purchaser for the building or structure
or a designated plumber on behalf of the water consumer provided that
before the operation of the outside remote water meter it be inspected
and accepted by the water department.
c. Charges. After acceptance of the installed outside remote water meter
reader by the water department the remote water meter readers shall
be maintained by the water department at no charge to the water
consumer.
d. New Construction. No permits for water meter installations shall be
issued by the water department for new construction wherein a water
meter shall be necessary unless provisions are made for the installation
or new construction for outside remote water meter reader.
§ 12-1.31 GENERAL § 12-2.2
1:443
preceding, the director of the department of public works may, for the
protection of health, safety and general welfare of the citizens and residents
of the township, proclaim the existence of a water emergency and prescribe
regulations to:
§ 12-2.3. Compliance Required. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord. #1746]
The proclamation of an emergency shall be conclusive of the fact of the
existence of such emergency and shall be binding upon all persons and
users upon the filing of the same in the office of the township clerk and
publication thereof at least once in the Commercial Leader, a newspaper
published and circulating in the township. The regulations set forth in
the proclamation and any subsequent regulations made and published as
aforesaid upon filing thereof in the office of the township clerk shall be
deemed to have the force and effect of regulations adopted under the
authority of this section, the same as if specifically incorporated and set
forth herein. Every owner, lessee, tenant and occupant of any building or
premises connected with the municipal water shall, upon the proclamation
and promulgation of the regulations of this article, conform thereto and
comply therewith in the use of water and the maintenance of the water
service connections and equipment for the purpose thereof.
§ 12-2.4. Duty to Prevent Waste of Water. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord.
#1746]
a. Prohibit the use of water from the municipal supply for any purpose not
necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public.
b. Allocate and prorate the available water supplies.
c. Reduce consumption by users.
d. Prevent waste for the period of duration of such emergency.
a. Every owner of buildings and premises connected with the municipal
water supply shall:
1. Maintain or cause to be maintained the water service pipes,
fixtures and connections in good order and repair in order to insure
that there shall be no waste of water; and
2. Forthwith, make or cause to be made necessary repairs to prevent
the waste of water.
b. Every lessee, tenant and occupant of any building or premises
connected with the municipal water supply shall:
1. Immediately notify the owner or his agent of any defective water
service pipes, fixtures or connections whereby water is being
wasted; and
§ 12-2.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 12-2.4
1:444
§ 12-2.5. Repairs by Township; Shutting Off Water Upon Owners
Failure to Make Repairs. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord. #1746]
Whenever an owner shall fail or refuse to make repairs so as to prevent the
waste of water, then the township shall have the power to make such repairs
and to charge the cost thereof to the owner in the same manner as other
water charges are made, as by the statutes and ordinances provided, or to
shut off the water from such premises until such repairs are made by the
owner.
§ 12-2.6. Violations. [Ord. #1424, § 19; Ord. #1746; Ord. #2620,
§ 1]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section
where no penalty has been set shall be punished by a fine not less than
$500 nor more than $2,000 or by imprisonment for any term not exceeding
90 days or both and each and every day that any violation continues shall
be deemed to be and shall be a separate offense separately punishable as
aforesaid.
§ 12-3. USE OF SEWERS.
§ 12-3.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1631, § 1; Ord. #1836, § 1]
As used in this section:
COMMERCIAL OR INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall mean all waste other than
waste generated by residential dwellings, office buildings, retail sales, and
nonprofit organizations.
§ 12-3.2. Permit Required for Commercial or Industrial Waste. [Ord.
#1631, § 2; Ord. #1838, § I]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the sanitary or
storm sewer system of the township any commercial or industrial waste
unless and until a permit is obtained as hereinafter provided.
§ 12-3.3. Application for Commercial/Industrial/Residential Sewer
Tap Inspection Fee. [Ord. #1631, § 3; Ord. #2216, § V; Ord. #2427,
§ II; Ord. #2474, § I]
2. Immediately notify the water department or police department of
any waste occurring by reason of defective water service pipes,
fixtures or connections.
c. Every owner and user of water shall, during the period of a water
emergency, be chargeable with notice of any waste of water due to
defective water service pipes, fixtures or connections and of the
regulations promulgated under the proclamation.
§ 12-2.4 GENERAL § 12-3.3
1:445
a. Permits may be granted by the township to make connections with the
sewer system for the discharge of industrial or commercial waste
consisting of water, or other fluid that will not deposit a sediment or
other obstruction, and which will also conform to the rules and
regulations, now or hereafter established by the "Joint Meeting, North
Arlington and Lyndhurst and Passaic Valley Sewerage Commission,"
concerning the receipt and the treatment of industrial or commercial
waste. A written application for such permit shall be made to the
department of public works upon forms provided for the purpose and
the applicant shall pay a fee of $50 to cover examination and processing
thereof, which application shall, among other things, state:
1. The full name and address of the applicant. If the applicant be a
partnership, the full names and addresses of all the partners shall
be stated; if a corporation, that fact shall be stated.
2. The nature of the business or industry of the applicant.
3. The location and dimensions of the premises upon which the
business or industry is to be or is carried on, together with a simple
plan showing the several boundary lines of the property and the
location and dimensions of all buildings thereon.
4. The character, chemical content, and physical and chemical
properties of the industrial or commercial waste proposed to be
deposited in the sewer system.
5. The approximate quantity of industrial or commercial waste to be
deposited in the sewer system.
6. The hours of each day, during which said industrial or commercial
waste will be deposited in the sewer system.
7. Where practicable data indicating the hours of peak, minimum and
mean-flow of such industrial or commercial waste into the sewer
systems, which data may, and at the special request of the
township, be submitted in the form of a chart or graph.
8. Such other or further information or data as the township may
require.
b. The township shall determine the terms and conditions, if any, for the
granting of the permit to deposit industrial or commercial waste in the
sewer system (should such applicant's application be approved by it),
and each and all of such terms and conditions shall be placed on the
written permit.
c. Any changes in the quantity, character, chemical content, or in the
physical and chemical properties of the industrial or commercial waste
of any holder of a special permit granted under this section which occur
after a permit has been granted or which occur in the interval between
§ 12-3.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 12-3.3
1:446
§ 12-3.4. Permit for Present Users. [Ord. #1631, § 4]
Any person who is already depositing industrial or commercial waste into
the sewer system of the township, shall within 30 days following written
request from the board of commissioners, file with the department of public
works a written application for a permit to continue to do so, which
application shall contain the matters and things specified in subsection
12-3.3.
§ 12-3.5. Precedent Not Established in Granting of Permits. [Ord.
#1631, § 5]
The granting of a permit by the board of commissioners to discharge
industrial or commercial waste into the sewer in any one or more instances
shall not be construed in such ways as to establish a precedent binding upon
the board of commissioners which will compel to grant future applications
for a permit to discharge the same or similar industrial or commercial waste
into the sewer system. Moreover, such permit, when granted, shall not
be deemed to be a continuing right to discharge industrial or commercial
waste into the sewer system, but instead such permit may be modified
or revoked at any time, in addition to other causes for modification or
revocation contained herein, by the board of commissioners when it is
determined by it that the terms and conditions of the permit have been
violated, or that the licensee's deposits in the sewer system will overburden
the filing of the application for a permit and the issuance of same shall
be forthwith reported in writing to the township.
d. Permits may be granted by the township to make connections with the
sewer system for the discharge of residential waste consisting of water,
or other fluid that will not deposit a sediment or other obstruction, and
which will also conform to the rules and regulations, now or hereafter
established by the "Joint Meeting, North Arlington and Lyndhurst and
Passaic Valley Sewerage Commission," concerning the receipt and the
treatment of residential waste as well as each and all of the provisions
of this section, as well as the rules and regulations of the "Passaic Valley
Sewerage Commission" concerning the receipt and treatment of
residential waste. A written application for such permit shall be made to
the department of public works upon forms provided for the purpose.
The applicant shall pay a fee of $100 to cover examination and
processing thereof, which application shall, among other things state:
1. The full name and address of the applicant.
e. The owner of any property to be used for residential purposes,
including multi-family dwellings shall be required to replace the
existing sewer lateral and construct and install a new sewer line from
the building and to connect same to the sewer main located in the
street. This section shall not apply to existing residential or multi-family
uses but shall be effective upon new construction or major renovation of
existing buildings.
§ 12-3.3 GENERAL § 12-3.5
1:447
its capacity or impair its operation to the detriment of other users of
the sewer system. In addition, such permit may be modified or revoked
for any other cause deemed good and sufficient therefor by the board of
commissioners.
§ 12-3.6. Separate Industrial Connections Required. [Ord. #1631,
§ 6]
Where deemed necessary by the board of commissioners the discharge of
industrial or commercial waste into the sewer system, when permitted by
the board of commissioners as herein provided for, shall be by a separate
connection from that used for the discharge of domestic waste.
§ 12-3.7. Rental Fee. [Ord. #1631, § 7; Ord. #1729, § 1; Ord. #1826;
Ord. #1836, § 2; Ord. #1856, § 1; Ord. #2590, § I; Ord. #2620, § 1]
§ 12-3.8. Water Meters Required on Private Wells. [Ord. #1631, § 8]
The owner of any property on which there is located a privately owned
water well, which is connected to a water system that is eventually
a. As it is the township's goal to encourage the conservation of water all
users of the sanitary sewer system of the township shall pay a rental fee
for the discharge of waste in the sanitary sewer system. Such fee shall
be based on the total water discharge into the sanitary sewer system, as
determined by water meter readings and/or well meter readings and/or
sanitary sewer meters or other data as taken by or supplied to the water
department and shall be paid in accordance with the following
schedule:
Water Utility Users
Up to 10,000 cubic feet per water utility user
unit per 1/3 of a year
No charge
Over 10,000 cubic feet per water utility water
user unit per 1/3 of a year
$2 per 100 cubic feet
Well users shall be billed at the rate of $0.50 per 100 cubic feet for the
entire amount of water metered. Properties with mixed residential and
nonresidential users shall only be entitled to the residential exemption
if there is a separate meter for the nonresidential user. Any user
utilizing a meter for discharge into the sanitary sewers shall be billed
upon the metered discharge.
b. Additional Fees. In addition to the fees prescribed in paragraph a
hereof the township shall charge such sewer fees as may be adopted by
resolution of the board of commissioners, as recommended by the
director of the department of public works, for services performed by
the employees of the township. All bills paid beyond the period of 30
days after they are due shall be paid together with interest at the rate of
18% per annum.
§ 12-3.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 12-3.8
1:448
discharged into the sanitary sewer system of the township shall install and
maintain water meters on the wells for the computation of the sewer rental
fee for such property.
Such water meter shall be of a type and design approved by the department
of public works and shall be installed by the owner at his own cost and
expense within 30 days after the adoption of this section.
§ 12-3.9. Road Opening Permit. [Ord. #1631, § 9; Ord. #1836, § 3]
§ 12-3.10. Inspections. [Ord. #1631, § 10]
Every person discharging industrial or commercial waste into the sewer
system by virtue of a permit granted by the board of commissioners for the
purpose, as provided for herein, shall at all times, permit the inspection
of waste by the agents or employees of the township, the "Joint Meeting,
North Arlington, Lyndhurst and the Passaic Valley Sewerage Commission,"
and, when ordered by the board of commissioners, shall cause such wastes
to be pretreated, so that same shall comply with the terms of this section,
the terms and conditions under which the permit was granted, the rules
and regulations of the "Joint Meeting, North Arlington and Lyndhurst" and
the rules and regulations of the "Passaic Sewerage Commission." Refusal to
permit inspection of waste or refusal to obey an order to treat same shall
be deemed a violation of this section sufficient to cause a revocation of the
permit.
§ 12-3.11. Installation of Grease Traps. [Ord. #1631, § 11]
Grease traps or other appliances may be necessary to protect the sewer
system from stoppage, shall be installed by the owners or the occupants
of any property at its or his expense when notified by the board of
commissioners in writing to make such installation. Upon failure or neglect
of any such owner or occupant to comply with such notice in addition to the
penalties hereinafter provided for violations of this section, the permit of
a. It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to make an excavation
in or tear up the surface of any township roads, without a permit in
writing from the department of public works.
b. Applicants shall specify on the permit the date on which the excavation
is to be made, the purpose of the opening, and the location. No
openings shall be made on Saturdays, Sundays, or holidays, unless an
emergency exists.
c. The department of public works will furnish an inspector from the time
the road is to be opened, until the backfilling with approved materials,
has been completed.
d. The permittee shall maintain safe crossing along the lines of the
opening and keep same properly guarded by suitable barricades and
warning signs during the day and by barricades and lights at night.
§ 12-3.8 GENERAL § 12-3.11
1:449
such person to discharge industrial or commercial waste into the township
sewer system may be revoked by the board of commissioners.
§ 12-3.12. Revocation of Permit; Violations. [Ord. #1631, §§ 12, 13]
§ 12-3.13. Board of Commissioners May Stop Industrial Discharge
Into Sewers. [Ord. #1631, § 14]
The right is reserved by the board of commissioners to stop and prevent
at any time the discharge into the sewers or laterals of any industrial or
commercial waste.
§ 12-3.14. Compliance with Standards Required. [Ord. #1631, § 15]
Disposal into the sewer system by any person shall not be permitted unless
the waste material is in compliance with standards promulgated pursuant to
the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 as amended plus any more
stringent standards promulgated by the State of New Jersey, Township of
Lyndhurst, Passaic Valley Sewerage Commission and the Lyndhurst-North
Arlington Joint Meeting.
§ 12-3.15. Prohibited Uses. [Ord. #1631, § 16]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage,
uncontaminated cooling water subject to the other provisions of this section
or unpolluted industrial process waters into the sanitary sewer system.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into such
sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet
a. Should the board of commissioners revoke a permit to discharge
industrial or commercial waste into the sewer system the discharge of
such industrial or commercial waste therein by the person affected by
such revocation shall be immediately discontinued and shall not
thereafter be resumed. Any person who discharges industrial or
commercial waste into the sewer system after such revocation shall, for
each day on which such discharge occurs, be deemed to be guilty of a
separate violation of this section and shall be separately punished for
each such violation.
b. Should the board of commissioners modify a permit to discharge
industrial or commercial waste into the sewer system the subsequent
discharge of industrial or commercial waste therein by the person
affected by such modification shall be in strict conformity with such
modification or modifications. Any person who discharges industrial or
commercial waste into the township sewer system after a modification
of such permit, in violation of the terms of such permit as modified,
shall, for each day on which such a discharge occurs, be deemed to be
guilty of a separate violation of this section and shall be separately
punished for each violation.
§ 12-3.11 LYNDHURST CODE § 12-3.15
1:450
approved by the township engineer or other designated municipal authority.
Uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process water shall
be discharged into a storm sewer or natural outlet upon the approval of the
township engineer or other designated municipal authority.
§ 12-3.16. Materials Not Permitted in Sewers. [Ord. #1631, § 17]
Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged, or allow to run, leak or escape into the aforementioned sewer
system, any of the following described materials, wastes or substances,
except such small quantities as may be presented in normal household
wastes:
a. Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other explosive liquids,
solids, or gases.
b. Any waters or wastes containing toxic or other poisonous substances or
gases in sufficient quantities, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure any sewage-treatment structure or equipment; or
which constitute a hazard to humans, or animals, or create a public
nuisance or interfere with the beneficiary uses of the receiving waters.
c. Any waters or wastes having a corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the
sewerage works.
d. Solid or viscous substance in quantities or of such size and volume,
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works such as, but
not limited to: ashes, bones, cinders, coffee grounds, construction
materials, containers, etc., either whole or shredded, dead animals,
entrails, feathers, fur, glass, hair and fleshings, leaves, mud, paper
dishes, cups, plastic, rags, sand, shavings, straw, unshredded
vegetables, vegetables in bulk, wax and wood.
e. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F. and 65°
C.
f. Any waste or water which may contain petroleum hydrocarbons, such
as grease, oil and oil sludges from garages, repair shops, machine
shops, industrial establishments, in concentrations in excess of 100 mg.
per liter. However, fats and greases such as those derived from cooking
and food processing may be discharged to sewers, provided that the
concentration and physical dispersion of the fats and greases does not
result in separation and the adherence to sewer structures or
appurtenances. If structures, or if such material cause blockage in the
sewer system, then the waste water carrying such materials must be
effectively treated by a process or device such as a grease trap or
interceptor before it is discharged into sewers.
g. Any substances which may solidify or become viscous between 32° and
150° F.
§ 12-3.15 GENERAL § 12-3.16
1:451
§ 12-3.17. Discharge of Garbage and Waste. [Ord. #1631, § 18]
The discharge of garbage or refuse, whether shredded or unshredded, shall
not be permitted into the sewer system, except that, properly shredded
garbage from household grinders will be accepted.
When, in the opinion of the township engineer, the solids in an industrial
waste require comminution before discharge to the system not only must
the necessary comminution facilities be approved for adequacy, but also the
operating results shall satisfactorily abate the problem which such solids
may tend to create in the water system.
§ 12-3.18. Connections That Could Accidentally Contain Prohibited
Substances Prohibited. [Ord. #1631, § 19]
Any physical connection to a public sewer, building sewer, or to a private
sewer connected to a public sewer, from vessels, tanks or containers
receiving any of the hereinbefore mentioned materials and substances from
which quantities of the aforesaid prohibited materials or substances could
accidentally be discharged directly or indirectly into the aforementioned
sewer system is prohibited. Precautions shall be taken to prevent accidental
spillage of any of the hereinbefore mentioned material to floor drains,
basins, downspouts, gutters, etc., from any manufacturing process or
storage vessel.
§ 12-3.19. Control of Odors. [Ord. #1631, § 20]
The control of all odors emanating from a building sewer shall at all times
be the responsibility of the owner of the connection. Such person shall
take all necessary steps to eliminate undue odors, at their source or to
install means and methods, such as traps, drafts, stacks, flap valves or other
devices to prevent the discharge or development of offensive odors within
the sewers. The cost of such devices and all attendant expenses shall be
borne solely by the owners of the premises.
§ 12-3.20. Pretreatment of Waste. [Ord. #1631, §§ 21, 22]
h. Coal, tar, its derivatives and waste.
i. Paints and waste products from paint manufacturing.
j. Water or wastes having a pH lower than 4.5 or higher than 9.5 or
having any other corrosive property apt to cause damage or hazard to
structures, equipment of the sewer systems or personnel employed in
its operation.
k. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance.
l. Any natural drainage, or recycled river, harbor or ocean waters.
§ 12-3.16 LYNDHURST CODE § 12-3.20
1:452
§ 12-3.21. Manhole Installation; Testing Requirements. [Ord.
#1631, § 23]
§ 12-3.22. Grievance; Hearing by Board of Commissioners. [Ord.
#1631, § 24]
a. Where determined necessary to insure compliance with the provisions
of this section the board of commissioners may require major
contributing industries to pretreat their waste material in accordance
with pretreatment standards promulgated by the Federal Government
and any of the standard developments of the State of New Jersey,
Township of Lyndhurst, Passaic Valley Sewerage Commission and the
Lyndhurst-North Arlington Joint Meeting.
b. Industries requiring approval before discharge of wastes include any
industry producing waste with strong acid or alkaline reactions or
which will form deposits or cause damage to the sewers or to
appurtenances of sewage-treatment works. The process or processes
employed in the pre-treatment of such wastes shall in each case be
satisfactory to and shall have the written approval of the township
engineer.
a. When required by the township, the owners of any property served by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and
measurement of wastes. Such manhole, when required shall be
accessible and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance
with plans approved by the township. The manhole shall be installed by
the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him.
b. All measurements, tests and analyses shall be taken by the township of
the characteristics of waters and wastes and shall be determined in
accordance with American Public Health Association Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Sewage, and shall be determined
upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that
no special manhole has been required the control manhole shall be
considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer
to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
c. The township and its duly authorized officers and employees bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon
all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing in accordance with the provision of this section.
d. The township may assess the property owner for the reasonable costs
monitoring the discharge into the sanitary sewer system including the
costs of analyzing the discharge.
a. Whenever it is claimed that the provisions of this section do not apply,
or that the true intent and meaning of the section has been
misconstrued, or that a decision of a township official made hereunder
§ 12-3.20 GENERAL § 12-3.22
1:453
§ 12-3.23. Violations. [Ord. #1631; Ord. #2616, § 1]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of not less than $150 and not more than
$1,000 for each and every offense; or imprisonment in the county jail of not
more than 90 days; or to a period of community service not exceeding 90
days at the discretion of the municipal court judge. Each and every day in
which a violation of any provision of this section exists shall constitute a
separate violation.
§ 12-3.24. Disposal of Wastewater Into Public Sanitary Sewer. [Ord.
#1987]
has been an improper one, or for any other grievance arising
hereunder, the aggrieved claimant, may appeal the decision or the
grievance in writing to the board of commissioners, in which event
the matter will be set down for a special hearing, at which time all
interested persons shall present evidence relevant to the subject matter
of the hearing. Notice of the hearing in writing shall be given to the
aggrieved claimant at least 10 days in advance by mailing same to the
claimant's last post office address.
b. The board of commissioners shall have the authority to modify any of
the provisions of this section where it finds there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the section or
where the proofs indicate that the section is unreasonable, arbitrary,
discriminatory or confiscatory in its application to any user, provided
that the spirit of the section shall be observed, the public health, safety
and welfare secured and substantial justice done. The burden of proof
shall be on the user (aggrieved claimant).
c. Appeals shall be made 45 days after the grievance arises or after the
rendering of a decision by the township official.
a. Whenever used in the within subsection, the following terms shall have
the following meaning:
1. Floatable oil shall mean oil, fat or grease in a physical state such
that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an
approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered
free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater
does not interfere with the collection system.
2. Natural outlet shall mean an outlet, including storm sewers and
combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or
other body of surface or groundwater including the Passaic River or
any of its tributaries.
3. Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer that carries liquid and watercarried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial
§ 12-3.22 LYNDHURST CODE § 12-3.24
1:454
plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of ground,
storm and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally.
4. Sanitary waste shall mean waste derived principally from
dwellings, office buildings, and sanitary conveniences. When
segregated from industrial wastes, may come from industrial plants
or commercial enterprises.
5. Sewage shall mean the spent water of a community. The preferred
term is "wastewater."
6. Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or
drainage water.
7. Storm drain (sometimes called storm sewer) shall mean a drain or
sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or
unpolluted water from any source.
8. Strength of waste shall mean a measurement of suspended solids,
and/or biochemical oxygen demand and/or chemical oxygen
demand, and/or any other parameter determined by PVSC as a fair
indicator of the relative use, other than volumetric, of PVSC
facilities by industrial wastes.
b. It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the
municipality any waste water or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided and where a National Pollution
Discharge Elimination System permit has been obtained from the
appropriate governmental authority, where required.
c. No person shall make connection on roof downspouts, foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or drain, which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless approved by the
municipality for purpose of disposal of polluted surface drainage.
d. The governing body shall appoint or designate some suitable person to
administer the within subsection.
e. All users of the wastewater facilities shall comply with the
requirements of the written rules and regulations of the PVSC which
have been adopted and which from time to time shall have been
adopted, which regulations shall become effective upon filing of
certified copies in the office of the municipal clerk after the effective
dates of the within subsection.33
f. Violations of any of the provisions of the within subsection or any
permit issued under the authority of the within subsection may result in
the termination of the permit and/or the termination of the authority to
discharge into the system.
33.Editor’s Note: This subsection was adopted by Ordinance No. 1987 on April 15, 1986.
§ 12-3.24 GENERAL § 12-3.24
1:455
§ 12-4. INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER.
§ 12-4.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1651, § 1]
As used in this section:
FLOATABLE OIL — Shall mean oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that
it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved
pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat
if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the
collection system.
INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY — Shall mean a charge to industrial users
based on its use of PVSC facilities to repay the capital cost outlay of the
federal share given PVSC under the provisions of applicable federal law
allocable to the treatment of the wastes from the industrial user.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Shall mean any nongovernmental user of PVSC
facilities identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual 1972 as
amended and supplemented under Divisions A, B, D, E or I. A user may be
excluded if it is determined that it introduces primarily segregated sanitary
wastes.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall mean the liquid waste from an industrial
process, as distinct from sanitary waste. All wastes, except storm waters
and sanitary wastes.
INDUSTRIAL WASTERS — Shall mean the wastewater from industrial
processes, trade, or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
MAJOR INDUSTRY — Shall mean an industrial user of PVSC facilities that:
NATURAL OUTLET — Shall mean an outlet, including storm sewers and
combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond ditch, lake or other
g. Any person violating any of the provisions of the within subsection shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 or
imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day in
which a violation of any provision of this subsection exists shall
constitute a separate violation.
h. No ordinance heretofore adopted by the municipality shall be effected
by the within subsection except that if any provisions of the prior
ordinance is in conflict with the provisions of the within subsection, the
provisions of the within subsection shall control.
a. Has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work day;
b. Has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts; or
Is found by USEPA, NJDEP or PVSC to significant impact, either singly
or in combination with other contributing industries, in the PVSC
treatment works or upon the quality of the effluent from the PVSC
treatment works.
c.
§ 12-3.24 LYNDHURST CODE § 12-4.1
1:456
body of surface or groundwater including the Passaic River or any of its
tributaries.
NJDEP — Shall mean New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection.
NPDES — Shall mean National Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
pH — Shall mean the reciprocal of the logarithm of the hydrogen ion
concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions, in grams,
per liter of solution. Neutral water has a pH value of seven (a hydrogen
concentration of 10-7). Lower pH's are acid, higher pH's are alkaline.
PRETREATMENT — Shall mean treatment given to industrial waste, prior
to its discharge, directly or indirectly, to the PVSC facilities, by the industry,
in order to remove illegal and/or undesirable constituents or to reduce the
strength of the waste.
PUBLIC SEWER — Shall mean a common sewer controlled by a
governmental agency, public utility or the municipality.
PVSC — Shall mean Passaic Valley Sewerage Commissioners.
SANITARY SEWER — Shall mean a sewer that carries liquid and watercarried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants,
and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface
waters that are not admitted intentionally.
SANITARY WASTE — Shall mean waste derived principally from dwellings,
office buildings, and sanitary conveniences. When segregated from
industrial wastes, may come from industrial plants or commercial
enterprises.
SEWAGE — Shall mean the spent water of a community. The preferred term
is "wastewater".
SEWER — Shall mean a pipe or conduit that carries waste water or drainage
water.
SLUG — Shall mean any discharge of water or wastewater which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average
twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal operation.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes called STORM SEWER) — Shall mean a drain
or sewer for conveying water, groundwater, subsurface water, or unpolluted
water from any source.
STRENGTH OF WASTE — Shall mean a measurement of suspended solids,
and/or biochemical oxygen demand and/or chemical oxygen demand and/or
any other parameter, determined by PVSC as a fair indicator of the relative
use, other than volumetric, of PVSC facilities by industrial wastes.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Shall mean total suspended matter that either
floats on the surface of, is in suspension in water, wastewater, or other
liquids and that is removable by laboratory filtering as prescribed in
"Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" and
referred to as nonfilterable residue.
§ 12-4.1 GENERAL § 12-4.1
1:457
TOXIC WASTES IN TOXIC AMOUNTS — Shall mean and be defined by
USEPA in 40 CFR 129 (38 F.R. 24342, 9-7-75) and any superseding
revisions.
UNPOLLUTED WATER — Shall mean water of quality equal to or better
than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of
receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge
to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
USEPA — Shall mean United States Environmental Protection Agency.
USER CHARGE — Shall mean a charge to users consisting of two parts. The
first part established by PVSC based on volume, and where applicable, on
strength or flow rate to pay for the use of the PVSC facilities. The second
part established by the municipality to pay for the use of the local sewer
system and to pay for administration of the billing and collection of the
funds.
WASTEWATER — Shall mean the spent water of a community. From the
standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and watercarried
wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and
institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and storm water
that may be present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES — Shall mean the structures, equipment, and
processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial
wastes and dispose of the effluent.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS — Shall mean the PVSC facilities.
§ 12-4.2. Discharging Wastewater Into Natural Outlets Prohibited;
Permit Required. [Ord. #1651, § 2]
It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the township
any wastewater or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment
has been provided and where a National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System permit has been obtained from the appropriate governmental
authority, where required.
§ 12-4.3. Connections to Sewer Require Permit. [Ord. #1651, § 3]
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a permit from the appropriate municipal official.
§ 12-4.4. Application for Sanitary Connections. [Ord. #1651, § 4]
Application for sanitary connections for dwellings, groups of dwellings or
industrial or commercial establishments with only sanitary waste shall be
made directly to the township. A fee shall be paid to the township to process
the application as otherwise provided by ordinances of the township. The
board of commissioners shall designate some suitable person to maintain
a record of the number of sanitary applications and connections that are
§ 12-4.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 12-4.4
1:458
added and removed from the system and shall make an annual report to
the Passaic Valley Sewerage Commissioners no later than February 1 of
each year. When a direct connection to a PVSC sewer is requested by the
applicant, the request shall first be endorsed with the approval of the board
of commissioners and then submitted to the PVSC for their action.
§ 12-4.5. Application for Industrial Users. [Ord. #1651, § 5]
§ 12-4.6. Classification of Industrial Users. [Ord. #1651, § 6]
Industrial users shall be classified by PVSC as follows:
a. Each existing industrial user which is presently connected directly or
indirectly to the wastewater facilities of the township shall make
application for a permit no later than April 1, 1977, whether the
connection be for industrial waste or storm water. Applications for
future connections must be made and approved before a certificate of
occupancy may be issued. The application shall be made to the
township by the industry that generates the waste, however, the
application must be signed by the owner of the property whereon the
industry is located. After approval of the application by the township,
the application shall be forwarded to PVSC for classification and
issuance of the permit by PVSC.
b. Any existing industrial user which proposes to make any change in its
facility or its processing, which significantly affects the quality or the
quantity of its discharge into the system, shall submit to the township
an industrial sewer waste revision application showing the
contemplated changes. Any new tenant or occupant of an existing
industrial user shall submit an industrial sewer waste revision
application. The application, if approved by the township, shall be sent
to the PVSC, accompanied by the written approval of the township.
Existing industrial users that have applied for permits may continue
their discharge until their application has been processed by PVSC,
except for any discharges which constitute prohibited waste as
otherwise provided in this section or unless notified by PVSC to cease
and desist their discharge. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
for an industrial use until an industrial permit has been issued by the
PVSC and no person shall occupy any building or structure for the
purpose of a new industrial use until an industrial permit has been
issued by the PVSC.
a. Category I.
1. Class I-A permit shall not be issued to an industry defined as a
major industry and when issued shall allow the industry to
discharge with no modification or pretreatment of flow.
2. Class I-B permit is one issued to an industry classified as a major
industry. This permit shall allow the industry to discharge with no
§ 12-4.4 GENERAL § 12-4.6
1:459
§ 12-4.7. Change in Classification. [Ord. #1651, § 7]
The PVSC classification of an application is subject to change by PVSC
upon written notification from PVSC to the applicant by certified mail. Any
change shall be accompanied by a detailed explanation of the reasons for
the change.
§ 12-4.8. Appeal of Classification. [Ord. #1651, § 8]
Any industry aggrieved by a permit classification by the PVSC shall have
a right to appeal to the PVSC. Such an administrative appeal shall be
taken within 30 days of notification by PVSC to the industry of its decision.
The notice of appeal shall be delivered personally to the offices of PVSC
at 600 Wilson Avenue, Newark, New Jersey or shall be sent by certified
mail, return receipt requested. The taking of an appeal shall not stay the
provisions of Class III denial. During the time of appeal, however, the
Class II permits shall be stayed, however, the staying shall not release
any industry from meeting any requirements of any schedule set by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection or the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.
§ 12-4.9. Hearing. [Ord. #1651, § 9]
Upon the filing of an appeal the PVSC shall set the date and time for
a hearing before the commissioners. The applicant shall have the right
to present evidence, shall have the right to be represented by counsel
and shall have the right of cross examination. Upon the conclusion of the
hearing, the commissioners shall make findings of fact and conclusions.
§ 12-4.10. Forms for Applications. [Ord. #1651, § 10]
All applications for industrial permits shall be submitted on forms to be
supplied by PVSC and shall comply with the instructions on the form.
modifications or pretreatment of flow, however, PVSC may require
the installation of monitoring equipment.
b. Category II.
1. Class II-A permit shall allow an industry to discharge pretreated
wastes in accordance with standards established in the permit.
2. Class II-B permit shall allow an industry to continue to discharge,
subject to change of characteristics of its waste by pretreatment or
other means in accordance with a schedule as established by the
PVSC in the permit.
c. Category III. The permit is denied and the discharge of prohibited
materials must be halted or modified by a date established by the PVSC
and in accordance with conditions contained in the permit denial.
§ 12-4.6 LYNDHURST CODE § 12-4.11
1:460
§ 12-4.11. Costs and Expenses. [Ord. #1651, § 11]
All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the applicant, and the applicant shall
indemnify the township or PVSC from any loss or damage that may be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. All sewer connections
shall be in accordance with the requirements of the township as otherwise
provided by ordinance. In the case of the connection into PVSC sewer the
connection shall be in accordance with the conditions contained in the
approval of the PVSC.
§ 12-4.12. Connections Prohibited. [Ord. #1651, § 12]
No person shall make connection on roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or drain, which in turn is connected directly or indirectly
to a public sanitary sewer unless approved by the township for purpose of
disposal of polluted surface drainage.
§ 12-4.13. Industrial Survey Form. [Ord. #1651, § 13]
In addition to the application for the permit as hereinabove provided,
each industrial user must complete an industrial survey form which will
be supplied by PVSC and, from time to time, shall update the form when
required by the PVSC.
§ 12-4.14. Major Industry to Install Monitoring System. [Ord.
#1651, § 14]
Whenever an industry is classified as a major industry, it shall install an
approved, sealed, automatic monitoring system if required by PVSC.
§ 12-4.15. Discharge of Uncontaminated Water Into PVSC System.
[Ord. #1651, § 15]
No uncontaminated water shall be discharged into the PVSC system except
with the prior written consent of the municipality and PVSC. (There will be
two separate provisions, one for municipalities with separate systems and
one for municipalities with combined systems.)
§ 12-4.16. Compliance with Standards. [Ord. #1651, § 16]
When pretreatment standards are adopted by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency for any given class of industries, then any
industry within that class must conform to the United States Environmental
Protection Agency timetable for adherence to pretreatment requirements as
well as all other applicable requirements promulgated by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency in accordance with the provisions of the
law. Additionally, such industries shall comply with such more stringent
standards necessitated by local conditions as determined from time to time
by the PVSC.
§ 12-4.11 GENERAL § 12-4.17
1:461
§ 12-4.17. Access to Facilities; Inspections. [Ord. #1651, § 17]
All industrial users shall provide immediate access to its facilities at any
time during normal working hours or at any other time that there is a
discharge into the PVSC system or into any waters under the jurisdiction
of the PVSC. Access shall be for the purpose of checking the quality of
the discharge, taking samples and making tests of the discharge or for
the purpose of permitting enforcement of this section. The access shall
be made available to the employees of PVSC, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, United States Environmental Agency and/or the
municipality. All users shall provide access to property and premises for
inspection for the purpose of determining if there is any violation of the
terms or provisions of this section.
§ 12-4.18. Wastes Prohibited. [Ord. #1651, § 18]
The following wastes are prohibited and may never be discharged into
waste water facilities of the township and PVSC:
§ 12-4.19. Wastes Requiring Permission to Discharge. [Ord. #1651,
§ 19]
The following wastes may not be discharged without special permission
from the PVSC, upon a determination by the PVSC that the discharge would
not be detrimental to the system:
a. Wastes that may create a fire or explosion hazard in the sewer or
wastewater facility, such as gasoline, fuel oil, cleaning solvents, etc.
b. Wastes that may impair or cause to impair the hydraulic capacity of the
sewer system, such as ashes, sand, metal, precipitates, etc.
c. Wastes that may create a hazard to people, the sewer system, the
treatment process, or the receiving water such as dangerous levels of
toxic materials.
d. Wastes at a flow rate which is excessive over a relatively short time
period so that there is a treatment process upset and substantial loss of
treatment efficiency.
e. Wastes below a pH of five unless the line is designed to accommodate
such waste.
f. Any discharge of radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by PVSC in compliance
with applicable State or Federal regulations.
a. Any discharge in excess of 150° F. (65° C.).
b. Any discharge containing more than 100 mg/l of mineral oil or grease.
c. Any discharge containing floatable oil or grease.
§ 12-4.17 LYNDHURST CODE § 12-4.19
1:462
§ 12-4.20. Construction of Sampling Point. [Ord. #1651, § 20]
Each major industrial user shall construct or otherwise have available a
sampling point for sampling waste water before it enters the municipal
sewer system. Other industrial users may be required to construct such
sampling point, if ordered so to do by the municipality or the PVSC.
§ 12-4.21. Discharges Causing Physical Damage; Interferes with
Treatment, Etc. [Ord. #1651, § 22]
No discharge into the wastewater facilities of PVSC shall be permitted from
any source which causes physical damage, interferes with the treatment
process, or results in a violation of effluent limitations or other conditions
contained in the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System Permit
to Discharge issued to the PVSC by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency.
§ 12-4.22. Structure Required for Sampling and Measurement of
Waste. [Ord. #1651, § 22]
When required by the township, USEPA, NJDEP, or the PVSC, the owner of
any property serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall
install a suitable structure together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances to the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling
and measurement of the wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be
accessibly and safely located and shall be constructed in accordance with
plans approved by the governmental agency requiring it. The structure shall
be installed by the applicant at his expense and shall be maintained by him
so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 12-4.23. Information to Be Supplied. [Ord. #1651, § 23]
All persons subject to subsections 12-3.1 through 12-4.29 shall be required
to provide prior to December 31 of each year information to the township,
PVSC or joint meeting as needed to determine compliance with this section.
These requirements may include:
d. Any discharge of heavy metals, or any other toxic materials in toxic
amounts, which amounts are to be established by PVSC.
e. Any discharge quantities of flow or concentration which shall constitute
a "slug".
f. Wastes with pH outside the limits of 5.0 to 9.0.
a. Wastewaters discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time
period.
b. Chemical analyses of wastewaters.
c. Information on raw materials, processes and products affecting
wastewater volume and quality.
§ 12-4.19 GENERAL § 12-4.23
1:463
§ 12-4.24. Standard for Measurements and Tests. [Ord. #1651, § 24]
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and
wastes to which reference is made in this section shall be determined
in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public
Health Association, or other method or procedure as may be approved by
PVSC. Sampling methods, location, times, durations, and frequencies are
to be determined on an individual basis subject to the approval of the
municipality, and/or PVSC.
§ 12-4.25. Compliance Required for User Charges Regulations.
[Ord. #1651, § 25]
All users shall be required to comply with the requirement of user charges
regulations and industrial costs, recovery system regulations to be adopted
by the PVSC in accordance with the requirements of the USEPA. The
effective date for the implement of user costs regulations and industrial
costs recovery system regulations shall be established by resolution of the
PVSC. The effective date shall be certified by the PVSC and the written
certification shall be filed in the office of the township clerk.
§ 12-4.26. Damage Facilities. [Ord. #1651, § 26]
No person shall intentionally break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is part of the
wastewater facilities.
§ 12-4.27. Administration. [Ord. #1651, § 27]
The board of commissioners shall appoint or designate some suitable person
to administer this section.
§ 12-4.28. Compliance with Passaic Valley Sewerage Commission.
[Ord. #1651, § 28]
All users of the wastewater facilities shall comply with the requirements of
the written rules and regulations of the PVSC which have been adopted and
which from time to time shall have been adopted, which regulations shall
become effective upon filing of certified copies in the office of the township
clerk after January 25, 1977.
d. Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil solvent or other
materials important to sewer use control.
e. A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
f. Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
g. Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials
through spills to the municipal sewer.
§ 12-4.23 LYNDHURST CODE § 12-4.29
1:464
§ 12-4.29. Violations. [Ord. #1651, § 29]
§ 12-4.30. Conflicting Ordinances. [Ord. #1651, § 30]
No ordinance heretofore adopted by the municipality shall be affected by
this section except that if any provisions of any prior ordinance is in conflict
with the provisions of this section, the provisions of this section shall
control.
Chapter 12A
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 12A-1. PET WASTE.
§ 12A-1.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2527, § I]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
IMMEDIATE — Shall mean that the pet solid waste is removed at once
without delay.
OWNER/KEEPER — Shall mean any person who shall possess, maintain,
house or harbor any pet or otherwise have custody of any pet, whether or
not the owner of such pet.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PET — Shall mean a domesticated animal (other than a disability assistance
animal) kept for amusement or companionship.
PET SOLID WASTE — Shall mean waste matter expelled from the bowels of
the pet; excrement.
PROPER DISPOSAL — Shall mean placement in a designated waste
receptacle, or other suitable container, and discarded in a refuse container
a. Violations of any of the provisions of this section or any permit issued
under the authority of this section may result in the termination of the
permit or the termination of the authority to discharge into the system.
b. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter III, Section 3-1.
c. The superintendent of water and sewer shall be the enforcing authority
for the Township.
§ 12-4.29 GENERAL § 12A-1.1
1:465
which is regularly emptied by the municipality or some other refuse
collector; or disposal into a system designed to convey domestic sewage for
proper treatment and disposal.
§ 12A-1.2. Requirement for Disposal. [Ord. #2527, § I]
All pet owners and keepers are required to immediately and properly
dispose of their pet's solid waste deposited on any property, public or
private, not owner or possessed by that person.
§ 12A-1.3. Exemptions. [Ord. #2527, § I]
Any owner or keeper who requires the use of a disability assistance animal
shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while such animal is
being used for that purpose.
§ 12A-1.4. Enforcement. [Ord. #2527, § I]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Police Department
and the Health Department of the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 12A-2. CONTAINERIZED WASTE.
§ 12A-2.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2527, § I]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — Shall mean the placement of yard waste in a trash can,
bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling
or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing state, county or municipal
roadway, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Shall mean leaves and grass clippings.
§ 12A-2.2. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. #2527, § I]
The owner or occupant of any property, or any employee or contractor
of such owner or occupant engaged to provide lawn care or landscaping
§ 12A-1.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 12A-2.2
1:466
services, shall not sweep, rake, blow or otherwise place yard waste, unless
the yard waste is containerized, in the street, except as provided in
subsection 12A-3.2 below regarding a scheduled or announced yard waste
collection. If yard waste that is not containerized is placed in the street, the
party responsible for placement of yard waste must remove the yard waste
from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this section.
§ 12A-2.3. Enforcement. [Ord. #2527, § I]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Lyndhurst
Department of Public Works.
§ 12A-3. YARD WASTE COLLECTION PROGRAM.
§ 12A-3.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2527, § I]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
CONTAINERIZED — Shall mean the placement of yard waste in a trash can,
bucket, bag or other vessel, such as to prevent the yard waste from spilling
or blowing out into the street and coming into contact with stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway,
viaduct, drive, or other way, which is an existing state, county or municipal
roadway, and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved
or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, curbs,
sidewalks, parking areas, and other areas within the street lines.
YARD WASTE — Shall mean leaves and grass clippings.
§ 12A-3.2. Yard Waste Collection. [Ord. #2527, § I]
Sweeping, raking, blowing or otherwise placing yard waste that is not
containerized at the curb or along the street is only allowed during the
seven days prior to a scheduled and announced collection, and shall not be
placed closer than 10 feet from any storm drain inlet. Placement of such
yard waste at the curb or along the street at any other time or in any other
manner is a violation of this section. If such placement of yard waste occurs,
the party responsible for placement of the yard waste must remove the
yard waste from the street or said party shall be deemed in violation of this
section.
§ 12A-2.2 GENERAL § 12A-3.3
1:467
§ 12A-3.3. Enforcement. [Ord. #2527, § I]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Department of Public
Works of the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 12A-4. ILLICIT CONNECTION.
§ 12A-4.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2527, § I]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use
in the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include
the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number,
and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The
word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. The definitions
below are the same as or based on corresponding definitions in the New
Jersey Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C.
7:14A-1.2.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Shall mean waste and wastewater from humans or
household operations.
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Shall mean any physical or nonphysical
connection that discharges domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater) to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the Township of
Lyndhurst, unless that discharge is authorized under a NJPDES permit
other than the Tier A Municipal Stormwater General Permit (NJPDES
Permit Number NJ0141852). Nonphysical connections may include, but are
not limited to, leaks, flows, or overflows into the municipal separate storm
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Shall mean nondomestic waste, including, but not
limited to, those pollutants regulated under Section 307(a), (b), or (c) of the
Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), (b), or (c)).
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of
Lyndhurst or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and
conveying stormwater.
NJPDES PERMIT — Shall mean a permit issued by the New Jersey
Department of Environmental Protection to implement the New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NJPDES) rules at N.J.A.C. 7:14A.
NONCONTACT COOLING WATER — Shall mean water used to reduce
temperature for the purpose of cooling. Such waters do not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product (other than
heat) or finished product. Noncontact cooling water may however contain
§ 12A-3.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 12A-4.1
1:468
algaecides, or biocides to control fouling of equipment such as heat
exchangers, and/or corrosion inhibitors.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Shall mean any water which, during
manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from
the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished
product, by-product, or waste product. Process wastewater includes, but is
not limited to, leachate and cooling water other than noncontact cooling
water.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
§ 12A-4.2. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. #2527, § I]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged through an illicit
connection to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Township of Lyndhurst any domestic sewage, noncontact cooling water,
process wastewater, or other industrial waste (other than stormwater).
§ 12A-4.3. Enforcement. [Ord. #2527, § I; Ord. § 2755, § 1]
This section shall be enforced by the police department or the department
of public works of the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 12A-5. IMPROPER DISPOSAL OF WASTE.
§ 12A-5.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2527, § I; Ord. #2755, § 1]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
BUFFER — Shall mean the land area, 25 feet in width, adjacent to any water
body.
COMMERCIAL FARM — Shall mean a farm management unit producing
agricultural or horticultural products worth $2,500 or more annually.
FERTILIZER — Shall mean a fertilizer material, mixed fertilizer or any other
substance containing one or more recognized plant nutrients, which is used
for its plant nutrient content, which is designed for use or claimed to have
§ 12A-4.1 GENERAL § 12A-5.1
1:469
value in promoting plant growth, and which is sold, offered for sale, or
intended for sale.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Shall mean a conveyance or system of
conveyance (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that is
owned or operated by the Township of Lyndhurst or other public body, and
is designed and used for collecting and conveying stormwater.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — Shall mean
a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage
systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made
channels, or storm drains) that is owned or operated by the Township of
Lyndhurst or other public body, and is designed and used for collecting and
conveying stormwater.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
PHOSPHORUS FERTILIZER — Shall mean any fertilizer that contains
phosphorus, expressed as P2O5 with a guaranteed analysis of greater than
zero; except that it shall not be considered to include animal (including
human) or vegetable manures, agricultural liming materials, or wood ashes
that have not been amended to increase their nutrient content.
SOIL TEST — Shall mean a technical analysis of soil conducted by an
accredited soil testing laboratory following the protocol of such a test
established by Rutgers Cooperative Research and Extension.
STORM DRAIN INLET — Shall mean an opening in a storm drain used to
collect stormwater runoff and includes, but is not limited to, a grate inlet,
curb-opening inlet, slotted inlet, and combination inlet.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewerage or
drainage facilities, or is conveyed by snow removal equipment.
WATER BODY — Shall mean a surface water feature, such as a lake, stream,
creek, pond, lagoon, bay or estuary.
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether natural or
artificial, within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or subject to its
jurisdiction.
§ 12A-5.2. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. #2527, § I; Ord. #2751, § 2;
Ord. #2755, § 1]
a. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater to
the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by Township of
Lyndhurst is prohibited. The spilling, dumping, or disposal of materials
other than stormwater in such a manner as to cause the discharge of
§ 12A-5.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 12A-5.2
1:470
§ 12A-5.3. Design Standards for Retrofitting of Storm Drain Inlet.
[Ord. #2755, § I]
Each storm drain inlet identified in subsection 12A-5.2e above shall comply
with the following standard to control passage of solid and floatable
materials through storm drain inlets. For purposes of this paragraph, "solid
and floatable materials" mean sediment, debris, trash, and other floating,
suspended, or settleable solids.
pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system is also
prohibited.
b. Any person who owns, leases or otherwise uses a refuse container or
dumpster must ensure that such container or dumpster does not leak or
otherwise discharge liquids, semi-liquids or solids to the municipal
separate stormwater sewer system operated by the Township of
Lyndhurst.
c. No person shall do any of the following with regard to the outdoor
application of fertilizer.
1. Apply fertilizer when a runoff producing rainfall is occurring or
predicted and/or when soils are saturated and a potential for
fertilizer movement off-site exists.
2. Apply fertilizer to an impervious surface. Fertilizer inadvertently
applied to an impervious surface must be swept or blown back in to
the target surface or returned to either its original or another
appropriate container for reuse.
3. Apply fertilizer within the buffer of any water body.
4. Apply fertilizer before February 13 and after November 15.
d. Phosphorus fertilizer shall not be applied to outdoor areas except as
demonstrated to be needed for the specific soils and target vegetation
in accordance with a soils test and the associated annual fertilizer
recommendation issued by Rutgers Cooperative Research and
Extension.
e. No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with
one single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing
(excluding the repair of individual potholes), resurfacing (including top
coating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin bade of hot
bitumen), reconstruction or altering any surface that is in direct contact
with an existing storm drain inlet on that property unless the storm
drain inlet either:
1. Already meets the design standard below to control passage of
solid and floatable materials; or
2. Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in subsection
12A-5.3 below prior to the completion of the project.
§ 12A-5.2 GENERAL § 12A-5.3
1:471
§ 12A-5.4. Exceptions to Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. #2527, § I; Ord.
#2751, § 2; Ord. #2755, § 1]
a. Design engineers shall use either of the following grates whenever they
use a grate in pavement or another ground surface to collect
stormwater from that surface into a storm drain or surface water body
under the grate.
b. Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear space in
that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if the curb opening
has two or more clear spaces) shall have an area of no more than seven
square inches, or be no greater than two inches across the smallest
dimension.
c. This standard does not apply:
1. Where the township engineer agrees that this standard would
cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could practicably be
overcome by using additional or larger storm drain inlets that meet
these standards;
2. Where flows are conveyed through any device (e.g., end of pipe
netting facility, manufactured treatment device, or a catch basin
hood) that is designed, at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all
solid and floatable materials that could not pass through one of the
following:
(a) A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long and 1 1/2
inches wide (this option does not apply for outfall netting
facilities); or
(b) A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inch.
3. Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars; or
4. Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
determines, pursuant to the New Jersey Register of Historic Places
Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that action to meet this standard is an
undertaking that constitutes an encroachment or will damage or
destroy the New Jersey Register listed historic property.
a. Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources;
b. Uncontaminated groundwater (e.g., infiltration, crawl space or
basement sump pumps, foundation or footing drains, rising
groundwaters);
c. Air conditioning condensate (excluding contact and noncontact cooling
water);
d. Irrigation water (including landscape and lawn watering runoff);
§ 12A-5.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 12A-5.4
1:472
§ 12A-5.5. Enforcement. [Ord. #2527, § I; Ord. #2751, § 2]
This section shall be enforced by the Police Department or Department of
Public Works of the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 12A-6. LITTER CONTROL.
§ 12A-6.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2527, § I]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
e. Flows from springs, riparian habitats and wetlands, water reservoir
discharges and diverted stream flows;
f. Residential car washing water, and residential swimming pool
discharges;
g. Sidewalk, driveway and street wash water;
h. Flows from firefighting activities;
i. Flows from rinsing of the following equipment with clean water:
1. Equipment used in the application of salt and deicing materials
immediately following salt and deicing material applications. Prior
to rinsing with clean water, all residual salt and de-icing materials
must be removed from equipment and vehicles to the maximum
extent practicable using dry cleaning methods (e.g., shoveling and
sweeping). Recovered materials are to be returned to storage for
reuse or properly discarded.
2. Rinsing of equipment, as noted in the above situation is limited to
exterior, undercarriage, and exposed parts and does not apply to
engines or other enclosed machinery.
j. Refuse containers at facilities authorized to discharge stormwater
under a valid NJPDES permit.
k. Application of fertilizer on commercial farms needed for:
1. Establishing vegetation for the first time, such as after land
disturbance, provided the application is in accordance with the
requirements established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and implementing rules.
2. Re-established or repairing a turf area.
l. Application of phosphorus fertilizer that delivers liquid or granular
fertilizer under the soils surface, directly to the feeder roots.
m. Application of phosphorus fertilizer to residential container plantings,
flowerbeds, or vegetable gardens.
§ 12A-5.4 GENERAL § 12A-6.1
1:473
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
LITTER — Shall mean any used or unconsumed substance or waste material
which has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic,
rubber, paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination
thereof, including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap
or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other lawn or garden waste, newspapers,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
processes of mining or other extraction processes, logging, sawmilling,
farming or manufacturing.
LITTER RECEPTACLE — Shall mean a container suitable for the depositing
of litter.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
§ 12A-6.2. Prohibited Acts and Regulated Activities. [Ord. #2527,
§ I]
§ 12A-6.3. Enforcement. [Ord. #2527, § I; Ord. #2755, § 1]
This section shall be enforced by the Police Department or the Department
of Public Works of the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 12A-7. WILDLIFE FEEDING.
§ 12A-7.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2527, § I]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings stated herein unless their use in
the text of this section clearly demonstrates a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard or otherwise
place any litter of any nature upon public or private property other than
in a litter receptacle, or having done so, to allow such litter to remain.
b. Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a
vehicle or boat in violation of this section, the operator or owner, or
both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated
this section.
§ 12A-6.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 12A-7.1
1:474
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
FEED — Shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any
edible material with the intention of feeding, attracting or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — Shall mean all animals that are neither human nor
domesticated.
§ 12A-7.2. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. #2527, § I]
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any property owned or
operated by the Township of Lyndhurst, any wildlife, excluding confined
wildlife (for example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation
centers, or unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
§ 12A-7.3. Enforcement. [Ord. #2527, § I]
§ 12A-8. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY. [Ord. #2527, § I]
Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,500.
§ 12A-9. SEVERABILITY. [Ord. #2527, § I]
Each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this chapter is
declared to be an independent section, subsection, sentence, clause and
phrase, and the finding or holding of any such portion of this chapter to
be unconstitutional, void, or ineffective for any cause, or reason, shall not
affect any other portion of this chapter.
§ 12A-10. SUPERSEDING ORDINANCE. [Ord. #2527, § I]
This chapter shall supersede all ordinances which are inconsistent with the
provisions herein.
§ 12A-11. STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR
MAJOR DEVELOPMENTS.
§ 12A-11.1. Scope and Purpose. [Ord. #2573, § 1]
a. This section shall be enforced by the Police Department and/or the
Health Department of the Township of Lyndhurst.
b. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be ordered to
cease the feeding immediately.
§ 12A-7.1 GENERAL § 12A-11.1
1:475
a. Policy Statement. Flood control, groundwater recharge, and pollutant
reduction through nonstructural or low impact techniques shall be
explored before relying on structural BMPs. Structural BMPs should be
integrated with nonstructural stormwater management strategies and
proper maintenance plans. Nonstructural strategies include both
environmentally sensitive site design and source controls that prevent
pollutants from being placed on the site or from being exposed to
stormwater. Source control plans should be developed based upon
physical site conditions and the origin, nature, and the anticipated
quantity or amount of potential pollutants. Multiple stormwater
management BMPs may be necessary to achieve the established
performance standards for water quality, quantity and groundwater
recharge.
b. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to establish minimum
stormwater management requirements and controls for "major
developments" as defined in subsection 12A-11.2.
c. Applicability.
1. This section shall be applicable to all site plans and subdivisions for
the following major developments that require preliminary or final
site plan or subdivision review:
(a) Nonresidential major developments; and
(b) Aspects of residential major developments that are not
preempted by the Residential Site Improvement Standards at
N.J.A.C. 5:21.
2. This section shall also be applicable to all major developments
undertaken by the Township of Lyndhurst.
d. Compatibility with Other Permit and Ordinance Requirements.
Development approvals issued for subdivisions and site plans pursuant
to this section are to be considered an integral part of development
approvals under the subdivision and site plan review process and does
not relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits
or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable code, rule,
act, or ordinance. In their interpretation and application, the provisions
of this section shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. This section
is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinances, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law except
that, where any provision of this section imposes restrictions different
from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the more restrictive provisions or higher standards
shall control.
§ 12A-11.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 12A-11.2
1:476
§ 12A-11.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2573, § 2]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this section shall
be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this section its most reasonable application. The definitions
below are the same as or based on the corresponding definitions in the
Stormwater Management Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:8-1.2.
COMPACTION — Shall mean the increase in soil bulk density.
CORE — Shall mean a pedestrian-oriented area of commercial and civic
uses serving the surrounding municipality, generally including housing and
access to public transportation.
COUNTY REVIEW AGENCY — Shall mean an agency designated by the
County Board of Chosen Freeholders to review municipal stormwater
management plans and implementing ordinance(s). The county review
agency may either be:
A county planning agency; or
A county water resource association created under N.J.S.A. 58:16A-55.5, if
the ordinance or resolution delegates authority to approve, conditionally
approve, or disapprove municipal stormwater management plans and
implementing ordinances.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection.
DESIGN ENGINEER — Shall mean a person professionally qualified and
duly licensed in New Jersey to perform engineering services that may
include, but not necessarily be limited to, development of project
requirements, creation and development of project design and preparation
of drawings and specifications.
DESIGNATED CENTER — Shall mean a State Development and
Redevelopment Plan Center as designated by the State Planning
Commission such as urban, regional, town, village, or hamlet.
DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the division of a parcel of land into two
or more parcels, the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural
alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or structure, any
mining excavation or landfill, and any use or change in the use of any
building or other structure, or land or extension of use of land by any
person, for which permission is required under the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of development of agriculture
lands, development means: any activity that requires a state permit; any
activity reviewed by the County Agricultural Board (CAB) and the State
Agricultural Development Committee (SADC), and municipal review of any
activity not exempted by the Right to Farm Act, N.J.S.A. 4:1C-1 et seq.
DRAINAGE AREA — Shall mean a geographic area within which
stormwater, sediments, or dissolved materials drain to a particular
receiving water body or to a particular point along a receiving water body.
EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD — Shall mean a neighborhood
designated by the Urban Coordinating Council in consultation and
§ 12A-11.2 GENERAL § 12A-11.2
1:477
conjunction with the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 55:19-69.
ENVIRONMENTALLY CRITICAL AREAS — Shall mean an area or feature
which is of significant environmental value, including but not limited to:
stream corridors; natural heritage priority sites; habitat of endangered
or threatened species; large areas of contiguous open space or upland
forest; steep slopes; and well head protection and groundwater recharge
areas. Habitats of endangered or threatened species are identified using
the Department's Landscape Project as approved by the Department's
Endangered and Non-game Species Program.
EROSION — Shall mean the detachment and movement of soil or rock
fragments by water, wind, ice or gravity.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Shall mean a surface that has been covered with
a layer of material so that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water.
INFILTRATION — Shall mean the process by which water seeps into the soil
from precipitation.
MAJOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean any "development" that provides
for ultimately disturbing one or more acres of land. Disturbance for the
purpose of this rule is the placement of impervious surface or exposure
and/or movement of soil or bedrock or clearing, cutting, or removing of
vegetation.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean any city, township, town or village.
NODE — Shall mean an area designated by the State Planning Commission
concentrating facilities and activities which are not organized in a compact
form.
NUTRIENT — Shall mean a chemical element or compound, such as
nitrogen or phosphorus, which is essential to and promotes the
development of organisms.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, company, partnership,
firm, association, the Township of Lyndhurst, or political subdivision of this
state subject to municipal jurisdiction pursuant to the Municipal Land Use
Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
POLLUTANT — Shall mean any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, refuse, oil, grease, sewage
sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, medical wastes,
radioactive substance (except those regulated under the Atomic Energy Act
of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. § 2011 et seq.)), thermal waste, wrecked
or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal,
agricultural and construction waste or runoff, or other residue discharged
directly or indirectly to the land, groundwaters or surface waters of the
state, or to a domestic treatment works. "Pollutant" includes both hazardous
and nonhazardous pollutants.
RECHARGE — Shall mean the amount of water from precipitation that
infiltrates into the ground and is not evapotranspired.
§ 12A-11.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 12A-11.2
1:478
SEDIMENT — Shall mean solid material, mineral or organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin
by air, water or gravity as a product of erosion.
SITE — Shall mean that lot or lots upon which a major development is to
occur or has occurred.
SOIL — Shall mean all unconsolidated mineral and organic material of any
origin.
STATE DEVELOPMENT AND REDEVELOPMENT PLAN METROPOLITAN
PLANNING AREA (PA1) — Shall mean an area delineated on the State
Plan Policy Map and adopted by the State Planning Commission that is
intended to be the focus for much of the state's future redevelopment and
revitalization efforts.
STATE PLAN POLICY MAP — Shall mean the geographic application of the
State Development and Redevelopment Plan's goals and statewide policies,
and the official map of these goals and policies.
STORMWATER — Shall mean water resulting from precipitation (including
rain and snow) that runs off the land's surface, is transmitted to the
subsurface, or is captured by separate storm sewers or other sewage or
drainage facilities, or conveyed by snow removal equipment.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BASIN — Shall mean an excavation or
embankment and related areas designed to retain stormwater runoff. A
stormwater management basin may either be normally dry (that is, a
detention basin or infiltration basin), retain water in a permanent pool
(a retention basin) or be planted mainly with wetland vegetation (most
constructed stormwater wetlands).
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURE — Shall mean any structural
or nonstructural strategy, practice, technology, process, program, or other
method intended to control or reduce stormwater or to eliminate illicit or
illegal nonstormwater discharges into stormwater conveyances.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — Shall mean water flow on the surface of the
ground or in storm sewers, resulting from precipitation.
TIDAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — Shall mean a flood hazard area, which
may be influenced by stormwater runoff from inland areas, but which is
primarily caused by the Atlantic Ocean.
URBAN COORDINATING COUNCIL EMPOWERMENT NEIGHBORHOOD
— Shall mean a neighborhood given priority access to state resources
through the New Jersey Redevelopment Authority.
URBAN ENTERPRISE ZONES — Shall mean a zone designated by the New
Jersey Enterprise Zone Authority pursuant to the New Jersey Enterprise
Urban Zones Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27H-60 et seq.
URBAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA — Shall mean previously developed
portions of areas:
§ 12A-11.2 GENERAL § 12A-11.2
1:479
WATERS OF THE STATE — Shall mean the ocean and its estuaries, all
springs, streams, wetlands, and bodies of surface or groundwater, whether
natural or artificial within the boundaries of the State of New Jersey or
subject to its jurisdiction.
WETLANDS or WETLAND — Shall mean an area that is inundated or
saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration
sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does support,
a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions, commonly know as hydrolytic vegetation.
§ 12A-11.3. General Standards. [Ord. #2573, § 3]
§ 12A-11.4. Stormwater Management Requirements for Major
Development. [Ord. #2573, § 4]
Delineated on the State Plan Policy Map (SPPM) as the Metropolitan
Planning Area (PA1), Designated Centers, Cores or Nodes;
a.
b. Designated as CAFRA Centers, Cores or Nodes;
c. Designated as Urban Enterprise Zones; and
Designated as Urban Coordinating Council Empowerment
Neighborhoods.
d.
a. Design and Performance Standards for Stormwater Management
Measures.
1. Stormwater management measures for major development shall be
developed to meet the erosion control, groundwater recharge,
stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
standards in subsection 12A-11.4. To the maximum extent
practicable, these standards shall be met by incorporating
nonstructural stormwater management strategies into the design.
If these strategies alone are not sufficient to meet these standards,
structural stormwater management measures necessary to meet
these standards shall be incorporated into the design.
2. The standards in this section apply only to new major development
and are intended to minimize the impact of stormwater runoff on
water quality and water quantity in receiving water bodies and
maintain groundwater recharge. The standards do not apply to new
major development to the extent that alternative design and
performance standards are applicable under a regional stormwater
management plan or Water Quality Management Plan adopted in
accordance with Department rules.
a. Maintenance Plan. The development shall incorporate a maintenance
plan for the stormwater management measures incorporated into the
design of a major development in accordance with subsection
12A-11.10.
§ 12A-11.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 12A-11.4
1:480
b. Threatened and Endangered Species. Stormwater management
measures shall avoid adverse impacts of concentrated flow on habitat
for threatened and endangered species as documented in the
Department Landscape Project or Natural Heritage Database
established under N.J.S.A. 13:1B-15.147 through 15.150 particularly
Helonias bullata (swamp pink) and/or Clemmys muhlnebergi (bog
turtle).
c. Exemptions. The following linear development projects are exempt
from the groundwater recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and
stormwater runoff quality requirements of subsection 12A-11.4f and g.
1. The construction of an underground utility line provided that the
disturbed areas are revegetated upon completion;
2. The construction of an aboveground utility line provided that the
existing conditions are maintained to the maximum extent
practicable; and
3. The construction of a public pedestrian access, such as a sidewalk
or trail with a maximum width of 14 feet, provided that the access
is made of permeable material.
d. Waivers. A waiver from strict compliance from the groundwater
recharge, stormwater runoff quantity, and stormwater runoff quality
requirements of subsection 12A-11f and g may be obtained for the
enlargement of an existing public roadway or railroad; or the
construction or enlargement of a public pedestrian access, provided
that the following conditions are met:
1. The applicant demonstrates that there is a public need for the
project that cannot be accomplished by any other means;
2. The applicant demonstrates through an alternatives analysis, that
through the use of nonstructural and structural stormwater
management strategies and measures, the option selected
complies with the requirements of subsection 12A-11.4f and g to
the maximum extent practicable;
3. The applicant demonstrates that in order to meet the requirements
of subsection 12A-11.4f and g, existing structures currently in use,
such as homes and buildings, would need to be condemned; and
4. The applicant demonstrates that it does not own or have other
rights to areas, including the potential to obtain through
condemnation lands not falling under paragraph d3 above within
the upstream drainage area of the receiving stream that would
provide additional opportunities to mitigate the requirements of
subsection 12A-11.4f and g that were not achievable on site.
e. Nonstructural Stormwater Management Strategies.
§ 12A-11.4 GENERAL § 12A-11.4
1:481
1. To the maximum extent practicable, the standards in subsection
12A-11.4f and g shall be met by incorporating nonstructural
stormwater management strategies set forth at subsection
12A-11.4e into the design. The applicant shall identify the
nonstructural measures incorporated into the design of the project.
If the applicant contends that is not feasible for engineering,
environmental or safety reasons to incorporate any nonstructural
stormwater management measures identified in paragraph 2 below
into the design of a particular project, the applicant shall identify
the strategy considered and provide a basis for the contention.
2. Nonstructural stormwater management strategies incorporated
into site design shall:
(a) Protect areas that provide water quality benefits or areas
particularly susceptible to erosion and sediment loss;
(b) Minimize impervious surfaces and break up or disconnect the
flow of runoff over impervious surfaces;
(c) Maximize the protection of natural drainage features and
vegetation;
(d) Minimize the decrease in the "time of concentration" from
preconstruction to post-construction. "Time of concentration"
is defined as the time it takes for runoff to travel from the
hydraulically most distant point on the watershed to the point
of interest within a watershed;
(e) Minimize land disturbance including cleaning and grading;
(f) Minimize soil compaction;
(g) Provide low-maintenance landscaping that encourages
retention and planting of native vegetation and minimizes the
use of lawns, fertilizers and pesticides;
(h) Provide vegetated open-channel conveyance systems
discharging into and through stable vegetated areas;
(i) Provide other source controls to prevent or minimize the use or
exposure of pollutants at the site, in order to prevent or
minimize the release of those pollutants into stormwater
runoff. Such source controls include, but are not limited to:
(1) Site design features that help to prevent accumulation of
trash and debris in drainage systems, including features
that satisfy subsection 12A-11.4e3 below;
(2) Site design features that help to prevent discharge of trash
and debris from drainage systems;
§ 12A-11.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 12A-11.4
1:482
(3) Site design features that help to prevent and/or contain
spills or other harmful accumulations of pollutants at
industrial or commercial developments; and
(4) When establishing vegetation after land disturbance,
applying fertilizer in accordance with the requirements
established under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq., and implementing rules.
3. Site design features identified under subsection 12A-11.4e, 2(i)(2)
above shall comply with the following standard to control passage
of solid and floatable materials through storm drain inlets. For
purposes of this paragraph, "solid and floatable material" means
sediment, debris, trash, and other floating, suspended, or
settleable solids. For exemptions to this standard see subsection
12A-11.4e3(c) below.
(a) Design engineers shall use either of the following grates
whenever they use a grate in pavement or another ground
surface to collect stormwater from that surface into a storm
drain or surface water body under that grate:
(1) The New Jersey Department of Transportation (NJDOT)
bicycle safe grate, which is described in Chapter 2.4 of the
NJDOT Bicycle Compatible Roadways and Bikeways
Planning and Design Guidelines (April 1996); or
(2) A different grate, if each individual clear space in that
grate has an area of no more than seven square inches, or
is no greater than 0.5 inches across the smallest
dimension.
Examples of grates subject to this standard include grates
in grate inlets, the grate portion (non-curb-opening
portion) of combination inlets, grates on storm sewer
manholes, ditch grates, trench grates, and grates of spacer
bars in slotted drains. Examples of ground surfaces
include surfaces of roads (including bridges), driveways,
parking areas, bikeways, plazas, sidewalks, lawns, fields,
open channels, and stormwater basin floors.
(b) Whenever design engineers use a curb-opening inlet, the clear
space in that curb opening (or each individual clear space, if
the curb opening has two or more clear spaces) shall have an
area of no more than seven square inches, or be no greater
than two inches across the smallest dimension.
(c) This standard does not apply:
(1) Where the review agency determines that this standard
would cause inadequate hydraulic performance that could
§ 12A-11.4 GENERAL § 12A-11.4
1:483
not practicably be overcome by using additional or larger
storm drain inlets that meet these standards;
(2) Where flows from the water quality design storm as
specified in subsection 12A-11.4g1 are conveyed through
any device (e.g., end of pipe netting facility, manufactured
treatment device, or a catch basin hood) that is designed,
at a minimum, to prevent delivery of all solid and floatable
materials that could not pass through one of the following:
[a] A rectangular space four and five-eighths inches long
and 1 1/2 inches wide (this option does not apply for
outfall netting facilities); or
[b] A bar screen having a bar spacing of 0.5 inches.
(3) Where flows are conveyed through a trash rack that has
parallel bars with one-inch spacing between the bars, to
the elevation of the water quality design storm as specified
in subsection 12A-11.4g1; or
(4) Where the New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection determines, pursuant to the New Jersey
Register of Historic Places Rules at N.J.A.C. 7:4-7.2(c), that
action to meet this standard is an undertaking that
constitutes an encroachment or will damage or destroy the
New Jersey Register listed historic property.
4. Any land area used as a nonstructural stormwater management
measure to meet the performance standards in subsection 12-11.4f
and g shall be dedicated to a government agency, subjected to a
conservation restriction filed with the appropriate county clerk's
office, or subject to an approved equivalent restriction that ensures
that measure or an equivalent stormwater management measure
approved by the reviewing agency is maintained in perpetuity.
5. Guidance for nonstructural stormwater management strategies is
available in the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in subsection 12A-11.7, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org.
f. Erosion Control, Groundwater Recharge and Runoff Quantity
Standards.
1. This paragraph f contains minimum design and performance
standards to control erosion, encourage and control infiltration and
groundwater recharge, and control stormwater runoff quantity
impacts of major developments.
(a) The minimum design and performance standards for erosion
control are those established under the Soil Erosion and
§ 12A-11.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 12A-11.4
1:484
Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq. and
implementing rules.
(b) The minimum design and performance standards for
groundwater recharge are as follows:
(1) The design engineer shall, using the assumptions and
factors for stormwater runoff and groundwater recharge
calculations at subsection 12A-11.5, either:
[a] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the site and its stormwater management
measures maintain 100% of the average annual
preconstruction groundwater recharge volume for the
site; or
[b] Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis that the increase of stormwater runoff volume
from preconstruction to post-construction for the twoyear
storm is infiltrated.
(2) This groundwater recharge requirement does not apply to
projects within the "urban redevelopment area," or to
projects subject to paragraph (3) below.
(3) The following types of stormwater shall not be recharged:
[a] Stormwater from areas of high pollutant loading. High
pollutant loading areas are areas in industrial and
commercial developments where solvents and/or
petroleum products are loaded/unloaded, stored, or
applied, areas where pesticides are loaded/unloaded
or stored; areas where hazardous materials are
expected to be present in greater that "reportable
quantities" as defined by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) at 40 CFR
302.4; areas where recharge would be inconsistent
with Department approved remedial action work plan
or landfill closure plan and areas with high risks for
spills of toxic materials, such as gas stations and
vehicle maintenance facilities; and
[b] Industrial stormwater exposed to "source material."
"Source material means any material(s) or machinery,
located at an industrial facility that is directly or
indirectly related to process, manufacturing or other
industrial activities, which could be a source of
pollutants in any industrial stormwater discharge to
groundwater. Source materials include, but are not
limited to, raw materials; intermediate products; final
products; waste materials; by-products; industrial
machinery and fuels, and lubricants, solvents, and
§ 12A-11.4 GENERAL § 12A-11.4
1:485
detergents that are related to process, manufacturing,
or other industrial activities that are exposed to
stormwater.
(4) The design engineer shall assess the hydraulic impact on
the groundwater table and design the site so as to avoid
adverse hydraulic impacts. Potential adverse hydraulic
impacts include, but are not limited to, exacerbating a
naturally or seasonally high water table so as to cause
surficial ponding, flooding of basements, or interference
with the proper operation of subsurface sewerage disposal
systems and other subsurface structures in the vicinity or
downgradient of the groundwater recharge area.
(c) In order to control stormwater runoff quantity impacts, the
design engineer shall, using the assumptions and factors for
stormwater runoff calculations at subsection 12A-11.5,
complete one the following:
(1) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that for stormwater leaving the site, post-construction
runoff hydrographs for the two-, ten- and 100-year storm
events do no exceed, at any point in time, the
preconstruction runoff hydrographs for the same storm
events;
(2) Demonstrate through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
that there is no increase, as compared to the preconstruction
condition, in the peak runoff rates of
stormwater leaving the site for the two-, ten-, and 100-year
storm events and that the increased volume or change in
timing of stormwater runoff will not increase flood damage
at or downstream of the site. This analysis shall include the
analysis of impacts or existing land uses and projected
land uses assuming full development under existing zoning
and land use ordinance in the drainage area;
(3) Design stormwater management measures so that the
post-construction peak runoff rates for the ten-, ten- and
100-year storm events are 50, 75 and 80% respectively, of
the preconstruction peak runoff rates. The percentages
apply only to the post-construction stormwater runoff that
is attributable to the portion of the site on which the
proposed development or project is to be constructed. The
percentages shall not be applied to post-construction
stormwater runoff into tidal flood hazard areas if the
increased volume of stormwater runoff will not increase
flood damages below the point of discharge; or
(4) In tidal flood hazard areas, stormwater runoff quantity
analysis in accordance with paragraphs (1), (2) and (3)
§ 12A-11.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 12A-11.4
1:486
above shall only be applied if the increased volume of
stormwater runoff could increase flood damages below the
point of discharge.
2. Any application for a new agricultural development that meets the
definition of major development at subsection 12A-11.2 shall be
submitted to the appropriate Soil Conservation District for review
and approval in accordance with the requirements of this section
and any applicable Soil Conservation District guidelines for
stormwater runoff quantity and erosion control. For the purpose of
this section, "agricultural development" means land uses normally
associated with the production of food, fiber, and livestock for sale.
Such uses do not include the development of land for the
processing or sale of food and the manufacturing of agriculturally
related products.
g. Stormwater Runoff Quality Standards.
1. Stormwater management measures shall be designed to reduce the
post-construction load of total suspended solids (TSS) in
stormwater runoff by 80% of the anticipated load from the
developed site, expressed as an annual average. Stormwater
management measures shall only be required for water quality
control if an additional one-quarter acre of impervious surface is
being proposed on a development site. The requirement to reduce
TSS does not apply to any stormwater runoff in a discharge
regulated under a numeric effluent limitation for TSS imposed
under the New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(NJPDES) rules, N.J.A.C. 7:14A, or in a discharge specifically
exempt under a NJPDES permit from this requirement. The water
quality design storm is one and one-quarter inches of rainfall in two
hours. Water quality calculations shall take into account the
distribution of rain from the water quality design storm, as
reflected in Table 1. The calculation of the volume of runoff may
take into account the implementation of nonstructural and
structural stormwater management measures.
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(Inches)
0 0.0000 65 0.8917
5 0.0083 70 0.9917
10 0.0166 75 1.0500
15 0.0250 80 1.0840
20 0.0500 85 1.1170
25 0.0750 90 1.1500
§ 12A-11.4 GENERAL § 12A-11.4
1:487
Table 1: Water Quality Design Storm Distribution
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(Inches)
Time
(Minutes)
Cumulative Rainfall
(Inches)
30 0.1000 95 1.1750
35 0.1330 100 1.2000
40 0.1660 105 1.2250
45 0.2000 110 1.2334
50 0.2583 115 1.2417
55 0.3583 120 1.2500
60 0.6250
2. For purposes of TSS reduction calculations, Table 2 below presents
the presumed removal rates for certain BMPs designed in
accordance with the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual. The BMP Manual may be obtained from the
address identified in subsection 12A-11.7, or found on the
Department's website at www.njstormwater.org. The BMP Manual
and other sources of technical guidance are listed in subsection
12A-11.7. TSS reduction shall be calculated based on the removal
rates for the BMPs in Table 2 below. Alternative removal rates and
methods of calculating removal rates may be used if the design
engineer provides documentation demonstrating the capability of
these alternative rates and methods to the review agency. A copy of
any approved alternative rate or method of calculating the removal
rate shall be provided to the Department at the following address:
Division of Watershed Management, New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, P.O. Box 418, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0418.
3. If more than one BMP in series is necessary to achieve the required
80% TSS reduction for a site, the applicant shall utilize the
following formula to calculate TSS reduction:
R=A + B - (AxB)/100
Where:
R = Total TSS percent load removal from application of both
BMPs, and
A = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the first BMP
B = The TSS percent removal rate applicable to the second
BMP
§ 12A-11.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 12A-11.4
1:488
Table 2:
TSS Removal Rates for BMPs
Best Management Practice TSS Percent Removal Rates
Bioretention Systems 90
Constructed Stormwater
Wetland
90
Extended Detention Basin 40-60
Infiltration Structure 80
Manufactured Treatment
Device
See subsection 12A-11.6c.
Sand Filter 80
Vegetative Filter Strip 60-80
Wet Pond 50-90
4. If there is more than one on-site drainage area, the 80% TSS
removal rate shall apply to each drainage area, unless the runoff
from the subareas converge on site in which case the removal rate
can be demonstrated through a calculation using a weighted
average.
5. Stormwater management measures shall also be designed to
reduce, to the maximum extent feasible, the post-construction
nutrient load of the anticipated load from the developed site in
stormwater runoff generated from the water quality design storm.
In achieving reduction of nutrients to the maximum extent feasible,
the design of this site shall include nonstructural strategies and
structural measures that optimize nutrient removal while still
achieving the performance standards in subsection 12A-11.4f and
g.
6. Additional information and examples are contained in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual which may
be obtained from the address identified in subsection 12A-11.7.
7. In accordance with the definition of FW1 at N.J.A.C. 7:9B-1.4,
stormwater management measure shall be designed to prevent any
increase in stormwater runoff to waters classified as FW1.
8. Special water resource protection areas shall be established along
all waters designated Category One at N.J.A.C. 7:9B, and perennial
or intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters as shown on the USGS Quadrangle Maps or in the
County Soil Surveys, within the associated HUC14 drainage area.
These areas shall be established for the protection of water quality,
aesthetic value, exceptional ecological significance, exceptional
recreational significance, exceptional water supply significance,
§ 12A-11.4 GENERAL § 12A-11.4
1:489
and exceptional fisheries significance of those established Category
One waters. These areas shall be designated and protected as
follow:
(a) The applicant shall preserve and maintain a special water
resource protection area in accordance with one of the
following:
(1) A 300-foot special water resource protection area shall be
provided on each side of the waterway, measured
perpendicular to the waterway from the top of the bank
outwards or from the center line of the waterway where
the bank is not defined, consisting of existing vegetation or
vegetational allowed to follow natural succession is
provided.
(2) Encroachment within the designated special water
resource protection area under paragraph (1) above shall
only be allowed where previous development or
disturbance has occurred (for example, active agricultural
use, parking area or maintained lawn area). The
encroachment shall only be allowed where applicant
demonstrates that the functional value and overall
condition of the special water resource protection area will
be maintained to the maximum extent practicable. In no
case shall the remaining special water resource protection
area be reduced to less than 150 feet as measured
perpendicular to the top of bank of the waterway or center
line of the waterway where the bank is undefined. All
encroachments proposed under this subparagraph shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(b) All stormwater shall be discharged outside of and flow through
the special water resource protection area and shall comply
with the Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for
Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq.
(c) If stormwater discharged outside of and flowing through the
special water resource protection area cannot comply with the
Standard for Off-Site Stability in the "Standards for Soil
Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey," established
under the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act, N.J.S.A.
4:24-39 et seq., then the stabilization measures in accordance
with the requirements of the above standards may be placed
within the special water resource protection area, provided
that:
(1) Stabilization measures shall not be placed within 150 feet
of the Category One Waterway.
§ 12A-11.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 12A-11.4
1:490
§ 12A-11.5. Calculation of Stormwater Runoff and Groundwater
Recharge. [Ord. #2573, § 5]
(2) Stormwater associated with discharges allowed by this
section shall achieve a 95% TSS post-construction removal
rate;
(3) Temperature shall be addressed to ensure no impact on
the receiving waterway;
(4) The encroachment shall only be allowed where the
applicant demonstrates that the functional value and
overall condition of the special water resource protection
area will be maintained to the maximum extent
practicable;
(5) A conceptual project design meeting shall be held with the
appropriate Department staff and Soil Conservation
District staff to identify necessary stabilization measures;
and
(6) All encroachments proposed under this section shall be
subject to review and approval by the Department.
(d) A stream corridor protection plan may be developed by a
regional stormwater management planning committee as an
element of a regional stormwater management plan, or by a
municipality through an adopted municipal stormwater
management plan. If a stream corridor protection plan for a
waterway subject to subsection 12A-11.4g8 has been approved
by the Department of Environmental Protection, then the
provisions of the plan shall be the applicable special water
resource protection area requirements for that waterway. A
stream corridor protection plan for a waterway subject to
paragraph g8 shall maintain or enhance the current functional
value and overall condition of the special water resource
protection area as defined in paragraph g8(a)(1) above. In no
case shall a stream corridor protection plan allow the
reduction of the Special Water Resource Protection Area to
less than 150 feet as measured perpendicular to the waterway
subject to this subsection.
(e) Paragraph g8 does not apply to the construction of one
individual single family dwelling that is not part of a larger
development on a lot receiving preliminary or final subdivision
approval on or before February 2, 2004, provided that the
construction begins on or before February 2, 2009.
a. Stormwater runoff shall be calculated in accordance with the following:
1. The design engineer shall calculate runoff using one of the
following methods:
§ 12A-11.4 GENERAL § 12A-11.5
1:491
(a) The USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
methodology, including the NRCS Runoff Equation and
Dimensionless Unit Hydrograph, as described in the NRCS
National Engineering Handbook Section 4 - Hydrology and
Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds;
or
(b) The Rational Methods for peak flow and the Modified Rational
Method for hydrograph computations.
2. For the purpose of calculating runoff coefficients and groundwater
recharge, there is a presumption that the preconstruction condition
of a site or portion thereof is a wooded land use with good
hydrologic condition. The term "runoff coefficient" applies to both
the NRCS methodology at subsection 12A-11.5a1(a) and the
Rational and Modified Rational Methods at subsection
12A-11.4a1(b). A runoff coefficient or a groundwater recharge land
cover for an existing condition may be used on all or a portion of
the site if the design engineer verifies that the hydrologic condition
has existed on the site or portion of the site for at least five years
without interruption prior to the time of application. If more than
one land cover have existed on the site during the five years
immediately prior to the time of application, the land cover with the
lowest runoff potential shall be used for the computations. In
addition, there is the presumption that the site is in good
hydrologic condition (if the land use type is pasture, lawn, or park),
with good cover (if the land use type is woods), or with good
hydrologic condition and conservation treatment (if the land use
type is cultivation).
3. In computing preconstruction stormwater runoff, the design
engineer shall account for all significant land features and
structures, such as ponds, wetlands, depressions, hedgerows, or
culverts that may reduce preconstruction stormwater runoff rates
and volumes.
4. In computing stormwater runoff from all design storms, the design
engineer shall consider the relative stormwater runoff rates and/or
volumes of pervious and impervious surface separately to
accurately compute the rates and volume of stormwater runoff
from the site. To calculate runoff from unconnected impervious
cover, urban impervious area modifications as described in the
NRCS Technical Release 55 - Urban Hydrology for Small
Watersheds and other methods may be employed.
5. If the invert of the outlet structure of a stormwater management
measure is below the flood hazard design flood elevation as defined
at N.J.A.C. 7:13, the design engineer shall take into account the
effects of tailwater in the design of structural stormwater
management measures.
§ 12A-11.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 12A-11.5
1:492
§ 12A-11.6. Standards for Structural Stormwater Management
Measures. [Ord. #2573, § 6]
b. Groundwater recharge may be calculated in accordance with the
following:
1. The New Jersey Geological Survey Report GSP-32, A Method for
Evaluating Ground-Water Recharge Areas in New Jersey,
incorporated herein by reference as amended and supplemented.
Information regarding the methodology is available from the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual at
http://www.state.nj.us/dep/njgs/; or at New Jersey Geological
Survey, 29 Arctic Parkway, P.O. Box 427, Trenton, New Jersey
08625-0427; (609) 984-6587.
a. Standards for structural stormwater management measures are as
follows:
1. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
take into account the existing site conditions, including, for
example, environmentally critical areas, wetlands; flood-prone
areas; slopes depth to seasonal high water table; soil type,
permeability and texture; drainage area and drainage patterns; and
the presence of solution-prone carbonate rocks (limestone).
2. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed to
minimize maintenance, facilitate maintenance and repairs, and
ensure proper functioning. Trash racks shall be installed at the
intake to the outlet structure as appropriate, and shall have parallel
bars with one-inch spacing between the bars to the elevation of the
water quality design storm. For elevations higher than the water
quality design storm, the parallel bars at the outlet structure shall
be spaced no greater than one-third the width of the diameter of
the orifice or one-third the width of the weir, with a minimum
spacing between bars of one-inch and a maximum spacing between
bars of six inches. In addition, the design of trash racks must
comply with the requirements of subsection 12A-11.8b.
3. Structural stormwater management measures shall be designed,
constructed, and installed to be strong, durable, and corrosion
resistant. Measures that are consistent with the relevant portions
of the Residential Site Improvement Standards at N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3,
7.4 and 7.5 shall be deemed to meet this requirement.
4. At the intake to the outlet from the stormwater management basin,
the orifice size shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches in diameter.
5. Stormwater management basins shall be designed to meet the
minimum safety standards for stormwater management basins at
subsection 12A-11.8.
§ 12A-11.5 GENERAL § 12A-11.6
1:493
§ 12A-11.7. Sources for Technical Guidance. [Ord. #2573, § 7]
b. Stormwater management measure guidelines are available in the New
Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual. Other
stormwater management measures may be utilized provided the design
engineer demonstrates that the proposed measure and its design will
accomplish the required water quantity, groundwater recharge and
water quality design and performance standards established by
subsection 12A-11.4 of this section.
c. Manufactured treatment devices may be used to meet the requirements
of subsection 12A-11.4 of this section, provided the pollutant removal
rates are verified by the New Jersey Corporation for Advanced
Technology and certified by the Department.
a. Technical guidance for stormwater management measures can be
found in the documents listed at 1 and 2 below, which are available from
Maps and Publications, New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection, 428 East State Street, P.O. Box 420, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625; telephone (609) 777-1038.
1. Guidelines for stormwater management measures are contained in
the New Jersey Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
as amended. Information is provided on stormwater management
measures such as: bioretention systems, constructed stormwater
wetlands, dry wells, extended detention basins, infiltration
structures, manufactured treatment devices, pervious paving, sand
filters, vegetative filter strips, and wet ponds.
2. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
Stormwater Management Facilities Maintenance Manual, as
amended.
b. Additional technical guidance for stormwater management measures
can be obtained from the following:
1. The "Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New
Jersey" promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee and
incorporated into N.J.A.C. 2:90. Copies of these standards may be
obtained by contacting the State Soil Conservation Committee or
any of the Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a)4.
The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained from the State Soil
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey 08625;
(609) 292-5540.
2. The Rutgers Cooperative Extension Services, 732-932-9306; and
3. The Soil Conservation Districts listed in N.J.A.C. 2:90-1.3(a).
4. The location, address, and telephone number of each Soil
Conservation District may be obtained form the State Soil
§ 12A-11.6 LYNDHURST CODE § 12A-11.7
1:494
§ 12A-11.8. Safety Standards for Stormwater Management Basins.
[Ord. #2573, § 8]
Conservation Committee, P.O. Box 330, Trenton, New Jersey,
08625, (609) 292-5540.
a. This subsection sets forth requirements to protect public safety through
the proper design and operation of stormwater management basins.
This subsection applies to any new stormwater management basin.
b. Requirements for Trash Racks, Overflow Grates and Escape Provisions.
1. A trash rack is a device designed to catch trash and debris and
prevent the clogging of outlet structures. Trash racks shall be
installed at the intake to the outlet from the stormwater
management basin to ensure proper functioning of the basin
outlets in accordance with the following:
(a) The trash rack shall have parallel bars, with no greater than six
inch spacing between the bars.
(b) The trash rack shall be designed so as not to adversely affect
the hydraulic performance of the outlet pipe or structure.
(c) The average velocity of flow through a clean trash rack is not to
exceed 2.5 feet per second under the full range of stage and
discharge. Velocity is to be computed on the basis of the net
area of opening through the rack.
(d) The trash rack shall be constructed and installed to be rigid,
durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
2. An overflow grate is designed to prevent obstruction of the
overflow structure. If an outlet structure has an overflow grate,
such grate shall meet the following requirements:
(a) The overflow grate shall be secured to the outlet structure but
removable for emergencies and maintenance.
(b) The overflow grate spacing shall be no less than two inches
across the smallest dimension.
(c) The overflow grate shall be constructed and installed to be
rigid, durable, and corrosion resistant, and shall be designed to
withstand a perpendicular live loading of 300 lbs./ft. sq.
3. For purposes of this paragraph 3, escape provisions means the
permanent installation ladders, steps, rungs, or other features that
provide easily accessible means of egress from stormwater
management basins. Stormwater management basins shall include
escape provisions as follows:
§ 12A-11.7 GENERAL § 12A-11.8
1:495
§ 12A-11.9. Requirements for a Site Development Stormwater Plan.
[Ord. #2573, § 9]
(a) If a stormwater management basin has an outlet structure,
escape provisions shall be incorporated in or on the structure.
With the prior approval of the reviewing agency identified in
subsection 12A-11.8c. a free-standing outlet structure may be
exempted from this requirement.
(b) Safety ledges shall be constructed on the slopes of all new
stormwater management basins having a permanent pool of
water deeper than 2 1/2 feet. Such safety ledges shall be
comprised of two steps. Each step shall be four to six feet in
width. One step shall be located approximately 2 1/2 feet below
the permanent water surface, and the second step shall be
located one to 1 1/2 feet above the permanent water surface.
(c) In new stormwater management basins, the maximum interior
slope for an earthen dam, embankment, or berm shall not be
steeper than 3 horizontal to 1 vertical.
c. Variance or Exemption from Safety Standards.
1. A variance or exemption from the safety standards for stormwater
management basins may be granted only upon a written finding by
the appropriate reviewing agency (municipality, county or
Department) that the variance or exemption will not constitute a
threat to public safety.
a. Submission of Site Development Stormwater Plan.
1. Whenever an applicant seeks municipal approval of a development
subject to this section, the applicant shall submit all of the required
components of the checklist for the site development stormwater
plan at subsection 12A-11.9c below as part of the submission of the
applicant's application for subdivision or site plan approval.
2. The applicant shall demonstrate that the project meets the
standards set forth in this section.
3. The applicant shall submit 18 copies of the materials listed in the
checklist for site development stormwater plans in accordance with
subsection 12A-11.9c of this section.
b. Site Development Stormwater Plan Approval. The applicant's site
development project shall be reviewed as a part of the subdivision or
site plan review process by the municipal board or official from which
municipal approval is sought. That municipal board or official shall
consult the engineer retained by the planning and/or zoning board (as
appropriate) to determine if all of the checklist requirements have been
satisfied and to determine if the project meets the standards set forth in
this section.
§ 12A-11.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 12A-11.9
1:496
c. Checklist Requirements. The following information shall be required:
1. Topographic Base Map. The reviewing engineer may require
upstream tributary drainage system information as necessary. It is
recommended that the topographic base map of the site be
submitted which extends a minimum of 200 feet beyond the limits
of the proposed development, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet
or greater, showing two-foot contour intervals. The map as
appropriate may indicate the following: existing surface water
drainage, shorelines, steep slopes, soils, erodible soils, perennial or
intermittent streams that drain into or upstream of the Category
One waters, wetlands and flood plains along with their appropriate
buffer strips, marshlands and other wetlands, pervious or
vegetative surfaces, existing man-made structures, roads, bearing
and distances of property lines, and significant natural and manmade
features not otherwise shown.
2. Environmental Site Analysis. A written and graphic description of
the natural and man-made features of the site and its environs. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, slopes,
wetlands, waterways and vegetation on the site. Particular
attention should be given to unique, unusual or environmentally
sensitive features and to those that provide particular
opportunities or constraints for development.
3. Project Description and Site Plan(s). A map (or maps) at the scale of
the topographical base map indicating the location of existing and
proposed buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural
facilities for stormwater management and sediment control and
other permanent structures. The map(s) shall also clearly show
areas where alterations occur in the natural terrain and cover,
including lawns and other landscaping, and seasonal high
groundwater elevations. A written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be
provided.
4. Land Use Planning and Source Control Plan. This plan shall provide
a demonstration of how the goals and standards of subsections
12A-11.3 through 12A-11.6 are being met. The focus of this plan
shall be to describe how the site is being developed to meet the
objective of controlling groundwater recharge, stormwater quality
and stormwater quantity problems at the source by land
management and source controls whenever possible.
5. Stormwater Management Facilities Map. The following
information, illustrated on a map of the same scale as the
topographic base map, shall be included:
(a) Total area to be paved or built upon, proposed surface
contours, land area to be occupied by the stormwater
management facilities and the type of vegetation thereon, and
§ 12A-11.9 GENERAL § 12A-11.9
1:497
§ 12A-11.10. Maintenance and Repair. [Ord. #2573, § 10]
details of the proposed plan to control and dispose of
stormwater.
(b) Details of all stormwater management facility designs, during
and after construction, including discharge provisions,
discharge capacity for each outlet at different levels of
detention and emergency spillway provisions with maximum
discharge capacity of each spillway.
6. Calculations.
(a) Comprehensive hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations
for the predevelopment and post-development conditions for
the design storms specified in subsection 12A-11.4 of this
section.
(b) When the proposed stormwater management control measures
(e.g. infiltration basins) depends on the hydrologic properties
of soils, then a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report
shall be based on on-site borings logs or soil pits profiles. The
number and location of required soil borings or soil pits shall
be determined based on what is needed to determine the
suitability and distribution of soils present at the location of the
control measure.
7. Maintenance and Repair Plan. The design and planning of the
stormwater management facility shall meet the maintenance
requirements of subsection 12A-11.10.
8. Waiver from Submission Requirements. The municipal official or
board reviewing an application under this section may, in
consultation with the municipal engineer, waive submission of any
of the requirements in subsection 12A-11.9c, 1 through 6, of this
section when it can be demonstrated that the information
requested is impossible to obtain or it would create a hardship on
the applicant to obtain and its absence will not materially affect the
review process.
a. Applicability.
1. Projects subject to review as in subsection 12A-11.1c of this section
shall comply with the requirements of subsection 12A-11.10b and
c.
b. General Maintenance.
1. The design engineer shall prepare a maintenance plan for the
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
a major development.
§ 12A-11.9 LYNDHURST CODE § 12A-11.10
1:498
2. The maintenance plan shall contain specific preventative
maintenance tasks and schedules; cost estimates, including
estimated cost of sediment, debris, or trash removal; and the name,
address, and telephone number of the person or persons
responsible for preventative and corrective maintenance (including
replacement). Maintenance guidelines for stormwater
management measures are available in the New Jersey Stormwater
Best Management Practices Manual. If the maintenance plan
identifies a person other than the developer (for example, a public
agency or homeowners' association) as having the responsibility for
maintenance, the plan shall include documentation of such
person's agreement to assume this responsibility, or of the
developer's obligation to dedicate a stormwater management
facility to such person under an applicable ordinance or regulation.
3. Responsibility for maintenance shall not be assigned or transferred
to the owner or tenant of an individual property in a residential
development or project, unless such owner or tenant owns or
leases the entire residential development or project.
4. If the person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 12A-11.10b2 above is not a public agency, the
maintenance plan and any future revisions based on subsection
12A-11.10b7 below shall be recorded upon the deed of record for
each property on which the maintenance described in the
maintenance plan must be undertaken.
5. Preventative and corrective maintenance shall be performed to
maintain the function of the stormwater management measure,
including repairs or replacement to the structure; removal of
sediment, debris, or trash; restoration of eroded areas; snow and
ice removal; fence repair or replacement; restoration of vegetation;
and repair or replacement of nonvegetated linings.
6. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 12A-11.10b2 above shall maintain a detailed log of all
preventative and corrective maintenance for the structural
stormwater management measures incorporated into the design of
the development, including a record of all inspections and copies of
all maintenance-related work orders.
7. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 12A-11.10b2 above shall evaluate the effectiveness of
the maintenance plan at least once per year and adjust the plan and
the deed as needed.
8. The person responsible for maintenance identified under
subsection 12A-11.10b2 above shall retain and make available,
upon request by any public entity with administrative, health,
environmental or safety authority over the site, the maintenance
§ 12A-11.10 GENERAL § 12A-11.10
1:499
§ 12A-11.11. Penalties. [Ord. #2573, § 11]
Any person who erects, constructs, alters, repairs, converts, maintains, or
uses any building, structure or land in violation of this section shall be
subject to the following penalties: $1,000 per day for each violation.
§ 12A-11.12. Effective Date. [Ord. #2573, § 12]
This section shall take effect immediately upon the approval by the county
review agency, or 60 days from the receipt of the ordinance by the county
review agency if the county review agency should fail to act.
§ 12A-11.13. Severability. [Ord. #2573, § 13]
If the provisions of any subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of
this section shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction,
such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any
subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this section.
Chapter 13
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
[Editor's Note: See also Chapter 8, Building and Housing.]
§ 13-1. TITLE; DECLARATION OF POLICY, AND PURPOSES.
plan and the documentation required by subsection 12A-11.10b6
and 7 above.
9. The requirements of subsection 12A-11.10b3 and 4 do not apply to
stormwater management facilities that are dedicated to and
accepted by the municipality or another governmental agency.
10. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a
danger to public safety or public health, or if it is in need of
maintenance or repair, the municipality shall so notify the
responsible person in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the
responsible person shall have 14 days to effect maintenance and
repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by the municipal
engineer or his designee. The municipality, in its discretion, may
extend the time allowed for effecting maintenance and repair for
good cause. If the responsible person fails or refuses to perform
such maintenance and repair, the municipality or county may
immediately proceed to do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the
responsible person.
c. Nothing in this subsection shall preclude the municipality in which the
major development is located from requiring the posting of a
performance or maintenance guarantee in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53.
§ 12A-11.10 LYNDHURST CODE § 13-1.1
1:500
§ 13-1.1. Title. [Ord. #1474]
This chapter shall be known as "The Property Maintenance Code of the
Township of Lyndhurst" and may be referred to in this chapter in the short
form as "The Property Maintenance Code" or as "this code."
§ 13-1.2. Findings and Declaration of Policy. [Ord. #1474]
Is is hereby found and declared that there exist in the township structures
which are, or may become in the future, substandard with respect to
structural integrity, equipment or maintenance, or further that such
conditions including but not limited to structural deterioration, lack of
maintenance of exterior premises, infestation, lack of essential heating,
plumbing, storage or refrigeration equipment, lack of maintenance or
upkeep of essential facilities and utilities, existence of fire hazards,
inadequate provisions for light and air, unsanitary conditions and
overcrowding, constitute a menace to the health safety, morals, welfare
and reasonable comfort of the citizens and inhabitants of the township.
It is further found and declared that by reason of lack of maintenance
and progressive deterioration, certain properties have the further effect of
creating, blighting conditions and initiating slums, and that if the same are
not curtailed and removed, the aforesaid conditions will grow and spread
and will necessitate in time the expenditure of large amounts of public funds
to correct and eliminate the same, and that by reason of timely regulations
and restrictions as herein contained, the growth of slums and blight may be
prevented and the neighborhood and property values thereby maintained,
the desirability and amenities of dwellings and neighborhoods enhanced
and the public health, safety and welfare protected and fostered.
§ 13-1.3. Purposes. [Ord. #1474]
The purpose of this code is to protect the public health, safety, morals
and welfare by establishing minimum standards governing the conditions of
occupancy and maintenance of premises; to establish minimum standards
governing utilities and other physical components and conditions essential
to make structures fit for human habitation and occupancy; to fix certain
responsibilities and duties upon owners and operators, and distinct and
separate responsibilities and duties upon occupants of buildings; to
authorize and establish procedures for the inspection of dwellings and other
buildings; to fix penalties for the violations of this code; to provide for the
right of access across adjoining premises to permit repairs; and to provide
for the repair, demolition or vacation of dwellings or other buildings unfit for
human habitation. This code is hereby declared to be remedial and essential
for the public interest and it is intended that this code be liberally construed
to effectuate the purposes as stated herein.
§ 13-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #1474]
As used in this chapter.
§ 13-1.1 GENERAL § 13-2
1:501
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — Shall mean a building which is customarily
used as an incidental building to a principal building, and located on the
same lot with such principal building, excluding however, any structure
which is attached to a principal building.
BASEMENT — Shall mean a portion of a building partly but not more than
one-half below the level of the grade. It shall be counted as a story in
determining the height of a building.
BATHROOM — Shall mean enclosed space containing one or more bathtubs,
showers, or both, and which shall also include toilets, lavatories, or fixtures
serving similar purposes.
CELLAR — Shall mean a portion of a building more than one-half below
the level of the grade. It shall not be counted as a story in determining the
height of the building.
DETERIORATION — Shall mean the condition of a building or part thereof,
characterized by holes, breaks, rot, crumbling, cracking, peeling, rusting
or other evidence of physical decay or neglect, lack of maintenance or
excessive use.
DWELLING — Shall mean any building which was or is wholly or partly used
or intended to be used for living or sleeping quarters by human occupants.
EMANCIPATED MINOR — Shall mean any person under the age of 18 who
is gainfully employed and self-supporting or who is married to a spouse who
is gainfully employed and who supports the minor or who is a student living
away from home in regular attendance at an institution of higher learning.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Shall mean open space on the premises
outside of any building thereon.
EXTERMINATION — Shall mean the control and elimination of insects,
rodents, and vermin by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or
making inaccessible material that may serve as their food; by poisoning,
spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other approved means of pest
elimination.
FAMILY — Shall mean a family is one or more persons who live together in
one dwelling unit and maintain a common household, and who are related
by blood, marriage or adoption. For the purpose of this chapter, a family
Dwelling units shall mean any room or group of rooms located within
a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
used or are intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
1.
Multiple dwelling shall mean any dwelling containing three or more
dwelling units.
2.
Single-family dwelling shall mean a building designed for and occupied
exclusively by not more than one family.
3.
Two-family dwelling shall mean a building designed for and occupied
exclusively by not more than two families.
4.
§ 13-2 LYNDHURST CODE § 13-2
1:502
includes only a husband and wife, son, son-in-law, daughter, daughterin-
law, father, father-in-law, mother, mother-in-law, brothers and sisters,
grandparents, grandchildren, stepchildren, and bona fide family servants
living in and working full time on the premises.
FIRE HAZARD (also see NUISANCE) — Shall mean anything or any act
which increases or may cause an increase of the hazard or menace of fire to
a greater degree than that customarily recognized as normal by persons in
the public service of preventing, suppressing, or extinguishing fire; or which
may obstruct, delay or hinder, or may become the cause of an obstruction, a
delay, a hazard or a hindrance to the prevention, suppression or expression
or extinguishment of fire.
FIRE OFFICIAL — Shall mean chief of the fire prevention bureau of the
township.
GARBAGE (see also REFUSE, RUBBISH) — Shall mean putrescible animal
and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and
consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOMS — Shall mean rooms used or designed for use by
one or more persons for living or sleeping or cooking and eating but
not including bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, serving
and storage pantries, corridors, foyers, vestibules, cellars, heater rooms,
boiler rooms, and utility rooms. Other rooms or spaces that are not used
frequently or for an extended period or that which has less than 70 square
feet of floor area, shall not be considered as habitable rooms.
HEALTH OFFICER — Shall mean the sanitarian of the township.
HOUSING INSPECTORS — Shall mean the officials, officers or employees
of the township entrusted with the enforcement of this code.
INFESTATION — Shall mean the presence of insects, rodents, vermin or
other pests on the premises which constitute a health hazard.
KITCHEN — Shall mean a portion of a dwelling unit designated or used
for cooking and eating. Stove, refrigerator, sink or cabinets must occupy at
least 16 square feet of kitchen area.
NUISANCE — Shall mean:
Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence,
or as provided by the statutes of the State of New Jersey, or the
ordinances of the township.
1.
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or
safety of persons whether in a building, on the premises of a building,
or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes, but is not limited to:
abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations, abandoned iceboxes,
refrigerators, motor vehicles, and structurally unsound structures,
lumber, trash, fences, debris, or vegetation such as poison ivy, oak or
sumac, which may prove a hazard for inquisitive persons.
2.
§ 13-2 GENERAL § 13-2
1:503
OCCUPANT — Shall mean any person living, sleeping, or having actual
possession of a business, dwelling unit or rooming unit.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any person who has charge, care or control of a
dwelling whether with or without the knowledge and consent of the owner.
OWNER — Shall mean any person, who, alone or jointly or severally with
others, shall have legal or equitable title to any premises, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof; or shall have charge, care or
control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, as owner or agent of the owner or
as executor, executrix, administratrix, trustee, receiver or guardian of the
estate, or as a mortgage in possession regardless of how such possession
was obtained. Any person who is a lessee subletting or reassigning any part
or all of any dwelling or dwelling unit shall be deemed to be a co-owner with
the lessor and shall have joint responsibility over the portion of the premises
sublet or assigned by the lessee.
PLUMBING — Shall mean all of the following supplies, facilities and
equipment, gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, garbage
disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers,
lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines,
catch basins, vents and any other similar supplied fixtures, together with all
connections to water, sewer or gas lines, and water pipes and lines utilized
in conjunction with air conditioning equipment.
PREMISES — Shall mean a lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings
or structures thereon.
PUBLIC OFFICERS — Shall mean the sanitarian, chief of the fire prevention
bureau and the construction official of the township and such officials as
designated to act in behalf of the township by the board of commissioners.
REFUSE (also see GARBAGE, RUBBISH) — Shall mean all putrescible and
nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes) including but not limited
to garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
REGISTERED MAIL — Shall mean registered mail or certified mail.
Physical conditions dangerous to human life or detrimental to health of
persons on or near the premises where the condition exists.
3.
4. Overcrowding of a room with occupants in violation of this code.
5. Insufficient ventilation or illumination in violation of this code.
Inadequate or insanitary sewage or plumbing facilities in violation of
this code.
6.
Insanitary conditions or anything dangerous to health, in violation of
this code.
7.
Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the
health of human beings.
8.
9. Fire hazards.
§ 13-2 LYNDHURST CODE § 13-2
1:504
ROOM — Shall mean space in an enclosed building, or space set apart by
a partition or partitions, and any space in a building used or intended to be
used as a bedroom, dining room, living room, kitchen, sewing room, library,
den, music room, dressing room, enclosed sleeping porch, sun room, party
room, recreation room, breakfast room, study, storage room and similar
uses.
ROOMING UNIT — Shall mean any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit other than a dwelling unit, which is rented or available for
rent for sleeping purposes, without cooking facilities.
RUBBISH (also see GARBAGE, REFUSE) — Shall mean nonputrescible solid
wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as
paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves,
wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.
SANITARY SEWER — Shall mean any sanitary sewer owned, operated and
maintained by the township and available for public use for the disposal of
sewage.
SEWAGE — Shall mean waste from a flush toilet, bathtub, sink, lavatory,
dishwashing or laundry machine, or the water-carried waste from any other
fixture or equipment or machine.
STORY — Shall mean that area of a structure comprised between a floor
and a floor or roof next above. No such area shall be considered a story if
of less than seven feet average height. Any such area of less than seven feet
average height shall be considered a half-story.
STRUCTURE — Shall mean that which is built or constructed, or any piece
of work artificially built or composed of parts joined together in some
definite manner, the use of which requires more or less permanent location
on or in the ground. The word "structure" shall be construed as if followed
by the words "or part thereof," and shall be construed to include a building
or buildings.
VENTILATION — Shall mean supply and removal of air to and from any
space by natural or mechanical means.
VENTILATION, MECHANICAL — Shall mean ventilation by power-driven
devices.
VENTILATION, NATURAL — Shall mean ventilation by opening to outer air
through windows, skylights, doors, louvers.
WATER CLOSET COMPARTMENT — Shall mean enclosed space containing
one or more toilets which may also contain one or more lavatories, urinals
and other plumbing fixtures.
WEATHERING — Shall mean deterioration, decay or damage, caused by
exposure to the elements.
§ 13-2 GENERAL § 13-2
1:505
Meaning of certain words: Whenever the words "accessory structure,"
"building", "dwelling", "dwelling unit" or "structure" are used in this code
they shall be construed, unless expressly stated to the contrary, to include
the plurals of these words and as if they were followed by the words "or
any part thereof". The word "shall" shall be applied retroactively as well as
prospectively.
§ 13-3. APPLICABILITY.
§ 13-3.1. Applicability to Dwellings and Other Structures. [Ord.
#1474; Ord. #1481]
Every building and the premises on which it is situated in the township,
except one family dwellings, used or intended to be used for human
occupancy or habitation, shall comply with the provisions of this code
whether or not such building shall have been constructed, altered or
repaired before or after September 8, 1970 and irrespective of any permits
or licenses which shall have been issued for the use or occupancy of the
building or premises, for the construction or repair of the building or for
the installation or repair of equipment or facilities prior to September 8,
1970. The provisions of this chapter may apply to one family dwellings, if a
duly sworn complaint is signed by a citizen and filed with a public officer.
This code establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued
occupancy of all buildings and does not replace or modify standards
otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or use of the
building, equipment or facilities contained therein, except as provided
elsewhere in this code.
Where there is a building with mixed occupancy, any rooming unit or
dwelling unit therein shall be nevertheless regulated by and subject to the
provisions of this code.
§ 13-3.2. Higher Standard to Prevail in Case of Conflict with Other
Ordinances or Laws. [Ord. #1474]
In any case where provisions of this code impose a higher standard than
that set forth in any other ordinance of the township under the laws of the
State of New Jersey, then the standard as set forth herein shall prevail. If the
provisions of this code impose a lower standard than any other ordinance
of the township or the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the higher
standard contained in any other such ordinance or law shall prevail.
§ 13-3.3. Issuance and Renewal of Other Permits and Licenses.
[Ord. #1474]
After September 8, 1970 all licenses and permits thereof shall, where this
code is applicable, be issued upon compliance with this code as well as
compliance with the ordinance under which such licenses and permits are
granted.
§ 13-2 LYNDHURST CODE § 13-3.4
1:506
§ 13-3.4. Enforcement of and Compliance with Other Ordinances.
[Ord. #1474]
No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this code shall
constitute a defense against any other ordinance of the township applicable
to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision herein relieve any
owner, operator or occupant from complying with any such other provision
nor any official of the township from enforcing any such other provision.
§ 13-4. RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER, OPERATOR AND
OCCUPANT INDEPENDENT OF EACH OTHER.
§ 13-4.1. Owner and Operator. [Ord. #1474]
Owners and operators shall have all the duties and responsibilities as
described in this code and the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto
and no owner or operator shall be relieved from any such duty and
responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any charge of violation
thereof by reason of the fact that the occupant is also responsible therefor
and in violation thereof.
§ 13-4.2. Occupant. [Ord. #1474]
Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as prescribed
elsewhere in this code and all the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto
and the occupant shall not be relieved from any such duty and responsibility
nor be entitled to defend against any charge of violation thereof by reason
of the fact that the owner or operator is also responsible therefor and in
violation thereof.
§ 13-4.3. Contract Not to Alter Responsibility. [Ord. #1474]
Unless expressly provided to the contrary of this code, the respective
obligations and responsibilities of the owner and operator on one hand and
the occupant on the other shall not be altered or affected by any agreement
or contract by and between any of the aforesaid or between them and other
parties.
§ 13-5. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNER AND
OPERATOR.
§ 13-5.1. Maintenance of Exterior of Premises, Free of Hazards and
Insanitary Conditions. [Ord. #1474]
The exterior of the premises and of all structures thereon shall be kept free
of all nuisances and any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians and
other persons utilizing the premises, and shall be kept free of insanitary
conditions and any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated
by the owner or operator. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator to
keep the premises free from hazards which include but are not limited to
the provisions and conditions hereinafter enumerated.
§ 13-3.4 GENERAL § 13-5.2
1:507
§ 13-5.2. Refuse. [Ord. #1474]
Brush, weeds, broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth,
garbage, trash, refuse and debris.
§ 13-5.3. Natural Growth. [Ord. #1474]
Dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth which by reason of
rotting or deteriorating condition or storm damage constitute a hazard to
persons in the vicinity thereof. Trees shall be kept pruned and trimmed to
prevent such condition.
§ 13-5.4. Overhangings. [Ord. #1474]
Loose and overhanging objects and accumulations of ice and snow which
by reason of location above ground level constitute a danger of falling on
persons in the vicinity thereof.
§ 13-5.5. Ground Surface Hazards or Insanitary Conditions. [Ord.
#1474]
Holes, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions, icy conditions and
excretions of pets and other animals on paths, walks, driveways and other
parts of the premises which are accessible to and are used by persons on
the premises, all such holes and excavations shall be filled and repaired,
walks and steps replaced and other conditions removed where necessary
to eliminate hazards or insanitary conditions with reasonable dispatch upon
their discovery.
§ 13-5.6. Recurring Accumulations of Storm Water. [Ord. #1474]
Adequate runoff drains shall be provided and maintained to eliminate any
such recurrence or excessive accumulations of storm water.
§ 13-5.7. Motor Vehicles. [Ord. #1474; Ord. #2479]
No currently uninspected or unregistered passenger motor vehicle shall be
parked or stored on any property in a residential district as defined by the
zoning ordinance of the township for a period exceeding 30 days, provided
said vehicle was previously registered to an occupant of the residence. If
the vehicle was not previously registered to an occupant of the residential
property, then it shall not be parked or stored on any property in a
residential district for a period exceeding five days. At no time shall the
vehicle be in any state of disassembly, disrepair or shall it be in the process
of being stripped or dismantled outside an enclosed building. At no time
shall any vehicle of any type undergo major overhauling, including body
work, in any other zone except at an approved automobile establishment.
§ 13-5.8. Snow Removal. [Ord. #2178, § I; Ord. #2727, § 2]
§ 13-5.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 13-5.8
1:508
§ 13-6. APPEARANCE OF EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES AND
STRUCTURES. [Ord. #1474]
The exterior of every structure or accessory structure (including fences,
signs and store fronts) shall be maintained so that the appearance of the
premises and all buildings thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance in
keeping with the standards of the neighborhood or such higher standards
as may be adopted by the township and such that the appearance of
the premises may be preserved, safety and fire hazards eliminated and
structures shall not constitute a blighting factor for adjoining property
owners nor an element leading to the progressive deterioration and
downgrading of the neighborhood, protecting them from the blighting
influences with the accompanying diminution of property values including
the following.
§ 13-6.1. Storage of Commercial and Industrial Material. [Ord.
#1474]
There shall not be stored or used at a location visible from the sidewalk,
street or other public areas equipment and material relating to commercial
or industrial uses unless permitted under the zoning ordinance for the
premises.
§ 13-6.2. Landscaping. [Ord. #1474]
Premises shall be kept landscaped and lawns, hedges, bushes shall be kept
trimmed and from becoming overgrown and unsightly.
§ 13-6.3. Signs and Billboards. [Ord. #1474]
All permanent signs and billboards exposed to public view permitted by
reason of other regulations as a lawful nonconforming use shall be
maintained in good repair. Any signs which have excessively weathered or
faded or those upon which the paint has excessively peeled or cracked shall,
with their supporting members, be removed forthwith or put into a good
state of repair. All nonoperative or broken electrical signs shall be repaired
or shall, with their supporting members, be removed forthwith.
a. The owners or tenants bordering or abutting public sidewalks shall
remove all ice and snow from the sidewalks in front of such land within
the next 48 hours after cessation of the snow fall.
b. It shall be a violation of this subsection to place the removed snow onto
a public street.
c. The penalty for violation of this section shall be $250 upon conviction in
the municipal court.
d. Complaints may be signed by health department employees,
department of public works employees or police officers.
§ 13-5.8 GENERAL § 13-6.4
1:509
§ 13-6.4. Signs or Advertisements Removal. [Ord. #1474]
Any temporary sign or other paper advertising material glued or otherwise
attached to a window or windows or otherwise exposed to public view shall
be removed: (a) at the expiration of the event or sale for which it is erected
or (b) within 60 days after erection, whichever shall occur sooner.
§ 13-6.5. Window Display Signs, Permitted Area. [Ord. #1474]
Except during the course of repairs or alterations, no more than 25% of the
square footage of any single window display area shall be devoted to signs
or other temporary advertising material attached to the window or windows
or otherwise exposed to public view.
§ 13-6.6. Awnings and Marquees. [Ord. #1474]
Any awning or marquee and its accompanying structural members which
extend over any street, sidewalk or other portion of the premises shall be
maintained in good repair and shall not constitute a nuisance or a safety
hazard. In the event such awnings or marquees are not properly maintained
in accordance with the foregoing, they shall, together with their supporting
members be removed forthwith. In the event the awnings or marquees
are made of cloth, plastic, or of similar materials, the cloth or plastic,
where exposed to public view, shall be maintained in good condition and
shall not show evidence of excessive weathering, discoloration, ripping,
tearing, or other holes. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize any
encroachment on streets, sidewalks, or other parts of public domain.
§ 13-6.7. Display Windows. [Ord. #1474]
All display windows exposed to public view shall be kept clean and free
of marks or foreign substances except when necessary in the course of
changing displays. All screening of interior shall be maintained in a clean
and attractive manner and in a good state of repair.
§ 13-6.8. Store Fronts. [Ord. #1474]
All store fronts shall be kept in good repair, painted where required, and
shall not constitute a safety hazard or nuisance. In the event repairs to a
store front become necessary, such repairs shall be made with the same
or similar materials used in the construction of the store front in such a
manner as to permanently repair the damaged area or areas. Any cornice
visible above a store front shall be kept painted, where required, and in
good repair.
§ 13-6.9. Reconstruction of Walls and Sidings. [Ord. #1474]
All reconstruction of walls and sidings shall be of standard quality and
appearance commensurate with the character of the properties in the same
block and on both sides of the street on which the premises front; such
that the materials used will not be of a kind that by their appearance under
§ 13-6.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 13-6.9
1:510
prevailing appraisal practices and standards as determined by the public
officers will depreciate the values of neighboring and adjoining premises as
aforesaid.
§ 13-6.10. General Maintenance. [Ord. #1474]
The exterior of every structure or accessory structure (including fences)
shall be maintained in good repair and all surfaces thereof shall be kept
painted or whitewashed when necessary for the purposes of preservation
and appearance. The same shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose
shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint or other
condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance to the end
that the property itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards
eliminated, and the adjoining properties and the neighborhood protected
from blighting influences.
§ 13-6.11. Weeds. [Ord. #2489]
All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or
plant growth in excess of 10 inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited.
Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other
than trees or shrubs provided however that this term shall not include
cultivated flowers and gardens.
§ 13-6.12. Exhaust Vents. [Ord. #2489]
Pipes ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gases, steam
vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate wastes
directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property or that of
another tenant.
§ 13-6.13. Defacement of Property. [Ord. #2489]
No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any
exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public
property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an approved state of
maintenance and repair.
§ 13-6.14. Protective Treatment. [Ord. #2489]
All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to doors, door and window
frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be
maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decaying
resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by painting
or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking, and chipped
paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and masonry
joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter
of windows, doors and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and
water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to
inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall
§ 13-6.9 GENERAL § 13-6.14
1:511
be stabilized and coated to inhibit further rust and corrosion. Oxidation
stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. However, surfaces designed
for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement.
§ 13-7. STRUCTURAL SOUNDNESS AND GENERAL MAINTENANCE
OF BUILDINGS AND ACCESSORY STRUCTURES - EXTERIOR. [Ord.
#1474]
Every dwelling and accessory structure and every part thereof shall be kept
structurally sound and in a state of good repair to avoid safety, health or fire
hazards, including the following.
§ 13-7.1. Foundation Walls. [Ord. #1474]
Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound, free from defects and
damage and capable of bearing imposed loads safely.
§ 13-7.2. Basements and Cellars. [Ord. #1474]
Basements, cellar and crawl spaces are to be free of moisture resulting from
seepage, and cross ventilation shall be required where necessary to prevent
accumulations of moisture and dampness.
§ 13-7.3. Chimneys and All Flue and Vent Attachments Thereto.
[Ord. #1474]
Chimneys and all flue and vent attachments thereto shall be maintained
structurally sound, free from defects and so maintained as to capably
perform at all times the functions for which they were designed. Chimneys,
flues, gas vents or other draft producing equipment shall provide sufficient
draft to develop the rated output and the connected equipment shall be
structurally safe, durable, smoke tight and capable of withstanding the
action of flue gases.
§ 13-7.4. Exterior Porches, Landings, Balconies, Stairs and Fire
Escapes. [Ord. #1474]
Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs and fire escapes shall be
provided with banisters or railings properly designed and maintained to
minimize the hazard of falling and the same shall be kept structurally sound
in good repair and free from defects.
§ 13-7.5. Exterior Walls, Sidings and Roof. [Ord. #1474]
Exterior walls, sidings and roof shall be kept structurally sound, in good
repair and free from defects.
§ 13-6.14 LYNDHURST CODE § 13-8
1:512
§ 13-8. PAINTING AND OTHER PROTECTIVE COATING. [Ord.
#1474]
All exposed surfaces susceptible to decay shall be kept at all times painted
or otherwise provided with a protective coating sufficient to prevent
deterioration.
§ 13-9. WEATHER AND WATER-TIGHTNESS. [Ord. #1474]
Every dwelling shall be so maintained as to be weather and water-tight.
§ 13-9.1. Exterior Walls, Roofs, Etc. [Ord. #1474]
Exterior walls, roofs, window, window frame, door, door frame foundation
and other parts of the structure shall be so maintained as to keep water
from entering the structure and to prevent excessive drafts. Damaged
materials must be repaired or replaced promptly. Places showing signs of
rot, leakage, deterioration or corrosion are to be restored and protected
against weathering or seepage.
§ 13-10. FREEDOM FROM INFESTATION. [Ord. #1474]
All parts of the premises shall be maintained so as to prevent infestation.
§ 13-10.1. Supplying of Screens. [Ord. #1474]
Properly fitting screens in good repair shall be supplied for each exterior
door and window of each dwelling unit. Such screens shall have a mesh
of not less than No. 16. In establishments subject to licensing and in all
buildings where janitor service is required screens shall be installed and
maintained by the owner or operator on all doors and windows which can
be opened from May 1 until October 1 of each year.
§ 13-11. GENERAL SANITATION AND SAFETY. [Ord. #1474]
All parts of the dwellings and structures shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, free of nuisances and free from health, safety and fire hazards.
§ 13-11.1. Freedom from Accumulations and Obstructions. [Ord.
#1474]
No accumulations or obstructions from garbage, refuse or rubbish shall be
permitted on common areaways, stairways, balconies, porches, hallways,
basements or cellars, except garbage stored in proper containers, may be
set out for removal.
§ 13-11.2. Floors, Interior Walls and Ceilings. [Ord. #1474]
Floors, interior walls and ceilings of every structure used for human
habitation or occupancy shall be structurally sound and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition.
§ 13-8 GENERAL § 13-11.3
1:513
§ 13-11.3. Floors Generally. [Ord. #1474]
Floors shall be considered to be structurally sound when capable of safely
bearing imposed loads and shall be maintained at all times in a condition so
as to be smooth, clean, free from cracks, breaks and other hazards.
§ 13-11.4. Bathroom, Water Closet Compartments and Kitchen
Floors. [Ord. #1474]
Bathroom, water closet compartments and kitchen floors shall be surfaced
with water resistant material and shall be kept at all times in a dry, clean
and sanitary condition and the shower room floors shall be kept clean and
sanitary.
§ 13-11.5. Cellar and Basement Floors. [Ord. #1474]
Floors of basements and cellars shall be paved with stone or concrete not
less than four inches thick and shall be maintained at all times in a condition
so as to be smooth, clean, free from cracks, breaks and other hazards.
§ 13-11.6. Supporting Structural Members. [Ord. #1474]
Supporting structural members are to be kept structurally sound, free of
deterioration and capable of bearing imposed loads safely.
§ 13-11.7. Walls and Ceilings Generally. [Ord. #1474]
Walls and ceilings shall be considered to be in good repair when clean, free
from cracks, breaks, loose plaster and similar conditions.
§ 13-11.8. Walls and Ceilings, Painting, Papering and Other
Covering. [Ord. #1474]
Walls shall be provided with paint, paper ceiling material or other protective
covering so that the walls and ceilings shall be kept clean, free of visible
foreign matter, sanitary and well maintained at all times.
§ 13-11.9. Stairs and Railings. [Ord. #1474]
Interior stairs of every structure used for human habitation or occupancy
shall be structurally sound and free from defects. Handrailings or banisters
shall be provided for all stairs, balconies, fire escapes and stairwells and
the handrails or banisters shall be securely attached, maintained free from
defects and shall be of sufficient height to guard against accident and to be
appropriate for use by persons of normal height using the stairway. Stairs
shall be adequately lighted in all places with control switches operable
from each story to permit safe use at night for persons ascending or
descending except where janitorial service is provided and artificial lighting
for hallways and common areaways is supplied in accordance with state law
from a master control switch.
§ 13-11.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 13-11.10
1:514
§ 13-11.10. Garbage Container to Be Supplied for Each Dwelling
Unit. [Ord. #1474; Ord. #1481]
Each dwelling unit containing cooking facilities shall be provided with
a water tight noncombustible container with a tight fitting lid for the
temporary storage of garbage or other refuse.
§ 13-11.11. Garbage Container for Exterior of Dwelling. [Ord.
#1474]
Where there are one or more occupants in a dwelling unit other than
the one occupied by the owner, the owner shall supply a water proof,
noncorrosive, noncombustible container at the exterior of the premises for
the removal of garbage and refuse, which container shall conform to the
provisions of the health department of the township.
§ 13-11.12. Responsibility for Removal. [Ord. #1474]
The owner or operator shall have the duty and responsibility of removing
garbage whenever a janitor is required for the premises.
§ 13-11.13. Accumulating Refuse and Nonfireproof Storage
Prohibited. [Ord. #1474]
Storage bins, rooms and areas shall not be used for accumulated garbage,
or refuse, provided, however, that enclosed spaces or rooms in the interior
of dwellings which are used exclusively as garbage collection points
equipped with garbage containers complying with the provisions of the
health department of the township shall be permitted. Inflammable or
combustible liquids or other materials may not be stored on the premises
unless they are of a type approved for storage by the regulations of the fire
department and then only in such quantities and in such fireproof storage
containers as may be prescribed by the regulations.
§ 13-11.14. Janitorial Service. [Ord. #1474]
In every dwelling containing ten or more dwelling units the owner shall
provide or designate a janitor, caretaker or housekeeper who shall at all
times maintain the premises in compliance with this code and keep the
premises free from filth, garbage, refuse and rubbish, and who shall be
responsible for the daily collection of garbage and other refuse from the
occupants on a regular schedule and at a reasonable time and place the
same out for collection in accordance with the provisions of the township.
The person shall be regularly available to perform the foregoing duties. The
failure of the person so designated to comply with the provision herein, even
in disobedience of instructions shall not relieve the owner or operator from
the duties and responsibilities imposed by this code.
§ 13-11.15. (Reserved)
§ 13-11.10 GENERAL § 13-11.16
1:515
§ 13-11.16. Containers Required to Be Covered and Maintained.
[Ord. #2751, § 3]
Any owner, operator or occupant who owns, leases, or otherwise used a
garbage or refuse container must ensure that such container is covered at
all times and shall prevent refuse from spilling out or overflowing.
§ 13-11.17. Containers Required to Be Screened. [Ord. No. 2657-08
§ 1]
No containers for the storage of garbage or refuse at the exterior of a
dwelling shall be visible from the public street or right-of-way. Where the
location of such containers is visible from the public street or right-ofway,
they shall be completely concealed by suitable natural or artificial
screening.
§ 13-12. UTILITIES AND FACILITIES WITHIN A DWELLING; WATER
AND PLUMBING FACILITIES.
§ 13-12.1. Adequate Supply of Public Water. [Ord. #1474]
Every facility using running water for domestic purposes within any
building shall be connected to the public water supply system of the
township. The building water system shall be maintained in good and
operable condition at all times so that sufficient positive pressure shall be
available at all installed hot and cold water outlets.
§ 13-12.2. Hot and Cold Water. [Ord. #1474]
Every kitchen sink, bathroom sink and basin, tub or shower as required
under this code shall be connected to both the hot and cold water lines.
There shall be sufficient and adequate equipment maintained in good
working condition to supply water at a minimum temperature as required
by the township ordinances.
§ 13-12.3. Facilities Required in Bathroom. [Ord. #1474]
Every bathroom required hereunder shall be provided with a flush toilet
connected to the cold water line and a shower or tub and washbasin
connected to running water as set forth above. Bathrooms shall also be
provided with adequate light and ventilation.
§ 13-12.4. Maintenance of Plumbing Facilities. [Ord. #1474]
Each facility required above shall be maintained in a sanitary condition,
free from defects and in operating condition at all times. Where the facility
or plumbing fixtures shall be clogged, overflow, or otherwise necessitate
repairs, such repairs shall be performed forthwith.
§ 13-11.16 LYNDHURST CODE § 13-12.5
1:516
§ 13-12.5. Connection to Sanitary Sewer. [Ord. #1474]
All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to the sanitary sewer through lines
which are free of leaks, corrosion or deterioration and provide unobstructed
passage from the plumbing facilities within the dwelling to the sanitary
sewer.
§ 13-12.6. Bathroom Requirements for Dwelling Units. [Ord.
#1474]
Every dwelling unit shall contain a bathroom which shall be located entirely
within that unit and which shall be completely enclosed, containing the
facilities as set forth in this code in a room which affords privacy to the
occupants thereof.
§ 13-12.7. Heating Facilities and Duty to Supply Heat. [Ord. #1474]
Every dwelling shall contain heating facilities of sufficient capacity to
maintain a minimum inside temperatures as required by the township
ordinances. In all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet
compartments where facilities are found to be of inadequate size or capacity
to accomplish the foregoing, then the owner or operator shall, at the
direction of the public officers, either increase the capacity of the heating
system or close off habitable space so that the standard as established
herein shall be met provided that such space can be removed as habitable
space without creating a violation of the standards established by this code.
§ 13-12.8. Central Heating Required. [Ord. #1474]
Central heating shall be required in all dwellings within the township.
§ 13-12.9. Alternative Modes of Heating. [Ord. #1474]
No other mode of heating shall be permitted unless application for the
approval thereof is made to the public officers and a permit is issued
therefor upon a finding that the facility is so designed and installed that it
does not constitute a hazard to the safety of the occupants of the dwelling.
§ 13-12.10. Storage of Fuel. [Ord. #1474]
Fuel for the operation of heating equipment shall be stored outside the
premises unless stored in the interior pursuant to the regulation of the fire
department of the township as to the storage of inflammable materials.
§ 13-12.11. Conversions Prohibited During Winter. [Ord. #1474]
No heating units shall be converted in any dwelling or part thereof between
October 1 and May 1 where there are occupants other than the owner
or operator dependent upon heat from the unit without written consent
of all such occupants. Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing
emergency alteration or repair.
§ 13-12.5 GENERAL § 13-12.12
1:517
§ 13-12.12. Side Arm Gas Water Heaters. [Ord. #1474]
Side arm gas water heaters shall not be permitted.
§ 13-12.13. Installation and Maintenance of Heating Facilities.
[Ord. #1474]
Heating equipment shall be installed in a manner which will avoid a
dangerous concentration of fumes and gases. Heating equipment shall not
be forced to operate beyond the safe capacity for which it is designed.
Where necessary, exposed heating risers, heating ducts, hot water lines,
shall be covered with an insulating material or guard. The heating facilities
and all parts thereof shall be kept in good operating condition, free of
defects, corrosion and deterioration at all times.
§ 13-12.14. Duty to Maintain Equipment. [Ord. #1474]
Notwithstanding a contract by the occupant to supply his own heat as
provided herein, where the heating unit is installed by or owned by the
owner or operator then the duty to maintain the same in operable and
functioning condition as provided herein shall remain the duty of the owner
or operator.
§ 13-12.15. Presumption Against Contract by Occupant to Supply
Own Heat. [Ord. #1474]
The presence of heating outlets, radiators, risers, or returns in any hall of
dwelling unit or rooming unit shall constitute a presumption that the owner
is to supply heat as required hereunder and in the absence of a clear and
convincing proof to the contrary this presumption shall control.
§ 13-12.16. Habitable Rooms; Windows and Sky-Lights. [Ord.
#1474]
Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors. The minimum aggregate window or skylight
available to unobstructed light shall not be less than 10% of the floor area
of such rooms or 12 square feet, whichever is greater. The window or
skylight shall either open to 45% of the required area or to be supplied
with a mechanical ventilation system of sufficient capacity provided with
the proper opening for incoming or outgoing air to assure comparable
ventilation. Openings for ventilation as required herein shall include
windows, skylights, louvers, monitors or other openings provided all such
openings are easily operable by the occupants.
§ 13-12.17. Bathroom and Water Closet Compartments. [Ord.
#1474]
Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall be adequately
ventilated with openable area as described in subsection 13-12.16,
§ 13-12.12 LYNDHURST CODE § 13-12.17
1:518
"Habitable Rooms, Windows and Skylights", totaling 1 1/2 square feet or by
comparable mechanical ventilation.
§ 13-12.18. Electrical Service Generally. [Ord. #1474]
Every dwelling, dwelling unit and rooming unit shall be properly connected
to and be provided with electric power through safely insulated conduits
conforming to the State Uniform Construction Code.
§ 13-12.19. Electrical Outlets in Habitable Rooms. [Ord. #1474]
Every habitable room shall be equipped with two permanently installed
electrical outlets sufficient to provide lighting and power and permit the
installation of or the use of electrical lights sufficient to meet the reasonable
lighting requirements for normal use of the room and other electrical
equipment normally expected to be used in that room.
§ 13-12.20. Lighting of Bathrooms and Water Closet Compartments.
[Ord. #1474]
Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall be provided with
a switch and a wall plate so located and maintained that there is no
danger of short-circuiting from water, from other bathroom facilities, or
from splashing of water.
§ 13-12.21. Lighting of Common Spaces Other Than Habitable
Rooms, Bathrooms and Water Closet Compartments. [Ord. #1474]
Lighting of hallways, stairways, landings and other spaces used by
occupants in common as a normal means of passage shall be sufficient to
provide at least five footcandles measured in the darkest portion. Light
switches for stairs and hallways shall be readily accessible to occupants
using the same and so located as to comply with the provisions of the
paragraph on stairs and railings. Every cellar, basement, workspace and
other part of the structure used occasionally and incidentally by the
occupants shall be provided with artificial light and available at all times
so that there shall be at least three footcandles measured in the darkest
portion trafficked by occupants.
§ 13-12.22. Loose or Exposed Wiring. [Ord. #1474]
Except as hereinafter stated, all wiring or cables shall be properly affixed
or attached to the structure. Insulation shall be provided for all wiring and
cables and kept in good repair. No loose cords or loose extension lines in
excess of six feet in length shall be permitted and no ceiling or wall fixture
shall be used for supplying power to equipment other than that for which
they are designed.
§ 13-12.17 GENERAL § 13-12.23
1:519
§ 13-12.23. Replacement of Light Bulbs. [Ord. #1474]
All required lighting fixtures shall be supplied at all times with functioning
light bulbs of sufficient wattage to supply the lumine requirements of this
code.
§ 13-12.24. Fuses and Protective Devices. [Ord. #1474]
Maximum fuse sizes consistent with safety shall be posted conspicuously on
the inside cover of all fuse boxes and no fuse shall be installed therein in
excess of the stated maximum except that owners shall not be responsible
for violation in fuse installations without their knowledge where the correct
size is stated and the fuse box is located within a dwelling unit or rooming
unit in exclusive possession of the occupants other than the owner.
§ 13-12.25. Overloading of Circuits. [Ord. #1474]
Overloading of circuits is prohibited. Where the public officers find after
notice and hearing, that by reason of the appliances and fixtures there is
continuing overloading of an electrical line, creating a hazard, the owner
shall be required to install a line of sufficient capacity to absorb the load to
which the line is subjected or to otherwise eliminate the conditions causing
the overload. For purposes of this section, the public officers may consider
the peak seasonal load to which the line is subject.
§ 13-12.26. Suspension of Service or Utilities. [Ord. #1474]
No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment
or utility which is required to be supplied by the provisions of the code
to be removed from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling unit or
rooming unit except for necessary repairs, alterations or emergencies, or
for such other reasons, as may be permitted pursuant to those sections of
the township ordinances applicable to such service, facility, equipment or
utility.
§ 13-13. CELLAR AND BASEMENT REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. #1474]
Use of cellar for sleeping purposes is hereby prohibited, except where the
area conforms to the requirements of the National Building Code as adopted
by the township for human habitation provided that:
a. There be sufficient light and ventilation as more particularly required
by other sections of this code and that natural light and ventilation are
not restricted by reason of walls or other obstructions located within six
feet of any window required pursuant to that section.
b. That there be a second means of egress conforming to the requirements
of the National Building Code as adopted by the township.
c. All furnaces or other heating facilities be so located, insulated and
separated from the living area by fireproof partition or walls necessary
pursuant to the regulations of the building department so that the same
§ 13-12.23 LYNDHURST CODE § 13-13
1:520
§ 13-14. LIMITATION ON NATURE OF OCCUPANCY OF CERTAIN
DWELLING UNITS AND ROOMING UNITS.
§ 13-14.1. Occupancy of Single Family Dwelling. [Ord. #1474]
A single family dwelling shall be occupied by persons composing an
immediate family and no more than two other persons, providing the
dwelling complies with the State Uniform Construction Code.
§ 13-14.2. Occupancy of One Room Dwelling Units or Rooming
Units. [Ord. #1474]
Occupancy of dwelling units or rooming units having only one habitable
room shall be limited to two persons.
§ 13-15. BASIC FACILITIES REQUIRED.
§ 13-15.1. Dwelling Units. [Ord. #1474]
Every dwelling unit shall have a bathroom containing a toilet, washbasin,
bathtub or shower; shall be equipped with private kitchen facilities and
shall comply with such other requirements as are set forth elsewhere in this
code. Where there are more than eight occupants the unit shall have two
bathrooms.
There shall be a second means of egress for all dwelling units (except in one
and two family houses), where dwelling units are located in basements or
above any second story level of any structure.
§ 13-15.2. Basement Dwelling Units. [Ord. #1474]
The second means of egress from any basement dwelling unit may be by
a second door located independently from the first means of egress and
leading directly to the outside of the premises or in the alternative a window
which shall serve as means of egress in accordance with the requirements
of the building and fire departments of the township.
§ 13-15.3. Window in Paths of Egress. [Ord. #1474]
Where a window forms a part of the path of egress from a common hallway
or areaway to a fire escape, the window shall be located no more than three
feet above the floor area and shall provide a minimum opening of at least
three feet in width and four feet in height. The window shall be easy to
open and shall lead directly to the fire escape or to the immediately adjacent
outside ground area with a maximum drop of three feet thereto. Screens,
does not constitute an undue hazard to the safety and health of the
occupants.
d. The dwelling units and all walls and floors thereof be free of visible
moisture and seepage at all times.
§ 13-13 GENERAL § 13-15.3
1:521
storm windows and other barriers to the outside shall be readily open or
removed so as not to form any obstruction to the occupants seeking egress
in cases of emergency.
§ 13-15.4. Door in Paths of Egress. [Ord. #1474]
Any door in the path of egress shall be at least 30 inches in width, with a
minimum height of four feet, shall open in the direction of exit travel and
shall be accessible and free from obstructions from common hallways or
areaways.
§ 13-15.5. Location and Number of Exits. [Ord. #1474]
Where two or more exits are required each exit shall be as remote as
practicable from the other exit or exits. All the exits shall be of such number
and so located that the distance of travel from the door of each rooming unit
or dwelling unit on each floor shall not exceed 50 feet, except in buildings
of fireproof construction or buildings equipped with automatic sprinkling
systems throughout, in which buildings the maximum distance of travel
from the door of any unit to the nearest exit shall not exceed 100 feet,
provided that two of the exits shall be at least 50 feet apart.
§ 13-16. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF OCCUPANTS.
§ 13-16.1. General and Specific Provisions. [Ord. #1474]
Occupants shall not, after notice as required in this chapter, occupy or
continue to occupy premises which are sub-standard by reason of the failure
of the dwelling unit or rooming unit occupied by them or of the dwelling
or premises to conform to and comply with the requirements of this code.
Upon discovery by the occupant of any condition on premises occupied by
the occupant which constitutes a violation thereof, the occupant shall report
the same to the public officers responsible for the enforcement hereunder
as more particularly set forth elsewhere in this code.
§ 13-16.2. Cleanliness and Sanitation. [Ord. #1474]
All parts of the premises under the control of the occupant shall be kept in a
clean and sanitary condition and the occupant shall refrain from performing
any acts which would render other parts of the premises unclean or
insanitary or which would obstruct the owner or operator from performing
any duty required hereunder or maintaining the premises in a clean
condition.
§ 13-16.3. Garbage Disposal and Personal Accumulations. [Ord.
#1474]
Occupants shall place all garbage in the receptacles provided for garbage
disposal and shall, where the janitor service is not supplied, place for
disposal all garbage and other refuse in garbage cans located in the exterior
of the premises in an area designated and set off for the same. Where
§ 13-15.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 13-16.3
1:522
janitorial service for the removal of garbage and other refuse to the exterior
of the premises is provided by the owner or operator, then the occupant
shall dispose of garbage and other refuse in containers provided therefor
by the owner or operator in designated and enclosed areas in the interior
of the premises. Garbage and other refuse shall not be thrown out of
windows or down dumbwaiter, nor shall garbage and refuse be set out on
stairways, common hallways, and common areaways shall be kept free of
accumulations of personal belongings. All dumbwaiters shall be operable
at all times where in existence and used as a regular part of the garbage
disposal system.
§ 13-16.4. Elimination of Infestation. [Ord. #1474]
Every occupant of a single family dwelling shall be responsible for the
elimination of infestation in the dwelling and on the premises. Every
occupant of a dwelling unit or rooming unit in a dwelling other than a single
family dwelling shall be responsible for eliminating all conditions causing
infestations which are caused by the occupant and also those conditions
which are subject to and under his exclusive control.
§ 13-16.5. Malicious Damage. [Ord. #1474]
Every occupant shall be responsible for willfully or maliciously causing
damage to any part of the premises.
§ 13-16.6. Use of Fuel. [Ord. #1474]
No occupant shall cause excessive discoloration of the sidewalks or ceilings
of any part of the premises by improper use of heating or cooking
equipment.
§ 13-16.7. Supplying of Heat to Other Occupants. [Ord. #1474]
Where any occupant undertakes by contract, or as a condition of his letting,
to supply his own heat through a furnace or boiler which also heats a
dwelling unit or rooming unit occupied by other persons, the occupant shall
be responsible for supplying heat in accordance with all provisions.
§ 13-16.8. Installation and Maintenance of Heating Equipment.
[Ord. #1474]
Where any occupant undertakes to install heating equipment, the same
shall conform to the requirements of this code. The occupant shall
thereafter be responsible for maintaining such equipment installed by him
in good repair and operating conditions during all times that the heating
equipment shall remain under his control.
§ 13-16.9. Maintenance of Plumbing. [Ord. #1474]
Every occupant shall maintain all plumbing fixtures used by him in a clean
and sanitary condition and he shall not deposit any material in any fixture
§ 13-16.3 GENERAL § 13-16.9
1:523
or sewer system which would result in stoppage or damage to the fixture or
sewer system.
§ 13-16.10. Providing Notice of Defects to Owner. [Ord. #1474]
Where the owner or operator would not otherwise know of a defect of
any facility, utility, equipment required to be furnished hereunder and the
same is defective or inoperable, each occupant affected thereby shall, upon
learning of the defect, provide notice to the owner, operator or other person
in charge of the premises. Nothing herein shall be construed to provide a
defense to any owner or operator violating this code.
§ 13-16.11. Occupancy of Rooming Unit or Dwelling Unit. [Ord.
#1474]
No occupant shall occupy or permit the occupancy of any rooming unit or
dwelling unit in violation of the occupancy standards established in this
code.
§ 13-16.12. Cooking Only Where Sanitary Facilities Exist. [Ord.
#1474]
No occupant shall cook in any dwelling unit except where all required
sanitary facilities are installed as required.
§ 13-16.13. Occupancy of Rooming Unit or Dwelling Unit Without
Required Facilities. [Ord. #1474]
No occupant shall occupy or continue to occupy a dwelling unit or a rooming
unit that does not have provision for bathroom facilities as required under
various sections of this chapter.
§ 13-16.14. Violation by Minors. [Ord. #1474]
Any adult member of the family shall be responsible and liable for any
violation of this subsection caused by minors under his or her care or
custody occupying the same dwelling unit, if the violations were created or
permitted to continue with the knowledge or acquiescence or consent of the
adult member.
§ 13-17. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.34
§ 13-17.1. The Health Sanitarian, Code Enforcement Officer, Police
Chief, Fire Official, and the Construction Official to Be Public
Officers. [Ord. #2191, § 1; Ord. #2828-11]
The health sanitarian, code enforcement officer, police officer, police chief
or his designee, fire official, and the construction official are hereby
34.Editor’s Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of Ordinance Nos. 1474
and 1481.
§ 13-16.9 LYNDHURST CODE § 13-17.1
1:524
designated to serve as public officers hereunder and all inspections,
regulations, enforcement and hearings on violations of the provisions of this
code, unless expressly stated to the contrary, shall be under their direction
and supervision. The board of commissioners shall appoint or designate
such other employees of the township to perform the duties only in the
event of their illness or inability to perform the duties.
§ 13-17.2. When Inspections Are to Be Made. [Ord. #2191, § I]
All buildings and premises subject to this code are subject to inspection
from time to time by the public officers only on sworn complaint having
first been filed with the public officers. At the time of such inspections
all rooms in the buildings and all parts of the premises shall be available
and accessible for such inspections and the owner, operator and occupant
are required to provide the necessary arrangements to facilitate such
inspections. Such inspections shall be made between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. unless one of the following conditions exist:
§ 13-17.3. Identification and Conduct of Inspectors. [Ord. #2191,
§ I]
Public officers and inspectors shall be supplied with official identification
and upon request shall exhibit such identification when entering any
dwelling unit, rooming unit, or other part of the premises subject to this
code. Inspectors shall conduct themselves so as to avoid intentional
embarrassment or inconvenience to the occupants. They shall explain the
purpose of their visit to the occupants.
§ 13-17.4. Where Entry by Inspector Is Refused. [Ord. #2191, § 1]
Where any public officer, or duly appointed inspector is refused entry or
access or is otherwise impeded or prevented from conducting an inspection
pursuant to this chapter by the owner, operator, or occupant of any
premises, such public officers may, upon affidavit, apply to the municipal
judge of the township for a search warrant. If the municipal judge is
satisfied as to the matter set forth in the affidavit, and if he finds that
probable cause for issuance of the search warrant exists, he shall authorize
the issuance of the search warrant permitting access to and inspection
of the particularly described building or all the buildings in a particularly
a. The premises are not available during the foregoing hours for
inspection;
b. There is reason to believe that violations are occurring on the premises
which can be only apprehended and proven by inspection during other
than the prescribed hours or which require immediate inspection after
being reported, such as failure to supply heat;
c. There is reason to believe a violation exists of a character which is an
immediate threat to health or safety, requiring inspection and
abatement without delay.
§ 13-17.1 GENERAL § 13-17.4
1:525
described area. Probable cause permitting the issuance of the aforesaid
search warrant may include, but is not limited to, the following:
§ 13-17.5. Procedure When Violation Discovered. [Ord. #2191, § I;
Ord. #2765, § 2]
Except as provided elsewhere in this code, where a violation of this code or
the regulations hereunder is found to exist, any of the public officers shall,
at their discretion, either cause summons-complaints to be issued for each
separate violation, or serve a written order, upon the person or persons
responsible for the correction thereof.
§ 13-17.6. Contents of Order Summons-Complaint. [Ord. #2191, § 1;
Ord. No. 2765, § 2]
The order or summons-complaint shall specify the violation or violations
committed. If the public officer shall issue an order, the order shall set forth
a reasonable period of time to correct or abate the violation(s). If the public
officer shall issue a summons-complaint, the period of time between service
of the summons-complaint and the municipal court hearing or other hearing
before a court of competent jurisdiction shall constitute a reasonable period
of time to correct or abate the violation(s).
§ 13-17.7. Serving of Notice. [Ord. #2191, § I]
Notice may be served personally or by certified mail and regular mail with
postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the person to be
served. In the case of an occupant notice may be posted upon the door of his
dwelling unit or rooming unit. Where it is ascertained that the owner does
not reside on the premises, the "last known address" shall be the address
of the owner as shown in the office of the tax collector. If the last known
address cannot be ascertained, the notice may be posted on the outside
front entrance of the dwelling. The public officers shall file and provide
notices to any owner, operator or occupant of any violation at any address
other than the last filed with the public officer personally or by certified
mail addressed to the public officer. Service upon an owner, operator or
occupant may also be attained by service of any notice upon a member of
the family of the owner, operator or occupant. Date of service of the notice
shall be determined where service is by mail as the day following the day of
the fourth day after the day of mailing for notices to addresses outside the
a. The passage of time; or
b. The nature of the building or buildings; or
c. The condition of the entire area; or
d. A valid public interest; or
e. Belief that a nuisance is maintained; or
f. Belief that a violation of this code is maintained.
§ 13-17.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 13-17.7
1:526
township. Where the day of service would fall upon a Sunday or other day
when mail is not ordinarily delivered, then the day of service shall be the
next regular delivery day.
§ 13-17.8. Extension of Time. [Ord. #1474; Ord. #2191, § I]
The public officers may extend the time for correction or abatement of the
violation for an additional reasonable period of time.
§ 13-17.9. Summary Abatement in Emergency, Notice and Hearing
Not Required. [Ord. #2191, § I]
Where the violation or conditions existing on the premises are of such a
nature as to constitute an immediate threat to life and limb unless abated
without delay, the public officers may either abate the violation or condition
immediately or order the owner, operator or occupant to correct the
violation or condition within a reasonable period of time, and upon failure to
do so, the public officers shall abate the condition immediately thereafter.
§ 13-17.10. Cost of Abatement to Be a Lien Against Premises. [Ord.
#2191, § I]
Where abatement of a violation or condition is required hereunder, public
officers shall cause to be certified to owner of the premises the cost thereof,
and the owner may request a hearing on the reasonableness of such cost as
provided in this section. After such hearing, a final determination shall be
made as to the reasonable cost of abatement, which determination shall be
certified to the tax collector and shall become a lien on the property and be
collected by the same procedure as real property taxes.
§ 13-17.11. Referral of Violations. [Ord. #2191, § I]
Any violation of any ordinance other than this code discovered by an
inspector shall be reported to the public officers who shall refer the alleged
violation to the official or agency responsible for the enforcement of such
other ordinance.
§ 13-17.12. Extension of Time When Dispossess Action Undertaken.
[Ord. #2191, § I]
Where there exists a violation of occupancy standards hereunder, an owner
or operator, upon receipt of an order of violation, if unable to eliminate
the violation by peaceable means with the period of time specified in such
notice, shall commence within such period legal action to dispossess, evict
or eject the occupants who cause the violation. No further action hereunder
shall then be taken against the owner or operator so long as the action
aforesaid is pending in the court and is prosecuted expeditiously and in
good faith.
§ 13-17.7 GENERAL § 13-17.13
1:527
§ 13-17.13. Effect of Notice on Owner. [Ord. #2191, § I]
For the purpose of enforcement of this code, the service of notice on an
owner, whether or not the owner is also the operator, shall constitute notice
of violations set forth therein until the violations are abated in conformity
with this code and the other applicable ordinances of the township.
§ 13-18. PENALTIES.35
§ 13-18.1. Fines for Violations. [Ord. #2191, § I; Ord. #2765, § 2]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,250 or by imprisonment
in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by a sentence of
community service for a period not to exceed 90 days, or any combination
thereof.
§ 13-18.2. Meaning of "Each Violation." [Ord. #2191, § I]
Each section and subsection of this code shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation independent of any other section or subsection or any
order issued pursuant to this code. Each day's failure to comply with any
such section or subsection shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 13-18.3. Application to Officers or Agents. [Ord. #2191, § I]
Where the defendant is other than a natural person or persons, the
foregoing penalties shall also apply to any agent, superintendent, officer,
member or partner who shall alone or with others have charge, care or
control of the premises.
§ 13-19. EXISTING OFFENSES AND VIOLATIONS NOT
DISCHARGED. [Ord. #1474]
The repeal of any provisions of any other ordinance by this code shall not
affect any action for prosecution or abatement under any such ordinance
or any notice complaint or order issued by any officer or agency of the
township prior to September 8, 1970 or concerning which any prosecution
or other steps of enforcement have been taken within any administrative
agency or in the municipal court for enforcement thereof.
§ 13-20. POWERS AND DUTIES OF PUBLIC OFFICERS.
§ 13-20.1. Adoption of Rules and Regulations by Public Officers.
[Ord. #1474]
The public officers are hereby authorized and empowered to promulgate
such written rules and regulations as may be necessary for the proper
interpretation and administration of the provisions of this code, provided
35.Editor’s Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of Ordinance No. 1474.
§ 13-17.13 LYNDHURST CODE § 13-20.1
1:528
that such rules and regulations do not conflict with this code and conform to
the general standards prescribed by this code, and also provided that such
rules and regulations have been approved by the board of commissioners
of the township. The public officer shall file copies of such rules and
regulations with the township clerk, the health department, building
department and the fire department and shall make available in the public
officer's office a copy for inspection by members of the public during
business hours. Such rules and regulations shall have the approval of the
health department, building department and fire department respectively
where the provisions thereof relate to matters which are also in the
jurisdiction of and supervision of each officer. In case of conflict the rule or
regulation may be promulgated by direction of the board of commissioners
of the township. Such rules and regulations shall have the same force and
effect as the provisions of this code as herein provided.
§ 13-20.2. Power to Vary or Modify Provisions of This Code. [Ord.
#1474]
The public officers shall have the power to withhold strict enforcement
of the requirements of this code upon written application therefor by an
owner, operator or occupant after making a determination that:
§ 13-20.3. Right to Hearing Where Application Denied. [Ord.
#1474]
Upon denial of any such application, the owner, operator or occupant may
request a hearing which shall be held in accordance with the provisions of
the section upon bearings under the terms of this chapter.
a. Any variation or modification of a structure or use approved by the
public officers will not in any material way alter the standards of this
code and cannot affect detrimentally the health or safety of occupants
of the premises or the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or
owners of adjacent premises or of the neighborhood; and
b. Premises subject to this code are contemplated for acquisition or are
within an area where acquisition is contemplated by a public agency
having the power of eminent domain and that there is a reasonable
likelihood that the premises will be acquired within a period of two
years and that the strict enforcement of the provisions of this code
would require the installation of repairs and improvements estimated to
exceed $300 in cost and that there is an alternative means satisfactory
to the public officers to be used which will eliminate violations of this
code constituting hazards to health, safety, welfare of the occupants of
the premises and persons in the immediate vicinity thereof, provided
however that any waiver of the provisions of this code permitted under
this subsection shall be cancelled and the public officers shall strictly
enforce this code if it shall be ascertained subsequent to the granting of
the waiver that the premises are in fact not to be acquired for public use
or purpose.
§ 13-20.1 GENERAL § 13-20.4
1:529
§ 13-20.4. Application Not to Constitute a Defense or Stay. [Ord.
#1474]
Such application shall not constitute a defense to any violation of this
code, concerning which any proceedings are pending in the municipal
court when the application is filed nor shall any variance or modification
allowed hereunder constitute a vested right against any ordinance enacted
hereinafter by the board of commissioners of the township compelling strict
enforcement of any provisions of this code.
§ 13-20.5. Record of Variations or Modifications Granted. [Ord.
#1474]
Where variations or modifications are approved of any section of this code
by the public officers or by the action of any court a written record thereof
stating the name of the applicant, the address of the premises, the variation
or modification approved, date of approval, and the reasons therefor
satisfying the provisions contained herein, shall be prepared by the public
officers and filed both under this section or sections of the code to which the
variation or modification applies and under the address of the premises and
such file shall be available for public inspection in the office of the public
officer during regular business hours.
§ 13-20.6. Annual Review of Code Provisions and Operations. [Ord.
#1474]
The public officers shall in the month of January of each year, after notice
and public hearing, review with the fire prevention bureau of the fire
department, health department and building inspector the procedure and
operation of this code and report to the board of commissioners on or before
March 1.
§ 13-21. INSPECTION AND STATUS REPORTS FOR THE USE BY
INTERESTED PARTIES.
a. Any recommended amendment, addition or modification of provisions
of this code consonant with the field experience of the personnel
charged with the enforcement.
b. A summary of the enforcement experience indicating number of
violations abated, number of cases processed in the municipal court,
number of inspections made and such other further pertinent
information as will provide the board of commissioners with an annual
account of progress in securing the standards required by this code.
c. Any further recommendation as to how the code and the procedures
and operations thereunder can be improved.
§ 13-20.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 13-21.1
1:530
§ 13-21.1. Application for Inspection. [Ord. #1474]
Whenever an owner, operator, occupant, prospective purchaser, mortgagee
or prospective occupant shall apply to the public officers for an inspection
in order to ascertain if any section of this code has been violated, the
public officers shall, after obtaining permission from the owner, operator, or
occupant thereof and upon payment of the fee hereunder stated, cause an
inspection to be made of the premises and issue an information certificate
or report of the inspection to the applicant, indicating therein any violations
of this code on the premises. The applicant for such inspection shall state
in writing his full name, residence and the reason and basis for which the
inspection is requested. The public officers may deny the application for
failure to comply with this requirement.
§ 13-21.2. Application for Status Report. [Ord. #1474]
Where, in lieu of an inspection, an owner, operator, occupant, lessee,
prospective purchaser, mortgagee or prospective occupant requests a
status report as to whether or not there are any known violations presently
pending on the premises, upon payment of the fee prescribed herein, a copy
of any notice or order on any violation then pending shall be sent to the
applicant.
§ 13-21.3. Significance and Scope of Inspection or Status Report.
[Ord. #1474]
No inspection report or status report issued under the terms of the above
sections shall be construed as providing a defense against any violation of
this code or any other ordinance of the township which may be discovered
thereafter, whether or not the condition or violation existed at the time
of any such inspection or status report. The inspection or status report
is provided as a convenience to the public and shall not be construed to
constitute a limitation on the full enforcement of this code. The inspection
or status report shall include only such matters as are embraced in this
code.
§ 13-21.4. Inspection and Status Report Fees. [Ord. #1474]
The fee for any inspection report shall be $20 for dwellings of 10 or less
dwelling units, and $1 additional for each unit in excess of 10, and the fee
for any inspection report for commercial buildings shall be $20. The fee for
any status report shall be $2.
§ 13-22. CERTIFICATE OF NECESSITY.
§ 13-22.1. Who May Apply. [Ord. #1474]
Where any owner, operator or occupant is required to make repairs or
otherwise improve his property and is unable to comply with this code
without having right of access to the building or premises through or across
adjoining premises not owned by him or under his control, and where right
§ 13-21.1 GENERAL § 13-22.1
1:531
of access has been refused the owner, operator or occupant, or where the
owner or person responsible for granting permission cannot be found or
located, then upon filing an affidavit setting forth the facts with the public
officer, the public officer shall service a five-day written notice of hearing
in accordance with the provisions for service contained in this code upon
the owner, operator or occupant of any adjoining premises affected by the
application.
§ 13-22.2. Hearing. [Ord. #1474]
On the day fixed for hearing the public officer shall provide opportunity for
the owner, operator or occupant of the adjoining property or properties to
state why access shall not be granted across the adjoining properties.
§ 13-22.3. Issuance of Certificate; Conditions. [Ord. #1474]
If the public officer determines that access is necessary to accomplish
or complete repairs or improvements necessary for compliance with this
code, then the public officers shall issue a certificate of necessity setting
forth therein the person or persons to whom the certificate shall apply,
such conditions as shall be necessary to protect the adjoining property
reasonable time limits during which certificate shall operate, precautions
to be taken to avoid damage and where the public officers deem proper,
that a bond be procured at the expense, if any, by the person seeking
access to secure the adjoining property owner against damage to persons
or property arising out of such rights of access. The bond shall not exceed in
amount $10,000 and the amount set shall take into consideration the extent,
nature and duration of the repairs, the proximity of the improvement on the
premises affected and the potential risk of damage thereto. The bond shall
be filed with the public officer.
§ 13-22.4. Procedure Where Access Refused. [Ord. #1474]
Any refusal to comply with this section or any interference with the access
to premises pursuant to a certificate issued hereunder, shall be a violation
of this code and, in addition to the penalties provided hereunder the public
officers may upon affidavit, apply to the municipal judge for a warrant under
the procedure set forth in the applicable section of this code authorizing
access to the premises under appropriate conditions and circumstances as
provided above.
§ 13-23. DWELLING UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION OR USE.
§ 13-23.1. Finding of Unfitness. [Ord. #1474]
The public officer on his own, or upon the filing of a petition by at least
10 residents charging that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation or use
shall make an inspection on any dwelling believed to be unfit for human
habitation or use, and shall make preliminary finding in accordance with
the standards provided herein whether or not the premises are unfit for
§ 13-22.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 13-23.1
1:532
human habitation or use. If so, he shall, thereupon, serve a notice upon the
owner, operator and occupant advising all such parties of the results of his
inspection and the basis for his determination and setting a date for hearing
not less than 10 nor more than 30 days from the date of service. However,
where the public officer makes a preliminary finding that the conditions
on the premises constitute an immediate substantial threat to the safety or
health of occupants or persons in proximity to the premises, he may order
and direct that the premises be vacated immediately and that the signs or
notice be posted prohibiting occupancy thereof and that the premises be
locked and boarded up as provided in this code.
§ 13-23.2. Basis for Finding of Unfitness. [Ord. #1474]
In making a determination of whether a dwelling is unfit for human
habitation or use the public officers shall determine whether by reason of
violations of this code existing in the dwelling or on the premises, that the
continued occupancy of the building will not endanger and jeopardize the
health and safety of the occupants or persons in the vicinity of the premises
and to the end that he may consider, among other factors:
§ 13-23.3. Hearing and Determination. [Ord. #1474]
After the holding of the hearing as prescribed in this code the public
officer shall make a determination as to whether the dwelling is unfit for
human habitation or use and thereupon he shall make an order based on an
evaluation of health and safety factors in the use of the premises as follows:
a. Whether the premises are so structurally defective that there is a risk of
collapse or of loose materials falling and injuring persons in and around
the dwellings;
b. Whether by reason of inadequate ventilation there is a danger of
communicable diseases being contracted and spread in among the
occupants or persons in the vicinity of the premises; or
c. Whether by reason of infestation or defective condition of plumbing, or
the lack of maintenance of halls, floors, walls, or other parts of the
premises, conditions exist which are conducive to the contracting and
spreading of diseases; or
d. Whether by reason of electrical wiring, conduits or equipment, heating
or cooking facilities, or lack of proper means of egress, there is a
danger of fire or in case of fire inadequate means of egress; or
e. Whether premises are deficient in one or more essential utilities
including public sewer, water supply or electricity; or
f. Whether premises were not designed or constructed for human
habitation whether by reason of same occupancy constitutes an
unnecessary hazard of safety or health.
§ 13-23.1 GENERAL § 13-23.3
1:533
§ 13-23.4. Compliance with Order and Reinspection. [Ord. #1474]
Where premises are ordered vacated, all doors to the exterior shall be
locked and the first story or basement and cellar windows barred or
boarded to prevent entry. Where an order is issued under the paragraph
preceding it shall be served upon all persons affected thereby. When the
conditions for the violations complained of are corrected, the owner or
occupant affected thereby may request a reinspection which shall be
provided upon the payment of a reinspection fee of $20. Based on the
reinspection, the public officers shall issue a further order which shall
either revoke the previous order and permit occupancy or state such further
conditions or time limits during which additional repairs or improvements
are to be made before occupancy is again permitted or order vacation as
stated in the preceding paragraph. Upon compliance with the conditions
contained in an order, the public officer shall permit the signs to be removed
and the premises made available again for occupancy.
§ 13-23.5. Failure to Comply with Order; Premises to Constitute a
Menace. [Ord. #1474]
Where the owner, operator or occupant fails to comply with any order
hereunder or perform in accordance with any written commitment as
provided herein or remove any notice posted pursuant hereto or any lock
or bar without the permission of the public officer, he shall be deemed
in violation of this code and subject to the penalties provided herein. In
addition thereto, the public officer may take such steps as may be necessary
to compel vacation and boarding up of any premises and may post signs
prohibiting occupancy. Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the
public officers to demolish any property except pursuant to an agreement
under the terms of this code or in accordance with the township ordinances.
Upon failure to comply with any such order, the premises shall constitute a
public nuisance and the public officer may take such further action under
the criminal and civil laws of this state through any court of competent
jurisdiction as may be necessary to remove or abate the nuisance.
a. That the occupancy of all or part of the dwelling be permitted for a
limited period of time not to exceed 30 days, upon condition that all
violations recited in the order are corrected or abated within that time
and if not corrected or abated, the premises vacated within 10 days
thereafter; or
b. That the dwelling or any part thereof be ordered vacated within a
specified time period not to exceed 30 days, be boarded up and signs or
notices that occupancy is prohibited be posted prominently at all the
entrances of the dwelling and that the order continue in effect until the
conditions are abated and the order revoked, as provided herein.
§ 13-23.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 13-23.6
1:534
§ 13-23.6. Vacation of Premises in Emergency. [Ord. #1474]
Where the public officers make a preliminary finding that conditions on
the premises constitute an immediate and substantial threat to the safety
or health of occupants or persons in proximity to the premises, he may
order and direct that the premises be vacated immediately and that signs
or notices be posted prohibiting occupancy thereof, and that the premises
be locked and boarded up as provided in this code. Any party aggrieved
thereby may within 10 days thereafter make a request for a hearing in
accordance with the sections on hearings in this code and upon holding
a hearing as provided herein and the making of a determination that the
premises are fit for human occupancy or that the premises upon the removal
of certain specified conditions will become again fit for human occupancy,
the order may be rescinded or modified and the signs, bars and locks,
as provided herein, removed when the premises are again fit for human
habitation and the specified condition, if any, are satisfied.
Chapter 14
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND SANITATION
[Editor's Note: For regulations concerning the operation of nonpassenger
motor vehicles on paved roadways, see Chapter 3, § 3-27.]
[For anti-littering provisions, see Chapter 3, § 3-14.]
[See Chapter 7 for motor vehicle traffic regulations.]
§ 14-1. SIDEWALKS AND CURBS.
§ 14-1.1. Construction and Repair Costs. [Ord. #1492, § 1]
The construction, maintenance and repair and reconstruction of sidewalks
and curbs shall be the responsibility of the abutting landowners and shall
be constructed, repaired, altered, relaid or maintained at the expense of the
abutting landowners as provided by the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:65-14.
§ 14-1.2. Notice from Board of Commissioners; Time Permitted.
[Ord. #1492, § 2]
The board of commissioners shall cause notice to be served upon abutting
landowners or occupants of the lands, requiring the necessary specified
work to the curb or sidewalk to be performed by the owners or occupant
within a period of not less than 30 days from the date of such notice. The
board of commissioners may, at their discretion, due to inclement weather
extend the period for a longer period than 30 days provided that this period
shall not exceed 90 days.
§ 13-23.6 GENERAL § 14-1.3
1:535
§ 14-1.3. Service of Notice if Owner Cannot Be Located. [Ord.
#1492, § 3]
The board of commissioners shall, whenever the abutting lands are
unoccupied and the owner in title cannot be found within the township, mail
postage prepaid to the owner's post office address, and in the event the
address cannot be ascertained, the board of commissioners shall insert a
notice for four weeks, once in each week, in a newspaper published within
the township.
§ 14-1.4. Owner Refuses to Repair; Township to Complete Work.
[Ord. #1492, § 4]
The board of commissioners, upon expiration of the period of notice, shall
in the event that the owner or occupant has not complied with the
requirements of the notice, file with the department of revenue and finance
due proof of service of publication of the aforesaid notice and the board
of commissioners shall after the filing of the notice with the department
of revenue and finance order the necessary work to be performed in
accordance with the notice by the director of public works and cause the
same to be paid for from the funds of the township.
§ 14-1.5. Costs to Be Tax Lien. [Ord. #1492, § 5]
The director of the department of public works, or his duly designated
representative, shall certify to the tax collector36 of the department of
revenue and finance the cost of the performance of the work, and upon the
filing of the certificate by the director of the department of public works or
his duly designated representative with the tax collector of the department
of revenue and finance, it shall thereafter cause a lien to be placed upon the
abutting lands wherein the work was performed.
§ 14-1.6. Tax Collector to Receive Funds. [Ord. #1492, § 6]
The tax collector of the department of revenue and finance shall collect
the monies so expended in the same manner as assessments for local
improvements as provided by the statutes of the State of New Jersey, and
the lien shall bear interest at the same rate as an assessment for local
improvements. The tax collector may, with the consent of the board of
commissioners, institute a suit in the courts of the State of New Jersey
for the collection of the amount of the lien from the owner of the lands,
as disclosed on the tax assessment list of the township at the time of the
performance of the work.
36.Editor’s Note: See Chapter 2, § 2-18, for the establishment of the position of tax collector/
treasurer/chief financial officer.
§ 14-1.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 14-1.7
1:536
§ 14-1.7. Use of Funds. [Ord. #1492, § 7]
The tax collector shall credit all monies from the performance of the work
to an account to be established by the tax collector for performance of the
work as set forth in this chapter by the township.
§ 14-1.8. Inspection of Sidewalks; Causes of Repair Due to Tree
Roots; Costs Assumed by Township. [Ord. #1492, § 8; Ord. #2569,
§ 1]
The director of the department of public works shall have the authority
under the provisions of this chapter to designate subordinate employees
in the department of public works as representatives in performing the
duties required of the director in the administering of the provisions of
this chapter, and the director may further designate employees within
the department of public works for the purpose of inspecting streets and
sidewalks. The director of public works, prior to the performance of any
work on any curb or sidewalk by the abutting landowner, shall ascertain
through his representatives the conditions affecting the existing sidewalks
and curbs on the abutting land. If the director determines that the condition
is due to the growth of roofs of any shade tree owned by the township, the
director shall order that the roots be removed and any affected sidewalk
or curbing be repaired or replaced, if necessary, by employees of the
township at no cost to abutting landowners. If the director determines
that the condition is not due to the growth of roots of any shade tree
owned by the township, the director thereafter shall notify the board of
commissioners of the condition existing and any work to be performed by
the abutting landowner, prior to the board of commissioners serving notice
on the landowner or occupant of the lands.
§ 14-1.9. Specifications for the Installation, Construction,
Reconstruction, and Replacement of Sidewalks in the Right-of-Way
of Any Township Street. [Ord. #2167, § I; Ord. #2388, § I; Ord.
#2557, § 1]
a. Installation and Construction of Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be
constructed of concrete having a composition of one part Portland best
cement, two parts of clean sharp sand, and three parts of machinebroken
trap rock. Sidewalks shall be four feet wide and five inches
deep, except sidewalks abutting driveways and driveway aprons shall
be at a depth of seven inches. Expansion joints shall be used every 10
feet. Sidewalks may be constructed of paving stones where appropriate.
b. Reconstruction or Replacement of Sidewalks. All existing concrete shall
be broken up and removed. Concrete which has been removed will be
disposed of by the contractor. All forming of sidewalks shall be
performed by said contractor, using 1x4 or 2x4 lumber, according to
each individual situation. The contractor shall replace concrete with
P.S.I. 3000 on all sidewalks, or with paving stones where appropriate,
except that a driveway apron shall be replaced with concrete, unless as
§ 14-1.7 GENERAL § 14-1.9
1:537
§ 14-1.10. Permit Required. [Ord. #2557, § 1]
§ 14-1.11. Application for Permit. [Ord. #2557, § 1]
otherwise provided in this subsection. Existing residential asphalt
driveway aprons on a single width driveway from the sidewalk to the
street may be replaced with asphalt, subject to design standards
established by the township engineer. All newly constructed driveway
aprons shall be concrete.
c. Removal of Roots. It shall be the sole responsibility of the township to
cut and remove any roots which may be obstructing the sidewalk. The
contractor shall not, under any circumstances, have contact or interfere
with any part of the tree at any time.
d. Replacement of Soil. After the removal of sidewalk forms by the
contractor, any soil removed along the tree area shall be replaced and
graded by the contractor.
e. Damages. The contractor shall be responsible for any damages that
occur resulting from performance of the work, including water boxes,
sewer cleanouts, drain pipes, gas lines, curbing and any existing
concrete not specified by the department of public works for removal.
f. Scheduling of Work. The superintendent of the department of public
works (hereinafter "superintendent") shall be responsible for
scheduling all work to be done.
g. Review by Superintendent and Beautification Commission. The
installation, construction, reconstruction, and replacement of sidewalks
shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent and
the township beautification commission. The installation, construction,
reconstruction, and replacement of sidewalk paving stones shall be
subject to the review and approval of the superintendent and the
township beautification commission.
a. No person or business entity, municipal or private, nor any utility
company, public or private, shall, for any purpose, install, construct,
reconstruct, or replace a sidewalk within the limits of the right-of-way
of any street in the township without first obtaining a permit from the
superintendent.
b. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed as requiring the
issuance of a permit for the performance of any work performed by the
township or under a contract with the township for the installation,
construction, or reconstruction of a sidewalk within the limits of the
right-of-way of any street within the township.
a. Form. Application for a permit shall be made, in writing, on forms to be
prescribed and issued by the superintendent and shall be filed prior to
the commencement of any work. The application shall specify the name
and address of the applicant; the specific location and description of the
§ 14-1.9 LYNDHURST CODE § 14-1.11
1:538
§ 14-2. RECYCLING PROGRAM.37
§ 14-2.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2045, § 1; Ord. #2239, § 1; Ord. #2693,
§ 1]
As used in this section:
ALUMINUM — Shall mean recyclable aluminum cans.
CONTRACTOR — Shall mean a business engaging in the business of
recycling or otherwise providing recycling services.
GLASS — Shall mean all products made from silica or sand, soda ash and
limestone which are transparent or translucent and used for packaging or
bottling of various matter and all other materials commonly known as glass;
excluding, however, blue and flat glass commonly known as window glass.
MARKET or MARKETS — Shall mean the disposition of designated
recyclable materials source separated in a municipality which entails a
disposition cost of less than the cost of transporting the recyclable materials
proposed sidewalk, including its width, length, and depth; and the
individual(s) or business entity for whose benefit the sidewalk is to
be made, and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee for the
issuance of the permit as hereinafter set forth. No work may commence
by a permittee until the date set forth in the issued permit, unless
previously approved by the superintendent. If the sidewalk consists
of pavers, approval from the beautification commission shall also be
required.
b. Applicant. With the exception of private property owners, all applicants,
whether individual or business entity, must be contractors licensed by
the State of New Jersey or agents of a public utility who will actually be
engaged in the performance of the work in order to comply with the
specifications, and for the safety of the public.
c. Issuance. Sidewalk permits shall be issued once reviewed and approved
by the superintendent and, if applicable, by the beautification
commission; provided, however, that no permit shall be issued until the
nonrefundable application fee has been paid.
d. Fee. The applicant shall pay a non-refundable fee to the township for
the sidewalk in the amount of $35.
e. Violation and Penalties. Any person or business entity who or which
shall violate any of the provisions of this subsection shall, upon
conviction of such violation, be subject to each offense, to a fine not
exceeding $500 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days, or
both.
37.Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 1589 previously contained herein was amended in entirety
by Ordinance No. 2045.
§ 14-1.11 GENERAL § 14-2.1
1:539
to solid waste facilities and disposing of them as municipal solid waste at
the facility utilized by the municipality.
MIXED PAPER — Shall mean and includes all newspaper, high-grade office
paper, fine paper, bond paper, offset paper, xerographic paper, mimeo paper,
computer paper, duplicator paper and related types of cellulosic material
containing not more than 10% by weight or volume of non-cellulosic
material such as laminates, binders, coatings or saturants.
OTHER MATERIALS — Will be included in "recycling" definition
periodically.
PAPER PRODUCTS — Shall mean any noncontaminated paper items or
commodities, including but not limited to, paper napkins, towels,
corrugated and other cardboard, and related types of cellulosic products
containing not more than 10% by weight or volume of non-cellulosic
materials such as laminates, binders, coatings or saturants.
PERSON — Shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization of any kind.
PLASTIC CONTAINER or PLASTICS — Shall mean any hermetically sealed,
or made airtight with a metal or plastic cap, container with a minimum
wall thickness of not less than 0.010 inches, and composed of thermoplastic
synthetic polymeric material, including containers such as polyethylene
terephthalate (PETE - #1) soda bottles; and high density polyethylene
(DEPE - #2) milk, water or detergent bottles.
POST-CONSUMER WASTE MATERIAL — Shall mean any noncontaminated
product generated by a business or consumer which has served its intended
end use, and which has been separated from solid waste for the purposes of
collection, recycling and disposition and which does not include secondary
waste material or demolition waste.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean those materials which would
otherwise become municipal solid waste, and which may be collected,
separated or processed and returned to the economic mainstream in the
form of new materials or products.
RECYCLED PAPER — Shall mean any paper having a total weight consisting
of not less than 50% secondary waste paper material.
RECYCLED PAPER PRODUCTS — Shall mean any paper product consisting
of not less than 50% secondary waste paper material.
RECYCLING — Shall mean any process by which materials that would
otherwise become solid waste are collected, separated or processed and
returned to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials or
products.
RECYCLING CENTER — Shall mean any facility designed and operated
solely for receiving, storing, processing and transferring source separated,
nonputrescible or source separated commingled nonputrescible metal,
glass, paper, plastic containers, and corrugated and other cardboard, or
other recyclable materials approved by the department of public works.
§ 14-2.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 14-2.1
1:540
RECYCLING SERVICES — Shall mean the services provided by those
engaging in the business of recycling, including the collection, processing,
storage, purchase, sale or disposition, or any combination thereof of
recyclable materials.
REGULATIONS — Shall mean and include such rules, implementation
dates, schedules of times and such other requirements promulgated by
the director of public works and approved by the Lyndhurst Board of
Commissioners as may be necessary to carry out the purposes and
objectives of this Section.
SECONDARY WASTE MATERIAL — Shall mean waste material generated
after the completion of manufacturing process.
SECONDARY WASTE PAPER MATERIAL — Shall mean paper waste
generated after the completion of a paper making process, such as post
consumer waste material, envelope cuttings, bindery trimmings, printing
waste, cutting and other covert waste, butt rolls, and mill wrappers, except
that secondary waste paper material shall not include fibrous waste
generated during the manufacturing process, such as fibers recovered from
waste water or trimmings of paper machine rolls, fibrous by-products of
harvesting, extractive or woodcutting processes, or forest residue such as
bark.
SOLID WASTE — Shall mean "solid waste" generated by all residential,
commercial and institutions within the boundaries of the Township of
Lyndhurst for regularly scheduled municipal collection.
SOURCE SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Shall mean recyclable
materials, including but not limited to, paper, metal, glass, food waste,
office paper and plastic which are kept separate and apart from residential,
commercial and institutional solid waste by the generator thereof for the
purpose of collection, disposition and recycling.
USED NEWSPAPER — Shall mean and include paper of the type commonly
referred to as newsprint and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily
or weekly having printed thereon news and opinions and containing
advertisements and other matters of public interest. Expressly excluded
however, are all magazines or other periodicals as well as all other paper
products of any nature whatsoever.
WHITE GOODS — Shall mean refrigerators, stoves, air conditioners,
furnaces, ovens, space heaters, bathtubs, sinks, electronic goods and
products and other household type appliances.
YARD WASTE — Shall mean and include leaves, grass clippings and brush/
tree parts, including branches and woodchips.
§ 14-2.1 GENERAL § 14-2.2
1:541
§ 14-2.2. Classes of Business. [Ord. #2045, § 2; Ord. #2239, § 2]
Class I Businesses regardless of how many employees, office buildings
containing less than six offices, multiple dwelling units of four
units or more and buildings containing a combination of
residences and buildings.
Class II Shall be eliminated
Class III Shall be eliminated
Class IV Shall be eliminated
Class VI Shall be eliminated
Class V Office buildings containing more than six offices.
Class VII Hotels or motels.
Class VIII Buildings containing a combination of residences and buildings.
Class IX Manufacturing plants.
Class X Local institutions such as Town Hall, fire and police
departments, schools, health department, library, etc.
§ 14-2.3. General Obligations. [Ord. #2045, § 3; Ord. #2128; Ord.
#2239 §§ 3 — 5; Ord. #2693, § 1]
a. Residential. All persons except those physically disabled who are
owners, lessees and/or occupants of residential property in the
Township of Lyndhurst, for purposes of disposal off site, shall separate
mixed paper, used newspapers, ferrous scrap metal, including iron
scrap, tin, aluminum and steel cans, white goods, yard waste, tires,
electronic goods and products; construction and debris materials,
except those resulting from work by a professional building or home
improvement contractor; household batteries, concrete, and asphalt
and shall dispose of said separated materials in accordance with
regulations prepared by the Lyndhurst Department of Public Works.
b. (Reserved)
c. (Reserved)
d. Class V, VII, IX. Class V, VII, and IX shall separate and store those
recyclable materials listed under subsection 14-2.3a, Residential, in
suitable receptacles as designated by the recycling coordinator for
pickup. Exception to this are those businesses that are contracted to
purchase material. Those businesses must submit, on a quarterly basis,
a copy of the weight or quantity document to the township's recycling
coordinator. Exemption forms to those institutions will be issued by the
township.
e. (Reserved)
§ 14-2.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 14-2.3
1:542
§ 14-2.4. Separation and Placement in Containers. [Ord. #2045, § 4;
Ord. #2128; Ord. #2270, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #2568, § 1; Ord. #2693, § 1]
All separated recyclables shall be placed for pickup, and/or collection and
recycling in strict conformity with the following regulations:
f. Class VIII. The owners of the building shall make available storage
areas for recyclables to be properly prepared; disposal shall be
designated by the recycling coordinator.
g. Class X. The officers and supervisors of these buildings shall make
available containers for the disposal of the type defined in subsection
14-2.1 including newspapers and made accessible for collection as
designated by the Recycling Coordinator.
a. Mixed paper, used newspapers, periodicals, direct mail catalogs, form
letters, envelopes, high grade papers, computer paper, white and
colored ledger, fine paper, bond paper, offset paper, xerographic paper,
mimeo paper, duplicator paper, file card stock, corrugated containers
having liners of jute or kraft and other like paper such as brown grocery
bags, sacks, brown wrapping paper, cereal boxes, cracker boxes, dry
soap boxes, shoe boxes, gift boxes, shirt cardboard, school papers, and
gift wrapping shall be separated and tied in bundles not to exceed 12
inches in height. Such bundles shall not be contained in plastic bags.
b. Aluminum shall be separated and secured in suitable reusable
containers supplied by the owner, lessee or occupant.
c. Glass shall be separated and contained in suitable reusable containers
supplied by the owner, lessee or occupant. Containers constructed of
paper or cardboard materials shall be deemed not suitable for this
purpose. Containers, when filled, to weigh not more than 25 pounds.
d. All leaves and brush/tree parts are to be placed curbside, before 8:00
a.m. on the scheduled sweeper day, from the first week of November
through the last week of December. Residents or business
establishments with a sweeper time of 3:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. shall have
leaves placed curbside after 6:00 p.m. Wednesday evening.
Grass clippings shall be placed in an open container on the scheduled
sweeper day. Brush shall be cut into four foot sections, tied and
bundled. Pickup of yard waste shall be from the first scheduled sweeper
day in April until the last scheduled sweeper day in October.
e. Plastics shall be separated and contained in suitable containers (clear
plastic garbage bags are acceptable) supplied by the owner, lessee, or
occupant.
f. Storage of recyclables shall be at a location which shall not cause an
unsightly or hazardous environment.
§ 14-2.3 GENERAL § 14-2.5
1:543
§ 14-2.5. Pickup and Collection of Separated Recyclables. [Ord.
#2045, § 5]
§ 14-2.6. Collection by Unauthorized Persons Prohibited. [Ord.
#2045, § 6]
From the time of placement at the curb for pickup, collection and recycling,
recyclables shall be the sole property of the Township of Lyndhurst, or its
duly authorized agent. No person unauthorized by the township shall collect
or pick up, or cause to be collected or picked up, any such recyclables.
Each collection or pickup of recyclables in violation hereof, from any one or
more residences, businesses, institutions, etc., shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
§ 14-2.7. Authorized Collections by Groups and Individuals. [Ord.
#2045, § 7]
No provision herein shall be constructed to prohibit groups or individuals
who shall be authorized by the director of the department of public works,
from collection or picking up recyclables at curbside, or otherwise in such
manner and under such terms and conditions as shall be prescribed by the
director. No such collection or pickup shall conflict or interfere with pickup
and collection by the township and its duly authorized agents.
§ 14-2.8. Authorized Containers and Receptacles. [Ord. #2045, § 8]
a. All such recyclables mentioned in this section shall be placed separately
at the curb for collection not earlier than 6:00 p.m. on the day
preceding those days to be designated for collection by the director of
public works of the township, under the rules and regulations
promulgated in accordance with the terms herein.
b. The director of the department of public works shall promulgate
reasonable regulations establishing the commencement dates for
mandatory separation of recyclables and the manner, dates and times
for the collection of the same in accordance with the terms of this
section. Any such regulations promulgated by the director of the
department of public works shall be approved by the local board of
commissioners, and may be changed, modified, repealed or amended in
whole or in part by a majority vote by the local board of commissioners.
A copy of such regulations promulgated by the director of the
department of public works, as approved, modified or amended, shall
be available for public inspection at the office of the township clerk
during regular hours.
a. Sufficient. Enough receptacles for each premises to eliminate the need
for baskets, cartons, paper bags, stored in loose condition at receptacle
locations.
§ 14-2.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 14-2.8
1:544
§ 14-2.9. Enforcement. [Ord. #2045, § 9]
The director of the department of public works, or his duly authorized
designee, is hereby designated and authorized as the enforcement officer of
this section.
§ 14-2.10. Warning. [Ord. #2045, § 10]
The director of the department of public works has duly authorized and
directed that our contractor is not to pick up any refuse bundles that contain
recyclable items. Such bundles will be left in front of any establishment,
whether it is residential, business, or institution. The contractor is also
directed to place a "red warning sticker" on such bundles explaining why
your refuse was left at your establishment. Continuous violations will be
subject to a penalty as set forth hereon.
§ 14-2.11. Penalties. [Ord. #2045, § 11]
§ 14-2.12. Enforcement and Prosecution of Violations. [Ord. #2045,
§ 12]
It shall be the duty of the police department, health department, or the
recycling coordinator of the Township of Lyndhurst to see to the
enforcement of this section and to prosecute all violations hereunder.
§ 14-3. DESTRUCTION OR MUTILATION OF CURBS.
b. Suitable. A receptacle as herein defined so constructed as to prevent
spillage having handles on other appurtenances thereto of such size as
to facilitate its emptying and maintained at all times in a clean
condition.
c. Type 1. Receptacle shall have handles to enable it to be handled by one
man and shall be filled to a weight no greater than 25 pounds.
d. Type 2. Receptacle shall be one commonly known as a "dumpster"
having a capacity of no greater than two cubic yards and shall have
standard appurtenant fixtures thereon to facilitate dumping into
standard garbage compactor trucks.
a. Any person, firm, or corporation not authorized by the Township of
Lyndhurst who picks up recyclable materials for their own personal use
or sale shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to
exceed $1,000, 60 days confinement, and/or perform community
service relating to the recycling program.
b. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with
any provisions of this section or any regulation promulgated thereto,
shall upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to exceed
$200, and perform community service relating to the recycling
program.
§ 14-2.8 GENERAL § 14-3.1
1:545
§ 14-3.1. Prohibition. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
The driving over, destruction or mutilation of the curb, or any part thereof,
upon any street within the township is hereby prohibited.
§ 14-3.2. Driveways. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
Driveways may be constructed over the curbs upon the streets within the
township by the owner of the abutting property, in conformity to the plans
and specifications therefor on file in the office of the township clerk.
§ 14-3.3. Application and Fee. [Ord. #1424, § 11; Ord. #2757, § 2]
Before such driveway shall be constructed, the owner of lands and premises
shall file with the Lyndhurst Construction Department a written application
describing therein the location of the proposed driveway and agree to
construct the same according to the plans and specifications and thereupon
the Construction Department shall issue a permit for the construction of
such driveway, in accordance with the plans and specifications. The fee
for the permit for the driveway, curbcut and/or apron, collectively, shall be
payable to the Lyndhurst Construction Department in accordance with the
fee schedule appearing under subsection 8-1.3 of these Revised General
Ordinances.
§ 14-3.4. Improper Construction. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
Any and all driveways not constructed in conformity to the provisions of this
chapter shall be reconstructed by the owner of the lands to which it leads as
hereinbefore provided within 30 days after receiving notice requiring such
reconstruction.
§ 14-4. STREET OPENINGS.
§ 14-4.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2077, § I]
The purpose of this section is to establish regulations and fees for the
opening of municipal streets within the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 14-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2077, § I]
As used in this section:
EXTENSIVE OPENING — Shall mean an opening, tearing up or excavating,
for any purpose, of the township road of 100 feet or more of roadway length
or where connecting bilateral openings are made at average intervals of
less than 100 feet along the roadway length or an opening which disturbs
20 or more of the pavement area.
OWNER — Shall mean any person, corporation, public utility or other entity
on whose behalf a street opening is performed by a permittee.
§ 14-3.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 14-4.2
1:546
PERMITTEE — Shall mean any person, firm or corporation granted a permit
hereunder.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Shall mean New Jersey Bell Telephone Company, or
its successor corporation or corporations, Public Service Electric and Gas
Company, cable television company or any other entity having either the
power of eminent domain or subject to the regulations of the Public Utilities
Commission of the State of New Jersey.
SMALL OPENING — Shall mean any opening, tearing up or excavating, for
any purpose, of the township road which is not an extensive opening.
STREET — Shall mean any street, road or other public way dedicated to
and accepted by the Township of Lyndhurst, and shall include all of the area
lying within the bounds of the dedicated right-of-way.
§ 14-4.3. Permit Required. [Ord. #2077, § I]
a. No person, persons or corporation, municipal or private, nor any utility
company, public or private, shall, for any purpose, open, tear up,
excavate, bore, tunnel or drive under or in any way impair the surface
or subsurface within the limits of the right-of-way of any street in the
township without first obtaining a road-opening permit from the
township clerk (hereinafter "clerk").
b. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed as requiring the
issuance of a permit for the performance of any work done by the
township or under a contract with the township for the construction of
water lines, sewer lines or street improvements.
c. No person or corporation shall be issued a road permit until he presents
satisfactory proof, in the form of a request number, which may be
verified through the "one number to call center" of the appropriate
utility, or a written statement from the person or corporation engaged
in the distribution or submission of manufactured, mixed or natural gas
or synthetic natural gas, liquefied natural gas or propane gas in the
area of the proposed road opening, that said applicant has complied
with the requirements of N.J.S.A. 2C:17-4 and 2C:17-5, which provide,
among other things, that said applicant give to any person or
corporation in the distribution or transmission of the aforesaid gases in
the area of the proposed excavation written notice of the proposed
excavation and ascertain from such person or corporation the location
of all such gas lines or pipelines within 200 feet of the proposed
excavation.
d. Non-opening of Road. No street, road or paved area constructed,
reconstructed or repaved within three years of the time that the road is
sealed can be excavated, built or patched without a demonstration by
the permittee that an emergency exists. Gas leaks, water main leaks
and sewer breaks shall be considered examples of emergencies.
§ 14-4.2 GENERAL § 14-4.3
1:547
§ 14-4.4. Application for Permit. [Ord. #2077, § I]
e. Certification of all underground facilities having been previously
located shall be marked using standard color codes for gas, water and
other utilities. Certification must indicate call authorization number.
a. Form. Application for a permit shall be made, in writing, on forms to be
prescribed by the superintendent of the department of public works
(hereinafter "superintendent") and issued by the clerk and shall be filed
at least one week prior to the commencement of any work. The
application shall specify the name and address of the applicant; the
specific location of the proposed excavation and the width, length and
depth thereof; the type of road or other surface; and the individual(s),
partnership or corporation for whose benefit the excavation is to be
made and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee for the issuance
of the permit as hereinafter set forth. Application for extensive
openings shall require, in addition to the above, information regarding
all improvements; typical detail and section of construction procedure;
and plans, profiles and other details necessary to accurately depict the
work. The requirements of the preceding sentence shall not be
necessary in the event of an application by public utility. No work may
commence by a permittee until the date set forth in the issued permit,
unless previously approved by the superintendent or engineer.
b. Emergency Road Opening.
1. In the event that an emergency condition exists requiring
immediate action by any person requested to obtain a permit
pursuant to this section, the person may immediately cause the
roadway to be entered and emergency measures taken without first
obtaining a permit, provided that:
(a) A true emergency exists and the person has notified the
Lyndhurst Police Department prior to the start of work, who
shall log the emergency.
(b) A permit is applied for within 24 hours of the road opening or
on the next business day, whichever is more practical.
(c) All work is performed in accordance with the provisions of
subsections 14-4.5, 14-4.6, 14-4.7, and 14-4.8.
(d) The superintendent or the township engineer shall be notified
within 24 hours of a road opening. If a road opening
commences on a Saturday or Sunday as a result of emergency
work, the police department shall be notified prior to the start
of work immediately and the superintendent or township
engineer (hereinafter "engineer") shall be notified on the
morning of the first business day thereafter.
§ 14-4.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 14-4.4
1:548
§ 14-4.5. Work Requirements. [Ord. #2077, § I]
2. The township reserves the right to issue a written stop-work order
where the same is deemed appropriate by the superintendent or
engineer.
c. Review of the Application for Small Openings. Prior to the issuance of a
permit, copies of the application therefor shall be referred to the
superintendent or the engineer, who shall note any objections to the
issuance of a permit or any conditions to be imposed on the application
within five working days. All objections and all conditions shall be
satisfied prior to or be imposed as conditions upon the issuance of the
permit, as appropriate.
d. Applicant. With the exception of private homeowners, all applicants
must be contractors licensed by the State of New Jersey or agents of a
public utility, whether corporate, individual or partnership, who will
actually be engaged in the performance of the work for the adherence
of the work to the specifications and for the safety of the public. With
the exception of private homeowners and public utilities, the
application shall be made for and on the behalf of the owner for whom
such work is being done and shall be countersigned by such owner.
Permits cannot be issued directly to private developers without specific
written approval of the mayor and board of commissioners.
e. Agreement. Except where otherwise provided by law or where
governed by township ordinance, the owner shall, as a condition of the
issuance of a permit agree that any facilities, pipe or poles or other
objects to be installed within the township right-of-way pursuant to the
permit shall be promptly relocated, at the owners expense, as required
by the Township of Lyndhurst to accommodate the installation of
township facilities. Such agreement shall be in writing and contained
on the face of the application form and permit.
f. Review of Application for Small and Extensive Openings. All small and
extensive openings shall first be reviewed and approved by the
superintendent, and extensive openings shall subsequently be reviewed
and approved by the engineer prior to the issuance of a permit.
g. Issuance. Street opening permits shall be issued by the clerk once
reviewed and approved as provided for herein; provided, however, that
no permit shall be issued until an application fee and an engineering
fee, both of which are nonrefundable, have been paid to the clerk.
a. Generally. The New Jersey State Department of Transportation 1983
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, with all
amendments and supplements, shall govern all of the work performed
under Township of Lyndhurst road opening permits, except as
supplemented below:
§ 14-4.4 GENERAL § 14-4.5
1:549
1. No Township road shall be closed to traffic without prior written
consent of the police department. In the event that a road is closed,
uniformed police may be required to act as traffic directors, and the
proper traffic control devices shall be erected and maintained in
accordance with standards described in the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, 1971 Edition. All costs of providing
uniformed police shall be the responsibility of the permittee or the
owners. In the event that a detour is deemed necessary by the
permittee, application shall be made to the chief of police, who
shall determine the necessity for such detour and the route to be
followed. In emergency situations, notification by phone to the
police department shall be done prior to the start of work.
2. Any work under an issued permit must be commenced within three
months from the date of issue and completed 45 days from
commencement, or the permit shall be deemed void, and
reapplication shall be required, unless previously approved by the
superintendent or engineer.
3. Work commenced under a permit shall be continued without
interruption during normal working hours until completed.
4. The applicant shall notify the clerk and the superintendent or the
engineer 24 hours in advance of the actual commencement of any
work under a permit.
b. Guard. The applicant shall keep the work site property guarded both
day and night and shall have lights, barriers and adequate safety
devices, as described in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
placed thereat and maintained throughout the performance of the work
and shall interfere as little as possible with traffic along the street or
road within the township, and only that part of any such street or road
as is set forth in the permit shall be opened.
c. Minimum Cover. All utilities shall be constructed with a minimum of
three feet of cover to provide protection for the utilities in the event
that future township road construction, repair or modification
necessitates excavation, undercutting or installation of facilities in the
area where the utility is located. This location will in no way relieve the
utility owner of the responsibility of relocating said utility at said utility
owners expense in case of conflict with future construction,
reconstruction or modification of related facilities, except as otherwise
specified herein. The aforementioned three-foot minimum cover may be
waived by the superintendent or engineer if the applicant prepared and
filed certified plans indicating the location, extent and depth of the
facilities and said plans are approved by the superintendent or
engineer. This paragraph shall apply only to new construction.
d. Protection of Existing Structures. It shall be the responsibility of the
permittee to give proper notice of the proposed street opening to any
person, firm or corporation whose pipes, conduits or other structures
§ 14-4.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 14-4.5
1:550
§ 14-4.6. Duty of Permittee to Repair and Clean Streets and
Property. [Ord. #2077, § I]
are laid in the portion of the street to be opened. Said notice shall be
given, in writing, a minimum of 72 hours before commencement of said
opening, and the permittee shall, at his own expense, carefully support,
maintain in operation and protect from damage such pipes, conduits
or other structures. If any damage is caused to such pipes, conduits or
structures, the permittee shall restore the same, at his own expense,
to the condition they were prior to commencement of work, except
that gas facilities must be repaired by Public Service Electric and Gas
Company.
e. All excavations shall be completely backfilled at the end of each
working day, unless it would constitute a hardship to the permittee or
where the size of the excavation makes it impossible to backfill at the
end of each working day, in which event a waiver may be granted by the
superintendent or engineer. In the event that a waiver is granted, the
contractor or owner shall cover the excavation with heavy one-inchthick
plates secured to existing pavement to prevent raffles and
movement and erect appropriate barriers and lights around the entire
excavation and arrange to provide appropriate security protection, if
such security is necessary, at his own cost and such other safeguards as
may be needed to protect the public from an open excavation. If plates
are placed for over a weekend or for an extended period, all edges are
to be macadam sealed and sloped. In no event shall an excavation be
left open for more than 72 hours, unless an emergency exists and
permission has been secured from the chief of police superintendent,
engineer or their designated representative.
a. The permittee shall be liable to any damage to work site roads. In the
event that any such damage is not repaired within 30 days after
completion of the street opening, the cost for the repair of the same
shall be deducted from the permittee's deposit held by the clerk.
b. The permittee shall, on a continuing basis, maintain all streets and
other property affected by the construction in clean condition free from
all rubbish, excess earth, rock and other debris. Upon completion of all
work under the permit, the permittee shall again clean the affected
property to remove all debris and unused material. In the event that the
permittee fails to act as provided herein, the township, upon 24 hours'
notice to the permittee, any clean and remove all rubbish, excess earth,
rock, debris and unused material and charge the permittee for the cost
thereof. If the permittee fails to reimburse the township for the costs
incurred, said costs shall be deducted from the permittee's deposit held
by the clerk.
§ 14-4.5 GENERAL § 14-4.7
1:551
§ 14-4.7. Inspections. [Ord. #2077, § I]
The superintendent or engineer shall periodically inspect all road openings
and the repair and resurfacing thereof for the purpose of determining
compliance with the conditions imposed on the issuance of the permit and
the specifications. The township may, upon the recommendation of either of
them:
§ 14-4.8. Specifications for Openings. [Ord. #2077, § I]
No road opening shall be permanently paved until a final inspection has
been made by the engineer or superintendent and final approval given.
a. Order a temporary stop to any road opening.
b. Order that the applicant perform or correct work in accordance with
the directions of the township.
c. Order a stop to any work and revoke the permit, in which event the
Township of Lyndhurst shall complete the work or cause it completed
and either declare the applicant's deposit forfeited or notify the
applicant's surety of an intent to file claim on the bond.
d. Authorize the correction of any work after notification to the permittee
and after the neglect or the refusal of the permittee to make sure
corrections within 24 hours and, after completion of the same, either
declare the permittee's deposit forfeited or notify the permittee's surety
of an intent to file a claim on the bond.
e. Take any other action deemed reasonable under the circumstances to
protect the township's interests.
a. For All Openings.
1. The paved roadway surfaces shall be saw-cut or bladecut vertically
on a straight line before excavating.
2. The material excavated from the trench opening shall not be
replaced as backfill unless expressly authorized by the
superintendent or engineer. Excavated materials must be removed
from the work site the day of excavation.
3. The backfill of stone or bank run sand shall be furnished from
outside sources.
4. The uncompleted length of road opening allowed under a permit at
any one time shall not exceed 50 linear feet, unless a special need
can be established by the permittee and approval to exceed this
limitation is secured from the superintendent or engineer. Such
special need shall be noted, in writing, to the superintendent or
engineer before such permission is granted, except in unusual
cases and/or emergencies. In the event, such special need shall be
documented, in writing, after approval is granted.
§ 14-4.7 LYNDHURST CODE § 14-4.8
1:552
5. Where existing manholes are located in the shoulder areas, a
minimum of two inches of asphalt FABC-1 Mix No. 5 shall be placed
eight feet on both sides of the manhole casting on four inches of
quarrying-processed stone. The width of the FABC-1 Mix No. 5
shall vary to the dimensions of the existing shoulder.
6. All backfill shall be placed in 12 inch layers, with each layer
thoroughly compacted by mechanical means to the satisfaction of
the superintendent or engineer. The superintendent or engineer
shall have the right to require a compaction test to be performed by
an independent laboratory, at the expense of the permittee.
7. After proper settlement and cutback, for any portion of the road,
the entire width of the trench, plus a four-inch overlap, shall be
overlaid with a 1 1/2 inch minimum thickness FABC Mix No. 5
pavement applied to the entire length of the disturbed area and
rolled in place to obtain a smooth pavement surface and sealed at
all edges.
b. Asphalt Pavement Openings.
1. For openings in old asphalt pavements, backfill material shall be
deposited in 12 inch layers and thoroughly compacted to a level
eight inches below the surface level of the adjacent paved surfaces.
The openings shall be cut back six inches beyond the perimeter of
the trench opening. The base course shall be bituminous stabilized
base stone mix, Mix No. 1, six inches thick (two lifts). The surface
shall be two inches compacted depth of FABC-1 Mix No. 5. All joints
between the new and existing pavements shall be sealed with a
tack coat.
2. When road openings are sequence or are within three feet of
another opening, the surface area of the combined openings will be
paved to form one surface. The surface course shall be two inches
compacted depth of FABC-1 Mix No. 5, with all joints between the
new and existing pavements sealed with a tack coat.
c. Concrete Pavement Surface Openings. For all openings in concrete
pavement surfaces, the trench backfill shall be compacted in twelveinch
levels to a level two inches below the top of the adjacent paved
surface. The opening shall be cut back six inches beyond the perimeter
of the trench opening. A two inch compacted depth of stabilized base
shall then be placed, compacted level with the existing pavement and
shall be maintained by the permittee to a pavement level by adding
additional bituminous material until final settlement has occurred. A
pavement of 4,000 pound concrete eight inches in depth shall be
constructed level with the existing pavement surface. A layer of heavy
six by six No. 6 gauge wire mesh reinforcement shall be placed in the
opening and extend fully into the cutback shelf at the point for six
inches below the finished elevation.
§ 14-4.8 GENERAL § 14-4.8
1:553
§ 14-4.9. Insurance and Security Requirements. [Ord. #2077, § I]
d. Nonpaved Area. All grass or graveled area or sidewalk areas disturbed
within the township right of way shall be reconstructed, topsoiled,
seeded and mulched within 14 days of completion of excavation. All
concrete areas will be thoroughly compacted. These limits may be
waived by the superintendent or engineer only when abnormal
temperatures or inclement weather necessitates the same.
e. All work shall be guaranteed for a period of 12 months.
a. Insurance. The applicant shall present evidence satisfactory to the
township attorney of insurance sufficient to indemnify and save
harmless the township and its agents and servants against and from all
suits and costs of every kind and from all personal injury or property
damage resulting from negligence or from any phase of operations
performed under the permit. Said insurance shall provide limits of not
less than $1,000,000 single limit or, in the case of a public utility, may
be in the form of a certificate of self-insurance. Where there is an
extensive opening, the superintendent or the engineer may request
additional insurance, if it deemed necessary under the circumstances.
b. Security.
1. The Clerk shall not issue a permit unless the applicant has
deposited, as security for faithful performance, a certified check
made payable to the Township of Lyndhurst or filed a bond with
surety satisfactory to the township attorney, the amount thereof to
be based upon the security deposit fee schedule as contained in
subsection 14-4.10 of this section. A public utility applicant may, in
lieu of the security required above, deposit an annual corporate
bond in the amount of at least $50,000. The surety bond shall be
renewed annually. In the event that a public utility applicant
applies for a permit for road opening and/or road openings and the
required security deposit fees set forth in subsection 14-4.10
exceeds said $50,000, the public utility applicant shall file a surety
bond in an amount equal to the difference between the $50,000 and
the required security deposit. For all non-public utility applicants,
the surety bond shall be at least $1,000. A certified check for a
lesser amount may be deposited, however, in the amount provided
by subsection 14-4.10 for the work to be performed.
2. Upon satisfactory completion of all work permitted or required
under the permit for extensive openings, if the security deposit is
$2,000 or less, the Township of Lyndhurst will retain 100% of the
security deposit as security for maintenance of the work for a
period not to exceed one year from the date of completion,
provided that, if the security deposit is in the form of a certified
check, the permittee may deposit surety bond of $2,000
satisfactory to the township attorney, in lieu of the certified check If
the security deposit is greater than $2,000, then the township will
§ 14-4.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 14-4.9
1:554
§ 14-4.10. Fee Schedule. [Ord. #2077, § I; Ord. #2215, § I]
release or refund 60% or more of the same, with the approval of the
superintendent or engineer, and a surety bond may be deposited
for the maintenance as set forth above. All bonds and certificates
of insurance shall contain a provision that the same shall remain in
full force and effect for a period not to exceed one year after the
last work under any permit has been completed and accepted by
the township.
3. In the case of a small opening, the township shall retain the
security deposit for six months after satisfactory completion of all
work permitted or required under the permit, provided that, if the
security deposit is in the form of a certified check, the permittee
may deposit a security bond in lieu of the check.
c. Application Fee and Escrow Deposit.
1. The applicant shall also pay, by separate money order, certified
check or, if the applicant is a public utility as herein defined, by a
corporate check, a nonrefundable application fee as set forth in
subsection 14-4.10. Applicants other than a public utility shall pay,
by separate money order or certified check, a refundable escrow
deposit fee for inspection and professional services as set forth in
subsection 14-4.10. The unused portion of the escrow deposit shall
be returned. Should the escrow deposit fee account at any time
become insufficient to cover the actual or anticipated inspection
and professional expenses, the fund shall be subject to increase on
demand of the clerk.
2. The township shall pay from the escrow deposit fee any costs
incurred by its designated representatives or professional
consultants for inspection or other engineering services or legal
fees required in connection with the proposed opening or
excavation at the rates established.
a. The application fee, nonrefundable (other than public utilities), shall be
as follows:
1. Road opening:
(a) First five linear feet by three feet wide: $25.
(b) From five linear feet to 25 linear feet by three feet wide, to be
defined as the longest dimension: an additional $20.
(c) From 25 linear feet to 50 linear feet by three feet wide: an
additional $40.
(d) Extensive openings: $75.
2. Boring, tunneling or driving under road, lump sum minimum: $75.
§ 14-4.9 GENERAL § 14-4.10
1:555
3. Curb, gutter, apron, sidewalk or driveway: lump sum, plus $15
when affected by excavation.
4. Application fees shall be accumulated in one account for each
public utility, and said funds can be utilized for the payment for
expenses incurred by the township for any work performed for the
permittee without restriction as to which application the funds
were originally posted.
5. In lieu of individual application fees, public utilities may pay annual
fees of $1,000.
b. The security deposit fee for guaranteeing restoration of pavement,
curbing or topsoil shall be as follows:
1. Opening, paved areas, curb, gutter, sidewalk, driveway:
(a) Base charge: $25.
(b) Charge for each square yard of trench opened: $15.
(c) Charge for each square yard of paving: $5.
(d) Charge for each linear foot of curb: $7.
2. Opening shoulders and roadside areas:
(a) Base charge: $25.
(b) Charge for each square yard of trench opened: $5.
3. Boring, tunneling or driving under the road:
(a) Base charge: $25.
(b) Charge per linear foot of boring: $1.
c. The escrow deposit fee, engineering and legal costs shall be as follows:
1. All road openings, excavation, boring and other work as stated on
the permit application:
(a) Base charge, including first five square yards on any trench,
driveway or sidewalk opening torn up or excavated, and
including the first 20 linear feet of any curb or gutter torn up or
excavated: $200.
(b) For all work proposed on each application that exceeds the
quantities delineated in paragraph c1 above, a work schedule
shall be submitted to and approved by the superintendent or
the engineer, who shall estimate the total escrow deposit fee
required based thereon. If, at any time during the course of the
work, it appears evident to the superintendent or the engineer
that the escrow deposit fee is or will be insufficient to cover all
costs of inspection and/or other professional services,
§ 14-4.10 LYNDHURST CODE § 14-4.10
1:556
§ 14-4.11. Return of Deposit Upon Completion of Work. [Ord.
#2077, § 1]
Upon the completion of any such work, the superintendent or engineer
shall file a report on a form to be furnished for that purpose, which report
shall contain the date of completion, the amount of deposit, the cost to the
township of resurfacing the area so excavated or opened, if the same shall
have been necessary, and the balance, if any, due to the applicant. Upon
receipt of the report by the clerk, the balance due, if any, to the applicant
on account of any deposit shall be forthwith returned.
§ 14-4.12. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #2077, § 1]
Any person, company, firm or corporation who or which shall violate any
of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction of such violation, be
subject, for each offense, to a fine not exceeding $1,000 or imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both. In case of failure to restore
pavements or roads or streets as hereinabove provided, after written notice
by the clerk to do so, each day that such pavement, roads or streets remain
unrestored shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 14-5. SNOW REMOVAL CONTRACTORS.
§ 14-5.1. Contractor Requirements. [Ord. #2371, § I]
Any contractor who desires to perform emergency snow removal services
for the Township of Lyndhurst must provide the township with the following
documentation concerning its vehicles and its drivers:
additional escrow deposit fees shall be estimated by the
superintendent or the engineer and paid to the clerk, based on
a revised work schedule to be submitted by the applicant. This
procedure shall be reported as often as necessary to guarantee
sufficient escrow deposit fees being available.
2. Actual payment from the escrow deposit fee fund shall be based
upon the following rates:
(a) Professional engineering services: minimum fee of $50 per
hour.
(b) Attorney: minimum fee of $65 per hour.
a. Current certificate of Insurance;
b. Current medical card;
c. Copy of valid Commercial Drivers' License;
d. Driver Abstracts as may be requested by the township;
e. Proof of successful completion of a Drug and Alcohol Program.
§ 14-4.10 GENERAL § 14-5.1
1:557
§ 14-5.2. Fee Schedule. [Ord. #2371, § 11; Ord. #2720, § 1]
The township shall pay for emergency snow removal as follows:
Rubber tire loader backhoe - 1 cubic yard $175/hr.
Rubber tire front end loader - 3 cubic yards $200/hr.
Rubber tire front end loader - 4-5 cubic yards $275/hr.
4 wheel drive pick-up plowing $90/hr.
Dump truck 2 1/2 cubic yards for removal or plowing
(single axle)
$110/hr.
Dump truck 5-7 cubic yards for removal or plowing
(single axle)
$125/hr.
Dump truck 15/20 cubic yards tandem, for removal or
plowing
$175/hr.
Chapter 15
TAXICABS
[Editor's Note: Prior ordinances codified herein include portions of
Ord. Nos. 1424, 1609, 1727, 1972.]
§ 15-1. PURPOSE. [Ord. #2218, § 1]
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the licensing and regulation of
taxicabs and taxicab drivers in the Township of Lyndhurst to preserve and
protect the public safety and welfare.
§ 15-2. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #2218, § 2]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OPERATOR'S LICENSE — Shall mean a license issued by the township
clerk, or her designee, to a person to drive a taxicab within the Township of
Lyndhurst.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, corporation, partnership,
unincorporated association or other legal entity.
TAXICAB LICENSE — Shall mean a license issued by the township clerk or
her designee, to a person to maintain and operate a vehicle or vehicles to
be used for taxicab/autocab business.
TAXICAB/AUTOCAB — Shall mean any motor vehicle with a carrying
capacity of not more than nine passengers, not including the driver,
commonly called a "taxi" or "taxicab", used in the business of carrying
passengers for hire which is held out, announced or advertised to operate or
All drivers will be subject to random drug and alcohol testing by the
township as may be permitted by law.
§ 14-5.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 15-2
1:558
run or which is operated or run over any of the streets within the Township
of Lyndhurst and particularly accepts and discharges such person or may
offer themselves for transportation from point or places within or outside
the township.
§ 15-3. VEHICLE LICENSES REQUIRED.
§ 15-3.1. Required; Transfer of License. [Ord. #2218, § 3]
§ 15-3.2. Operator's License Required. [Ord. #2218, § 3]
No person who owns a taxicab required to be licensed under this chapter
shall allow a person to operate such taxicab unless such person is licensed
to operate such vehicle in accordance with this chapter. It shall be the
obligation of the owners of a taxicab to determine whether such operator is
licensed hereunder. It shall be a violation of this chapter for both the owner
and the operator of a taxicab, if the operator is not licensed properly.
§ 15-4. LICENSE FEES; TERMS; RENEWAL. [Ord. #2218, § 4; Ord.
#2872-12, § 3]
a. Taxicabs. No person shall pick up for hire any person in the Township of
Lyndhurst unless the taxicab and the driver thereof are licensed
pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
b. No taxicab license may be transferred or assigned to another vehicle
unless there is consent given by the board of commissioners, upon
recommendation of the chief of police.
a. The annual taxicab license fee shall be $60 per year per vehicle and
shall be effective from January 1 to December 31 of each calendar year
or part thereof, and shall be apportioned as follows: Application/
licensing fee — $35 per vehicle Inspection fee — $25 per vehicle (nonrefundable)
At the time of submitting an application, the proposed licensee shall
pay $25 nonrefundable inspection fee, whereupon if the vehicle passes
inspection, the $35 application/license fee shall be paid within five
days of such time on notice of such vehicle passing such inspection,
whereupon a license will be issued immediately. The township shall not
inspect any vehicle wherein such application review discloses that no
such license can be issued hereunder. In the event that the vehicle
fails inspection the $25 fee shall not be refunded, and there shall be
an additional $25 inspection fee for any additional inspection. Written
notice of the results and determination of any inspection or
reinspection shall be forwarded within three business days of such
inspection.
For the purpose of this chapter and this section, "inspection",
"reinspection", and "spot inspection", as the case may be, shall mean
§ 15-2 GENERAL § 15-4
1:559
§ 15-5. LICENSE APPLICATIONS. [Ord. #2218, § 5; Ord. #2872-12,
§ 3]
Every applicant for a taxicab license or operator's license shall make
application therefor on forms furnished by the township clerk, and the same
shall be complete and verified under oath and filed with said township clerk.
any physical inspection of the subject vehicle to determine compliance
with this chapter, including riding in the subject vehicle.
b. The annual operator's license fee shall be $25 and shall be effective
from January 1 to December 31 of each calendar year or part thereof.
c. (1) No fees shall be imposed for any application that is denied;
(2) The inspection fee which shall be required to be paid prior to a
vehicle inspection; any reinspection shall require a $25 inspection
fee, per vehicle, to be paid prior to such reinspection.
d. Such inspection shall be made within 20 days of the date of application
properly filed with the office of the township clerk. In the event that a
vehicle is not inspected within said twenty-day period, or the applicant
misses or cancels two appointments to inspect such vehicle, such
vehicle shall be deemed to have failed the inspection and the inspection
fee of $25 shall be forfeited.
e. Taxicab and operator's licenses are renewable upon payment of the
annual fee and the filing of an annual renewal application by December
31 of the preceding year, subject to compliance with all other provisions
of this chapter.
f. Any licensed taxicab must be relicensed by January 10 of the following
year may be submitted after December 1st. It is expressly noted that no
vehicle, regardless of whether it has been in service before, may
operate in the Township of Lyndhurst without a new license after said
January 10th.
The township clerk shall make such rules and regulations to effectuate
the licensing procedure and the scheduling of inspections or
reinspection.
a. Applicants for a taxicab license shall furnish the following information
and any such information that from time to time is deemed necessary on
forms supplied by the township clerk:
1. The corporate or trade name of the applicant and the address of the
applicant from which the taxicab business shall be conducted.
2. The names and addresses of all stockholders of said business.
3. The year, type and model, vehicle identification number and
registration of the vehicle for which the license is desired.
§ 15-4 LYNDHURST CODE § 15-5
1:560
§ 15-6. INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; FINGERPRINTING OF
APPLICANTS AND FEES. [Ord. #2218, § 6; Ord. #2872-12, § 3]
§ 15-7. ISSUANCE OF TAXICAB LICENSE; MUNICIPAL CONSENT.
[Ord. #2218, § 7]
4. Evidence of insurance as required by law.
5. The number of persons the vehicle is designed to carry.
6. The minimum intended hours per day of operation of the vehicle.
7. Whether any of the stockholders or officers of the corporation or
business listed in Section 15-5a2 have been convicted of any crime
of the first, second, third or fourth degree.
b. Applicants for an operator's license shall furnish the following
information on forms provided by the township clerk:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
2. The age, height and color of eyes and hair.
3. A copy of the applicant's New Jersey driver's license.
4. Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime of the
first, second, third or fourth degree.
5. A passport-type photograph (front view) taken within 30 days of the
application.
a. The chief of police or his designee, shall cause to be made an
investigation of each applicant for a taxicab license or an operator's
license upon the filing of an application.
b. Applicants shall contact the Lyndhurst Police Department Record
Bureau for information regarding fingerprinting.
a. The board of commissioners do hereby designate the township clerk or
such designee as he/she chooses, to issue taxicab licenses. Such taxicab
licenses shall be issued to all applicants who are fit, willing and able to
perform such public transportation as required herein, and conform to
the provisions of this chapter, including payments of proper fees and
inspection of the licensed vehicle.
b. The approval of an application by the board of commissioners shall
constitute municipal consent pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:16-2.
c. No vehicle license shall be issued hereunder except upon certification
and proof that the owner of the vehicle to be licensed has at least one
driver/operator licensed hereunder.
d. No taxicab license shall be issued to any person who conducts such
taxicab business at a location within the Township of Lyndhurst, except
§ 15-5 GENERAL § 15-7
1:561
§ 15-8. SUBSTITUTION OF VEHICLES; TRANSFER OF LICENSES.
[Ord. #2218, § 8]
§ 15-9. ISSUANCE OF OPERATOR'S LICENSE. [Ord. #2218, § 9]
§ 15-10. DISPLAY OF LICENSES. [Ord. #2218, § 10]
upon proof that such location is zoned to permit such business to be
conducted from such location.
a. Vehicle listed on the license may be substituted or replaced by other
vehicles only after written authorization is granted by the township
clerk or his/her designee and payment of a transfer fee of $10.
b. No license may be sold, assigned or otherwise transferred without
consent of the governing body.
a. The chief of police or his designee, upon consideration of an application
for an operator's license and the report made thereon, shall approve or
reject the application. In the event that an application is approved, the
chief of police or his designee shall advise the township clerk to issue
an operator's license. In the event that an application is rejected, the
chief of police or his designee shall advise the applicant. No licenses
shall be issued in the case of any applicant:
1. Whose New Jersey driver's license to operate a motor vehicle is
suspended or revoked.
2. Who has been convicted of any crime involving dishonesty or moral
turpitude within three years of the date of application.
3. Who shall have previously been convicted of driving an automobile
resulting in death to any person.
4. Who shall have been convicted of driving a motor vehicle while
impaired or under the influence of intoxication, liquor or drugs
within five years of the date of the application.
b. Upon the approval of an application for an operator's license by the
chief of police or his designee, the township clerk shall issue a license
upon which shall appear the name, age, height, color of eyes and hair of
the holder thereof, employer and a photo of the applicant.
a. Each holder of a taxicab license shall post said license in a conspicuous
position on the taxicab which shall be in plain view of all passengers,
and a copy of said license shall be affixed on the passenger's side front
windshield which is visible to all passengers.
b. Each holder of an operator's license shall post said license in a
conspicuous position in the taxicab which shall be in plain view of all
passengers.
§ 15-7 LYNDHURST CODE § 15-10
1:562
§ 15-11. SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF TAXICAB LICENSE.
[Ord. #2218, § 11]
c. In addition to the above requirements, each taxicab license under this
chapter shall affix to the driver's side, lower portion rear windshield, a
sticker provided by the township and containing such language as the
township deems appropriate, which shall certify that such taxicab is
licensed under this chapter.
d. All such licenses and sticker are the property of the Township of
Lyndhurst and shall be surrendered upon demand of the town.
e. Any person displaying any license or sticker which the township has
demanded be surrendered or returned to the township, shall be in
violation of this chapter.
a. The chief of police, or his designees, may from time to time conduct
investigations to determine that all licenses comply with the provisions
of this chapter. A taxicab license issued hereunder may be suspended or
revoked by the chief of police, or his designees, if the holder has:
1. Failed to operate the licensed vehicle for more than 10 days, unless
for good cause shown.
2. Violated any township ordinance or state or federal law, the
violation of which reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the licensee
to hold a taxicab license.
3. Failed to keep in force the insurance policy and power of attorney
as required by state statute.
4. Sold, assigned or otherwise transferred the license without prior
permission of the chief of police or his designee.
5. Failed to keep a taxicab vehicle in a safe and sanitary condition.
6. Failed to provide the service that is required pursuant to Section
15-16 of this chapter.
7. Charged in excess of the fee/rate schedule that is on file.
8. Failed to have the licensed vehicle inspected at a "spot inspection",
when requested.
9. Operates a taxicab business from a Lyndhurst location in violation
of the applicable zoning laws.
10. Allows a person to operate a taxicab or limousine without an
operator's license.
b. Whenever the holder of more than one taxicab license shall be
suspended for a violation of a section of this chapter, the chief of police
or his designees shall have the right to also suspend all other licenses
held by the same person.
§ 15-10 GENERAL § 15-11
1:563
§ 15-12. SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF OPERATOR'S LICENSE.
[Ord. #2218, § 12]
c. Prior to suspension or revocation, the licensee shall be given written
notice of the proposed action to be taken and the reasons therefor, and
he shall have an opportunity to be heard before the chief of police or his
designees.
d. Before any revocation of a license or suspension shall become effective,
the holder thereof may appeal the decision to the board of
commissioners within 15 days of the receipt of notice of the intended
action.
e. Any vehicle license that is suspended and/or revoked, wherein the
suspension and/or revocation is based upon the condition of the taxicab
which is in violation of this chapter, shall only be relicensed or
reinstated upon such vehicle being reinspected and payment of the
application fees, including a reinspection fee of $25 and the application
fee of $35, if applicable.
f. Any licensed vehicle which is called in for a "spot inspection" to
determine compliance with this chapter shall not be subject to an
inspection fee for such inspection. For the purpose of this subparagraph
a "spot inspection" shall mean an inspection conducted/performed to a
vehicle already licensed in order to insure that the vehicle is in
conformity with this chapter.
a. An operator's license issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked
by the chief of police, or his designees, for failure to meet or continue to
meet any of the provisions of this chapter, including being unable to
presently qualify to hold such a license for any reason articulated in this
chapter.
b. Except as provided in paragraph c below, before any revocation of a
license or suspension shall become effective, the holder thereof may
appeal the decision to the board of commissioners within 15 days of the
receipt of notice of the intended action.
c. Whenever the chief of police or his designees, determine that the acts
or condition of a taxicab operator constitute an imminent danger to or
jeopardize the public safety, he may suspend immediately the license of
said individual; provided, however, that a hearing shall be held if
requested by the licensee before the board of commissioners on such
action within five days of the suspension.
d. The discharge of a driver by his employer shall automatically suspend
the operator's license. No fee will be charged for an operator's license if
the same individual is rehired by another licensed taxicab operator
licensed in the Township of Lyndhurst during the same calendar year.
§ 15-11 LYNDHURST CODE § 15-13
1:564
§ 15-13. VEHICLE EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE. [Ord. #2218,
§ 13]
§ 15-14. CONDUCT AND DUTIES OF DRIVERS. [Ord. #2218, § 14]
a. No taxicab shall be issued unless the vehicles meet all the requirements
and standards of the New Jersey Division of Motor Vehicles and carry a
current inspection sticker issued by said division. If the New Jersey
Division of Motor Vehicles or any authorized inspection agency of the
state, upon inspection of any vehicle regulated by this chapter, does not
"pass" inspection, such vehicles shall not be permitted to operate within
the township until they have successfully passed inspection.
b. All taxicabs shall meet the requirements set forth below and shall
continue to meet the requirements set forth below for the entire
licensing period.
1. A minimum of four operable side doors, two leading into the
driver's compartment and two leading into the passenger's
compartment. Each door shall have an approved operable safety
lock and shall be so constructed that it may be opened from the
inside and outside when engaged.
2. A passenger compartment light adequate to illuminate the interior
of the passenger's compartment.
3. Each taxicab shall bear on the outside of each rear or front door, in
painted letters not less than three inches in height, in contrasting
colors, the name of the owner of the taxicab, the public telephone
number of the company or owner and the number of the taxicab if
the company operates more than one vehicle. Each taxicab licensed
under this chapter shall be uniform in color, except for two-tone
vehicles or the like, and body panels shall not be mismatched.
c. 1. The interior of each vehicle operating under this chapter shall be
kept in a safe and sanitary condition, and shall be free from dents,
missing parts, or other unsightly conditions.
2. The interior and upholstery of each vehicle operating under this
chapter shall be kept in a safe and sanitary condition and free from
broken parts.
a. All taxicab drivers shall:
1. Be clean and neat in appearance.
2. Shall wear clean shirts, and all clothing shall be free of rips and
tears.
b. No taxicab driver shall charge fees in excess of the fee/rate schedule
that is on file with the chief of police, and the township clerk.
c. All drivers shall comply with all township, state and federal laws.
§ 15-13 GENERAL § 15-14
1:565
§ 15-15. DENIAL OF LICENSE; APPEALS. [Ord. #2218, § 15]
Any person applying for any license hereunder who shall have such
application denied, or any person issued any license hereunder who shall
have such license revoked or suspended, or who is any way aggrieved
by any decision of the chief of police, or his respective designees, shall
have the right to appeal such decision or determination to the board of
commissioners of the Township of Lyndhurst within 15 days of notice of
such decisions or determination. Such person shall file such appeal by
giving notice thereof to the township clerk, which notice shall include a
written statement setting forth the basis of such appeal. The board of
commissioners shall conduct a public hearing within ten business days
of such notice, and render a decision within five business days of such
hearing. The board of commissioners may affirm or reverse such decision
or determination or remand the matter back to the chief of police or
his designee in conformity with any determination made by the board of
commissioners at such hearing. Nothing herein shall affect or limit the
chief of police, or his respective designees from having any violation of
this chapter brought to the attention of the municipal court. The board of
commissioners shall have no jurisdiction to hear any matter which was or
is the subject of a matter that was heard or is pending in the Lyndhurst
municipal court.
§ 15-16. RATE OF FARE. [Ord. #2218, § 16]
d. All drivers shall comply with all reasonable and lawful requests of
passengers as to the route of the vehicle.
e. Any motor vehicle accident involving a taxicab licensed by Lyndhurst
and causing injury to a person or to property of another in excess of
$100 shall be reported immediately by the driver to the chief of police
or his designees regardless of where the accident occurred.
f. The owner and operator of each taxicab shall keep a daily record
recording all trips made by each taxicab showing the time and place of
origin and destination of each trip and amount of fare. All such records
shall be retained by the owner for one year, who shall be responsible for
the maintenance of daily records of all cabs owned by him. Said daily
records may be reviewed at any time by the chief of police, or his
designees, the purpose of assuring that there is compliance with this
chapter.
a. Upon the effectiveness of this chapter, no person or taxicab company
shall operate a taxicab service before such taxicab company files the
fare schedule (rate schedule), which schedule shall include all costs,
surcharges, etc., for taxi services, with the township clerk, the chief of
police and/or his designees. The taxicab company has the option of
either establishing fares based on mileage and waiting times or based
on a flat fee schedule or some other equitable formula. Said rate
schedule may set a maximum and minimum fare in or between zones.
§ 15-14 LYNDHURST CODE § 15-16
1:566
§ 15-17. REFUSAL OF PASSENGER TO PAY FARE. [Ord. #2218, § 17]
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare after
having hired the taxicab.
§ 15-18. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. #2218, § 18]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not less than $100 and not
exceeding $1,000, or by imprisonment in the county jail for period not to
exceed 90 days, or shall be required to perform community service for a
period not to exceed 90 days, or both.
Any person who is convicted of violating any section of this chapter within
one year of the date of a previous conviction of the same section, and who
was fined for the previous violation, shall be sentenced by the court to an
additional fine as a repeat offender. The additional fine imposed by the court
upon a person for a repeated offense shall not be less than the minimum or
exceed the maximum fine fixed for a violation of this chapter, but shall be
calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of the chapter.
Chapter 16
TRAILERS
§ 16-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #1424, § 18]
As used in this chapter:
Whenever such person or taxicab company shall submit an amended
fare schedule to the township clerk, and the chief of police, such
new rates shall not be effective until approved by the board of
commissioners. Notice of said new rates shall also be posted in all
taxicabs 30 days prior to its effectiveness. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the chief of police or his designees, shall from time to time,
require all licensees to complete rate sheets by inserting the fares to be
charged between various points of passage. Such rate sheets shall be
the maximum fare.
b. Prior to the transportation for hire of any person, the customer shall be
told the rate of fare for a trip or, if such trip is based upon the mileage
factor, the rate of fare for each mile or fraction thereof.
c. All taxicabs shall have posted within the taxicab, in view of the
passenger, a card which shall read as follows: "Passengers shall be
advised of the rate of fare prior to the commencement of the trip."
d. All taxicabs shall have posted within the taxicab, in view of the
passenger, a fare schedule of all rates imposed.
§ 15-16 GENERAL § 16-1
1:567
TRAILER COACH LOT — Shall mean a unit of level adequately drained
ground of definite size, clearly indicated by corner markers for the placing
of a trailer coach and tow car.
TRAILER or CAMP CAR or TRAILER COACH — Shall mean any vehicle,
whether self-propelled or otherwise, used or intended for use as a
conveyance upon the public streets and so designed, constructed or
reconstructed or added to by means of accessories in such manner as to
permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or
more persons, or as living and business quarters combined, and having
no foundation other than wheels, jacks, or skirtings so arranged as to be
integral with or portable by such trailer, camp car or trailer coach.
TRAILER PARK — Shall mean any site, lot, field or tract of ground upon
which two or more trailer coaches are placed, and shall include any
building, structure, tent, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as a
part of the equipment of such park.
§ 16-2. PERMIT FOR PARKING OUTSIDE OF TRAILER PARK. [Ord.
#1424, § 18]
a. It shall be unlawful, within the limits of the township for any person to
park any trailer coach of any kind on any street, alley, highway, or
public place in the township.
b. No trailer coach shall be parked, used, or occupied on any tract of
ground with the township except as provided in this section.
c. No person shall park, use or occupy any trailer coach for more than 48
hours on the premises of any occupied dwelling, nor for more than 24
hours on any lot which is not a part of the premises of any occupied
dwelling, unless a permit therefor shall have been first obtained, nor
shall any person permit such parking, use, or occupancy unless the
occupant of the trailer coach shall first have obtained a permit therefor.
d. A permit shall be obtained by the trailer coach occupant for any
location outside of a trailer park from the township clerk who issues
such licenses for other privileges. The permit shall be for a period of
one month and at a fee of five $5. The permit shall be granted only upon
the written consent of the owner, legal agent of the owner, or the lessee
of the location for which the permit is issued.
e. Application for the permit shall contain the street and number of the
occupied dwelling, the name of the occupant of the dwelling and his
permission to locate; a statement of the nature and location of sanitary
facilities and the permission of the occupant of the dwelling house for
their use; and a statement that all waste water from the trailer coach
sinks shall be emptied into a proper sewer connected fixture.
Application for a permit to locate on a vacant lot shall contain the street
with the name and approximate distance from the nearest intersection;
a statement of the nature and location of sanitary facilities; and a
§ 16-1 LYNDHURST CODE § 16-2
1:568
§ 16-3. PERMIT FOR TRAILER PARK.
§ 16-3.1. Permit Required. [Ord. #1424, § 18]
§ 16-3.2. Application for a Trailer Park Permit. [Ord. #1424, § 18]
§ 16-3.3. Park Plan. [Ord. #1424, § 18]
statement that all waste water from the trailer coach shall be emptied
into a proper sewer connected fixture.
f. The use of trailer coach plumbing fixtures is prohibited unless the
fixtures meet the requirements noted in subsection 16-3.8, paragraphs
b and c.
a. It shall be unlawful within the township for any person to construct or
operate a trailer park without first securing a permit.
b. No trailer park shall be operated within the township except as
provided in this section.
c. The permit for a trailer park shall be obtained from the township clerk
at an annual fee of $10 for each trailer coach space as specified in the
plan to be submitted as provided in subsection 16-3.3b, but in no event
shall the annual fee exceed $250.
d. Permit for trailer parks shall be conspicuously displayed at all times.
a. Any applicant for permit to operate a trailer park shall agree in his
application that a responsible attendant shall be in charge of the trailer
park at all times. At the time of application, the names of the attendants
to be in active charge of the proposed trailer park and their hours of
duty shall be set forth. Any changes after the permit is granted shall be
filed with the authority issuing the permit within five days from the date
of change. Such attendant shall supervise the park and be, together
with the licensee, responsible for any violation of the provisions of this
section which occurs in the operation of such trailer park.
b. With each application a park plan indicating the information required in
subsection 16-3.3, entitled "Park Plan" shall be submitted to the
township clerk for inspection and approval. The application for license
must include the name and address of the applicant and a legal
description and complete plan of the proposed park, containing the
information required by subsection 16-3.3.
a. The park shall be located on a well drained site suitable for the purpose;
shall have an entrance and exit well marked and easily controlled and
supervised; shall have surfaced roads not less than 18 feet wide, well
drained, plainly marked in the daytime; adequately lighted at night, and
easily accessible to all trailer coaches; and walkways to the various
buildings shall be surfaced and adequately lighted.
§ 16-2 GENERAL § 16-3.3
1:569
§ 16-3.4. Zoning of Trailer Coaches and Trailer Parks. [Ord. #1424,
§ 18]
Trailer parks shall be prohibited on property in Zones A, B, C, and in
Business Zones as provided for in the zoning ordinance of the township.
Trailer parks shall be permitted only on property zoned for Light Industrial
and Heavy Industrial uses as provided for in the zoning ordinance of the
township duly adopted by the board of commissioners on April 12, 1938.
§ 16-3.5. Water Supply. [Ord. #1424, § 18]
A sufficient supply of pure healthful drinking water, approved by the
township department of health, not more than 200 feet from any trailer
coach, shall be provided in convenient locations. No common drinking
vessel shall be provided. Waste from this supply shall be emptied into a
drain connection to an approved disposal system. An abundant supply of
b. The trailer coach park shall provide lots for each trailer coach,
boundaries to be indicated by corner markers, with an area not less
than 800 square feet, with a minimum width of 25 feet and a minimum
depth of 35 feet. Each trailer coach shall be located (1) at least ten feet
from any building and (2) at least as far from the building line as the
nearest adjacent permanent building on the same lot; and (3) at least
three feet from the property line.
c. Adequate space shall be provided to afford (1) space for clothes drying
adjoining laundry facilities; (2) locations for burning space and
incinerator space; and (3) a play space for children as shall be
prescribed by the township clerk when issuing the permit.
d. The park plan required by subsection 16-3.2 shall provide a legal
description and map clearly setting out the following information:
1. The extent and area to be used for park purposes.
2. Driveways at entrances and exits, roadways and walkways.
3. Location of sites for trailer coaches.
4. Location and number of proposed sanitary conveniences, including
proposed toilets, washrooms, laundries, laundry drying space and
utility rooms.
5. Method and plan of sewage disposal.
6. Method and plan of garbage removal.
7. Plan of water supply.
8. Plan of electric lighting.
9. Incinerator and burning space.
10. Children's play area.
§ 16-3.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 16-3.5
1:570
hot water shall be provided at all times for bathing, washing and laundry
facilities. There shall be no drinking water in toilet compartments.
If the water is from a private source, it shall be tested for sanitary quality
at intervals of 30 days. Tests shall be made by a laboratory approved by the
department of health. Tests shall be paid for by the permittee.
§ 16-3.6. Sanitary Facilities Required. [Ord. #1424, § 18]
The park shall provide flush toilets in conveniently located buildings not
more than 200 feet from each trailer coach. The building shall be well
lighted at all times, ventilated with screened openings, and constructed of
moisture proof material permitting satisfactory cleaning. The floors shall be
concrete or similar material, slightly pitched to a floor drain.
Toilets shall be enclosed in separate compartments, with fly doors, and have
the minimum width of two feet eight inches. Toilets shall be provided for
each sex in the ratio of one toilet for every 10 females and one toilet for
every 10 males.
In addition, every male toilet room shall have one urinal for each 16 males,
but in no case shall any male toilet room be without one urinal.
Toilet rooms shall contain one lavatory with hot and cold running water for
each three toilets, but in every case not less than one lavatory with hot and
cold running water in every toilet room.
These accommodations shall be based on the total park capacity according
to the accepted plans, and shall be computed on the basis of a minimum of
three persons to each trailer coach, with the sexes being assumed equal in
number.
§ 16-3.7. Showers, Laundry and Utility Facilities. [Ord. #1424, § 18]
Separate bathing facilities for each sex shall be provided 200 feet from the
most remote trailer coach. Each section shall contain one shower for each
eight families at least three feet square with a dressing compartment of
three square feet.
Laundry facilities shall be provided in the ratio of one double tray and
ironing board for each 20 trailer coaches. When ironing boards are
provided, they shall be located in a separate space from the laundry trays.
The construction of the showers, laundry and utility buildings shall be the
same or similar to that designated for the toilets by subsection 16-3.6.
If no local means of collection of the trailer coach waste are provided, then
slop sinks shall be provided properly connected to the sewerage system at
a maximum distance of not more than 100 feet from any trailer coach.
§ 16-3.8. Sewerage and Refuse Disposal. [Ord. #1424, § 18]
§ 16-3.5 GENERAL § 16-3.8
1:571
§ 16-3.9. Garbage Receptacles. [Ord. #1424, § 18]
The park shall provide supervision and equipment sufficient to prevent
littering the ground with rubbish and debris. Fly-tight metal depositories
with tight fitting metal covers shall be conveniently located not farther
than 200 feet from any trailer coach. Depositories shall be kept in sanitary
condition at all times. Garbage and rubbish shall not be mixed.
§ 16-3.10. Registration. [Ord. #1424, § 18]
The park shall keep a record of all guests, noting:
§ 16-3.11. Removal of Wheels. [Ord. #1424, § 18]
Any action towards the removal of wheels except for temporary purposes of
repair, or other action to attach the trailer to the ground by means of posts,
piers, foundation or skirting, shall subject the trailer to the requirements of
the building code as well as this chapter.
§ 16-3.12. Miscellaneous Provisions. [Ord. #1424, § 18]
All plumbing installation, alteration, or repair in the park and all electrical
work shall be in conformity with the State Uniform Construction Code.
Dogs shall not be permitted to run at large in any trailer park at any time.
No permanent additions of any kind whatsoever shall be built onto or
become a part of the trailer coach.
a. Waste from showers, toilets, slop sinks and laundries shall be wasted
into a public sewer system in such manner as approved by the township
department of health or into a private sewer disposal plant or septic
tank system approved by the same department.
b. All kitchen sinks, wash basins or lavatories, bath or shower tubs in any
trailer coach located in any trailer park shall empty into an approved
receptacle or disposal system.
c. Toilets and water closets not connected with an approved disposal
system shall not be used and it shall be further unlawful for any person
to use or permit the use of such fixtures.
a. Name and address of each occupant.
b. License numbers of all units.
c. State issuing such licenses.
The park shall keep a copy of the registry available for inspection at any
time by any authorized person, and shall not destroy such registry until
the expiration of 12 months following the date of registration.
§ 16-3.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 16-3.12
1:572
It shall be the duty of the park attendant to notify immediately the health
inspector of the township of any communicable diseases in the park.
§ 16-3.13. Inspection. [Ord. #1424, § 18]
Before any renewal of trailer coach parking or trailer park license an
inspection shall be made by the township health inspector to determine that
all the requirements of this section have been complied with.
§ 16-4. REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT. [Ord. #1424,
§ 18]
The township health inspector shall have the authority to enter and inspect
for health and sanitation purposes any facility licensed hereunder at any
reasonable time.
If, upon inspection, it shall be found that the permit holder has violated any
provision of the chapter, the health inspector or the chief of police shall
have the power to revoke or suspend any license and order the trailer coach
parking removed or the trailer park closed after notice and proper hearing.
§ 16-5. VIOLATIONS. [New]
Any person violating or contributing in any way to the violation of this
chapter or any part thereof, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the
penalty stated in Chapter 3, § 3-1.
Chapter 17
SOIL AND SOIL REMOVAL
§ 17-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
As used in this chapter:
SOIL — Shall mean and be liberally construed in its broadest sense, and
shall be in addition to all types of soil including all types of clay.
§ 17-2. PERMIT.
§ 17-2.1. Permit Required. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
No person shall excavate or otherwise remove soil for sale or for use
other than on the premises from which the soil shall be taken, except
in connection with the construction or alteration of a building on such
premises, and excavation or grading incidental thereto, without first having
procured permission therefor from the board of commissioners. The
provisions of this chapter shall apply to all lands in the township including
meadowlands and uplands within the township.
§ 16-3.12 GENERAL § 17-2.2
1:573
§ 17-2.2. Application; Contents and Accompanying Documents.
[Ord. #1424, § 11]
The board of commissioners shall not consider any application for the
removal of soil from the premises for sale or otherwise unless and until the
owner of the premises shall first file with the township clerk an application
requesting such permission, together with a map of the premises showing
the contour lines and proposed contour grades resulting from such intended
removal of soil in relation to the topography of the premises, and the
proposed contour grades and proposed contour lines will be subject to the
inspection and approval of the board of commissioners. No permission for
soil removal shall be issued until such map has been filed, and until the
proposed contour lines and grades have been approved by the board of
commissioners.
§ 17-2.3. Hearing: Factors in Determination; Issuance of Permit;
Terms. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
Upon written request for a hearing made by the applicant to the board
of commissioners, an opportunity to be heard shall be granted within 30
days thereafter; and the board of commissioners, upon considering and
reviewing the application and in arriving at its decision, shall be guided and
take into consideration the public health, safety and general welfare and
give particular consideration to the following factors:
§ 17-3. MANNER OF REMOVAL. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
If permission to remove the soil be granted, the owner or person in charge
shall so conduct the operations that there shall be no sharp declivities, pits
a. Soil erosion by water and wind.
b. Drainage.
c. Soil fertility.
d. Lateral support slopes and grades of abutting streets and lands.
e. Land values and uses.
f. Such other factors as may bear upon or relate to the coordinated,
adjusted and harmonious physical development of the township.
If, after examining the application and the map provided for in
subsection 17-2.2 and after the hearing in the event a hearing is
requested by the applicant, the board of commissioners shall be of
the opinion that the proposed soil removal will not create conditions
inimical to the public health, welfare and safety and will not result in
the creation of any sharp declivities, pits or depressions, soil erosion
or fertility problems, depressed land values, nor create any drainage,
sewerage problems or other conditions of danger, permission to remove
the soil shall be granted.
§ 17-2.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 17-3
1:574
or depressions, and in such a manner that the area shall be properly leveled
off, cleared of debris, and graded to conform with the contour lines and
grades as approved by the board of commissioners.
§ 17-4. REMOVAL FROM PREMISES OF TOP LAYER FOR A DEPTH
OF SIX INCHES FORBIDDEN. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
The owner of the premises or the person in charge of the removal of soil,
when permission has been duly granted, shall not take away the top layer
of arable soil for a depth of six inches, but such top layer of arable soil to
a depth of six inches shall be set aside for the retention on the premises,
and shall be re-spread over the premises when the rest of the soil has been
removed pursuant to levels and contour lines approved by the board of
commissioners.
§ 17-5. BOND; AMOUNT; SURETY. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
Before any permit or permission for soil removal shall be granted and
issued, the owner or applicant shall file with the board of commissioners
a bond, in form and with surety acceptable to the Township of Lyndhurst
in such amount as in the opinion of the board of commissioners shall be
sufficient to insure the faithful performance of the work to be undertaken
pursuant to the permission granted by the board of commissioners pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 17-6. NO EXCAVATION. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
No excavation shall be made and no soil shall be removed under the
provisions of this chapter unless a permit therefor shall have been first
obtained as provided herein, and no excavation shall be made and no soil
shall be removed except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 17-7. VIOLATIONS. [New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to
the penalty stated in Chapter 3, § 3-1.
Chapter 18
SWIMMING POOLS
§ 18-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #1251; Ord. #1424, § 15; Ord. #1597;
Ord. #2865-12]
As used in this chapter:
APPROVED — Shall mean accepted or acceptable under, applicable
specifications stated in this chapter, or accepted or suitable for the
proposed use under the procedures and powers of administration delegated
in this chapter.
§ 17-3 GENERAL § 18-1
1:575
BOARD OF HEALTH — Shall mean and include the health officer or other
duly authorized representative thereof, except in such case when the board
is referred to in a manner that contemplates action by it as a body.
CONSTRUCT — Shall mean and include the construction, or building, or
installing of a new swimming pool or the enlarging of an existing swimming
pool or any of the facilities.
PORTABLE POOL — Shall mean any above surface type of swimming,
bathing, or wading pool that contains water not more than 24 inches
deep, and is constructed of canvas, rubber, plastic or other material, not
designed or intended to be stationary or permanently fixed, but designed
and intended to be removed and stored.
SWIMMING OR BATHING POOL — Shall mean any private pool or other
body of water whether permanently constructed or of the portable type
having a depth of more than 18 inches below the level of the surrounding
land or an above-surface pool or other body of water having a depth
more than 24 inches whether or not designed, used and maintained for
swimming or bathing purposes by an individual for use of the members of
his household and guests, and located on applicant's land as an accessory
use to a residence, and shall include all buildings, structures, equipment
and appurtenances thereto.
TOWNSHIP OF LYNDHURST — Shall mean building subcode official or
other duly authorized representative thereof.
WADING POOL — Shall mean and include any shallow pool not included
under swimming or bathing pool.
§ 18-2. SCOPE AND APPLICATION. [Ord. #1251; Ord. #1424, § 15]
a. The application of the provisions herein to a permanently installed
swimming or bathing pool constructed prior to August 3, 1959 shall be
as follows:
1. Such pool shall not be subject to the requirements under
subsection 18-5.1a, pertaining to distances of pool from boundary
lines, etc., unless a n enlargement of facilities is sought.
2. Such pool shall be exempt from the requirements under subsection
18-4.3, paragraphs a and b, pertaining to permits and fees, unless
an enlargement of facilities is sought.
3. Such pools, however, shall be subject to all the provisions and
regulations relating to safety and sanitation, including subsection
18-5.5 and Section 18-6 pertaining to the sanitary code of the board
of health of the township.
b. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to wading pools, unless
specific reference is made in any section herein to such type of pool.
§ 18-1 LYNDHURST CODE § 18-3
1:576
§ 18-3. COMPLIANCE REQUIRED. [Ord. #1251; Ord. #1424, § 15]
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain a
swimming or bathing pool in the township without having first complied
with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 18-4. APPLICATION AND PERMIT.
§ 18-4.1. Application for Permit; Submission of Plans and
Specifications. [Ord. #1251; Ord. #1424, § 15; Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
No person shall construct any permanent or stationary type swimming or
bathing pool without first having obtained a permit therefor. Applications
for a permit required by this subsection shall be made to the building
subcode official or other official designated by resolution of the board of
commissioners. The application form shall be provided by the township,
executed in duplicate, and accompanied by duplicate set of the following:
§ 18-4.2. Processing of Application. [Ord. #1251; Ord. #1424, § 15;
Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
a. Plan and specification for the proposed swimming or bathing pool,
showing and covering all auxiliary structures and appurtenances
related thereto.
b. A plot plan showing property lines of the land upon which the proposed
swimming or bathing pool is to be constructed, installed or located,
showing all existing houses and structures thereon, the specific location
and dimensions of the proposed pool and auxiliary structures, showing
the distance from the property lines and abutting street. The distance
shall not be less than the minimum provided in subsection 18-5.1.
c. A clear description shall be given of the fence or other enclosure
proposed to surround the swimming or bathing pool, the type of
material to be used, the height thereof, and the number of gates or
doors. The fence or other enclosure shall conform to the minimum
standards provided in subsection 18-5.4.
d. The applicant shall disclose the method proposed to dispose of the
waste water from the swimming or bathing pool, and the means of
disposal proposed shall be subject to the provisions of subsection 18-5.3
and to the approval of the board of health as provided therein.
e. The application fee for a permit issued hereunder shall be in the
amount provided in subsection 18-4.3 and the fee shall accompany the
application.
a. Upon the filing of an application for a permit hereunder, properly
executed, the building subcode official shall forthwith file the duplicate
application and accompanying plan and specification with the board of
health, for its recommendations and approval.
§ 18-3 GENERAL § 18-4.2
1:577
§ 18-4.3. Permits and Fees. [Ord. #1251; Ord. #1424, § 15; Ord.
#2861-12, § 2]
The fee accompanying an application for a permit to construct, install,
enlarge and maintain a swimming or bathing pool authorized under this
chapter shall be as follows:
§ 18-5. POOL REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS.
§ 18-5.1. Location of Pools. [Ord. #1251; Ord. #1597]
The building subcode official shall, within 30 days after receiving a
properly executed application for a permit, act upon the same in the
manner as follows:
1. Approve the application as submitted and cause the permit to be
issued.
2. Approve the application subject to any correction, modifications or
additional information required to be furnished, to assure proper
compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. Upon receipt of
an application so amended, the building subcode official shall cause
the permit to be issued.
3. Reject the application when it is determined that a permit should
not be issued.
a. For installation of a new swimming or bathing pool of permanent or
stationary type of construction or for the enlargement of such an
existing swimming or bathing pool, a charge of $10 and $1.75 for each
$500 of the estimated cost of construction or fraction thereof.
b. No permit shall be required for a portable pool as defined in this
chapter.
c. The fees provided in this subsection are intended to defray the cost of
processing the application, inspection of site before and after issuance
of permit.
d. The permit issued and the fee paid hereunder shall be in addition to any
permits and fees which will be required by the board of health to
regulate the operation of swimming or bathing pools in a sanitary
manner, and to defray the inspection and examination costs.
a. A swimming pool, bathing pool or wading pool of permanent or
stationary type of construction shall not be constructed, installed,
located, maintained, or operated within five feet of any property
boundary line, nor any such pool be located in the front yard of any
premises as defined by the zoning ordinance of the township.
§ 18-4.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 18-5.1
1:578
§ 18-5.2. General Construction Requirements. [Ord. #1251; Ord.
#1424, § 15]
All material used in the construction of a swimming or bathing pool licensed
hereunder, shall be of durable quality and waterproof, and so designed as
to facilitate its emptying and cleaning. The bottom and sides of the pools
shall be either white or a light color, except that aluminum paint shall
not be used as a finish. Pool sides and bottom shall be smooth and free
from cracks and open joints. Inlets shall be so located and spaced as to
secure satisfactory dispersion of inflowing waters throughout the pool and
to permit the draining, cleaning and disinfection of the bottom and sides.
Sand or earth bottom shall not be used.
§ 18-5.3. General Sanitary Regulations as to Construction and
Maintenance. [Ord. #1251; Ord. #1424, § 15]
In addition to the provisions in this chapter the construction, installation,
maintenance and operation of any swimming pool, bathing pool, or wading
pool shall be subject to the regulations and standards now or hereafter
provided in the sanitary code of the township pertaining to the following
matters:
§ 18-5.4. General Safety Regulations. [Ord. #1251; Ord. #1518;
Ord. #1597]
b. A swimming or bathing pool, or wading pool, shall not be constructed,
installed, located or maintained on any land unless a residence building
is also located thereon.
a. Construction, installation and maintenance of equipment for
chlorinating, disinfecting and filtering.
b. Physical connection between potable water supply system and pool.
c. Physical, chemical and bacterial quality of the pool water.
d. The method of discharging waste water.
a. Every swimming pool, bathing pool or wading pool having a depth of 18
inches below the level of the land surrounding the pool, or in the case of
above-surface pools, having a depth of 24 inches or more, shall be
completely surrounded by a fence or wall of substantial construction
not less than five feet in height, which shall be so constructed as not to
have opening, holes or gaps larger than two inches in dimension, except
for doors or gates; and if a picket fence is erected or maintained, the
horizontal dimension shall not exceed three inches. A dwelling house or
accessory building may be used as part of such enclosure.
b. The fence or wall enclosure shall be so designed and constructed as to
reasonably prevent any person from gaining access beneath, through or
over the same, and shall be provided with one or more substantial gates
or doors of the same height as the fence or wall enclosure.
§ 18-5.1 GENERAL § 18-5.4
1:579
§ 18-5.5. General Sanitary Regulations. [Ord. #1251; Ord. #1424,
§ 15]
Swimming, bathing or wading pools shall also be subject to any sanitary
regulations now provided in the sanitary code of the board of health of the
township or to be hereafter enacted.
§ 18-6. INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS; TESTING OF WATER.
[Ord. #1251; Ord. #1597, § 4]
The police department, health officer, or building subcode official shall be
entitled to enter onto private property to investigate complaints concerning
violations of this chapter. The health officer at any time may require the
property owner to obtain at the property owner's expense a laboratory
report on the water purity from a certified testing laboratory. Such
certification must set forth a conclusion as to whether or not the pool
water tested constitutes a health menace. The department of health shall
require the property owner to comply with such rules and regulations as
the department of health may promulgate pertaining to pools in accordance
with this chapter. In the event of failure of compliance after due notice to
the property owner, the department of health shall have power to abate or
cause a suspension of use of private swimming pools until such time as in
the opinion of the department of health it is no longer a menace or hazard
to health.
c. Every gate or door opening through such enclosure shall be equipped
with a self-closing and self-latching device, capable of keeping such
gate or door securely closed.
d. It shall be deemed that there is sufficient compliance with this section
when the owner's entire property is completely enclosed by a fence and
gate of the type above-mentioned.
e. Any access ladder or steps used in connection with the above-surface
type of swimming or bathing pool shall be removed from the pool when
the same is not in use.
f. Lights used to illuminate any swimming pool or bathing pool shall be so
arranged and shaded as to reflect light away from adjoining premises.
g. Electrical fixtures, wiring and installation thereof, used in connection
with the swimming pool shall conform to the standards of the National
Board of Fire Underwriters for Electrical Wiring and Apparatus.
h. All private swimming pools shall be emptied so as not to create a
discharge or flow of the swimming pool water onto adjacent property
and the swimming pool water shall not be discharged into the public
sanitary sewer system of the township and in any case it shall not be
discharged in any manner or form that would create a public or private
nuisance.
§ 18-5.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 18-6
1:580
The building subcode official may require the replacement or repair of
rotted, rusting, or other unsatisfactory above ground pool supports where,
in his opinion, such defective supports are a menace or a hazard to the
safety of the pool users. However, safe, and healthful use of the pool and
proper construction and maintenance shall be the sole responsibility of the
property owner and the police department, health department and building
subcode official through their investigation or action upon a complaint shall
not assume any liability for the negligent use, construction or maintenance
of the pool or improper or inadequate water purity of the pool.
§ 18-7. VIOLATIONS. [New]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 3, § 3-1.
Chapter 19
LAND USE PROCEDURES
§ 19-1. PLANNING BOARD.
§ 19-1.1. Establishment. [Ord. #1650; Ord. #2165, § II]
There is hereby established pursuant to c. 291, P.L. 1975, in the township a
planning board of seven members consisting of the following four classes:
Class I The mayor.
Class II One of the officials of the township other than a member of the
board of commissioners to be appointed by the mayor; provided
that if an environmental commission is established, the member
of the environmental commission who is also a member of the
planning board as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed
to be the class II planning board member if there is both a
member of the zoning board of adjustment and a member of the
board of education among class IV members.
Class III A member of the board of commissioners to be appointed by it.
Class IV Four other citizens of the township to be appointed by the
mayor. The members of class IV shall hold no other township
office, except that one member may be a member of the zoning
board of adjustment and one may be a member of the board
of education. A member of the environmental commission who
is also a member of the planning board as required by N.J.S.A.
40:56A-1 shall be a class IV planning board member unless there
be among the class IV members of the planning board both
a member of the zoning board of adjustment and a member
of the board of education, in which case the member of the
environmental commission shall be deemed to be the class II
member of the planning board. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23.1,
there shall be two alternate members to the planning board.
§ 18-6 GENERAL § 19-1.2
1:581
§ 19-1.2. Terms. [Ord. #1650]
The term of the member composing class I shall correspond with his official
tenure. The terms of the members composing class II and class III shall
be for one year or terminate at the completion of their respective terms of
office, whichever occurs first, except for a class II member who is also a
member of the environmental commission. The term of a class II or a class
IV member who is also a member of the environmental commission shall
be for three years or terminate at the completion of his term of office as a
member of the environmental commission, whichever comes first.
The term of a class IV member who is also a member of the board of
adjustment or the board of education shall terminate whenever he is no
longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his class IV
term, whichever occurs first.
The terms of all class IV members first appointed pursuant to this chapter
shall be so determined that to the greatest practicable extent the expiration
of such term shall be evenly distributed over the first four years after their
appointment as determined by resolution of the board of commissioners,
provided however that no term of any member shall exceed four years and
further provided that nothing herein shall affect the term of any present
member of the planning board, all of whom shall continue in office until the
completion of the term for which they were appointed. Thereafter all class
IV members shall be appointed for terms of four years except as otherwise
herein provided. All terms shall run from January 1 of the year in which the
appointment was made.
§ 19-1.3. Vacancies. [Ord. #1650]
If a vacancy of any class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled by appointment as above provided for the unexpired term.
§ 19-1.4. Organization of Board. [Ord. #1650]
The planning board shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from the
members of class IV and select a secretary who may be either a member of
the planning board or a township employee designated by it.
§ 19-1.5. Experts and Staff. [Ord. #1650]
The planning board may also employ or contract for the services of experts
and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The board shall not,
however, exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by
the board of commissioners for its use.
§ 19-1.6. Powers and Duties Generally. [Ord. #1650]
The planning board shall adopt by-laws governing its procedural operation.
It shall also have the following powers and duties.
§ 19-1.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 19-1.6
1:582
a. To make, adopt and amend a master plan for the physical and social
development and policy of the township including any areas outside its
boundaries, which in the board's judgment bear essential relation to the
planning of the township in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-28.
b. To administer the provisions of the land subdivision ordinance and site
plan review ordinance of the township in accordance with the
provisions of the said ordinances and the Municipal Land Use Law of
1975 C. 40:55S-1, et seq.
c. To approve conditional uses in accordance with the provisions of the
zoning ordinance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67.
d. To participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans
required by state or federal law or regulations, including preparation of
grant proposals and evaluations thereof.
e. To assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning
process.
f. To annually prepare a program of municipal capital improvement
projects projected over a term of six years, and amendments thereto,
and recommend same to the board of commissioners.
g. To consider and make report to the board of commissioners within 35
days after referral as to any proposed development regulation
submitted to it pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-26A, and
also pass upon other matters specifically referred to the planning board
by the township committee, pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-26B.
h. When reviewing applications for approval of subdivision plats, site
plans, or conditional uses, to grant to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the zoning board of adjustment.
1. Variances pursuant to subsection 57C of Chapter 291, Laws of New
Jersey 1975 from lot area, lot dimensional setback and yard
requirements; provided that such relief from lot area requirements
shall not be granted for more than one lot.
2. Direction pursuant to Section 25 of said Act for issuance of permit
for building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin, or public area reserved pursuant
to Section 23 of said Act.
3. Direction pursuant to Section 27 of the Act for issuance of a permit
for a building or structure not related to a street.
Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, notice
of a hearing on the application for development shall include
reference to the request for a variance or direction for issuance of
a permit as the case may be.
§ 19-1.6 GENERAL § 19-1.6
1:583
§ 19-1.7. Minor Subdivision. [Ord. #1650]
§ 19-1.8. Major Subdivision. [Ord. #1650]
i. To perform such other advisory duties as are assigned to it by ordinance
or resolution of the board of commissioners for the aid and assistance of
the board of commissioners or other agencies or officers.
j. Whenever the planning board shall have adopted any portion of the
master plan, the board of commissioners or other public agency having
jurisdiction over the subject matter, before taking action necessitating
the expenditure of any public funds, incidental to the location,
character or extent of such project, shall refer the action involving such
specific project to the planning board for review and recommendation
in conjunction with such master plan and shall not act thereon without
such recommendation or until 45 days have elapsed after such
reference without receiving any recommendation. This requirement
shall apply to action by a housing, parking, highway, special district, or
other authority, redevelopment agency, school board or other similar
public agency, state, county or municipal, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-31, Section
22.
k. The planning board may investigate, study and survey substandard
areas within the township and recommend to the mayor and board of
commissioners such action as it deems advisable for the rehabilitation
and preservation of such areas.
l. The planning board may study and make recommendations to the board
of commissioners on an official map.
a. Minor subdivision shall be any subdivision of land which does not
involve the creation or reassembly of more than three lots; which does
not involve planned development; which does not involve any new
street; and which does not involve the extension of any off-tract
improvements.
b. The planning board may waive notice and public hearing for an
application for development if the planning board or subdivision
committee of the board find that the application for development
conforms to the definition of "minor subdivision" set forth in subsection
19-1.7a.
c. Minor subdivision approval shall be deemed to be final approval of the
subdivision by the board; provided that the board or subcommittee may
condition such approval on terms ensuring the provision of
improvements pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-38, 39, 40 and N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53 of Chapter 291, Laws of 1975.
a. Major subdivision is any subdivision of land which is not classified as a
minor subdivision.
§ 19-1.6 LYNDHURST CODE § 19-1.8
1:584
§ 19-1.9. Subdivision Approval. [Ord. #1650]
b. For all major subdivisions, the planning board shall hold a public
hearing with public notice given by publication in the official newspaper
of the municipality, if there be one, or in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality; and a notice of the hearing shall be
given to the owners of all real property as shown on the current tax
duplicate, located within 200 feet in all directions of the property which
is the subject of such hearing and to other persons as required by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12 and in following the procedures set forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-12.
c. As a condition of subdivision or site plan approval, the approving
authority may require the installation and maintenance of on-tract
improvements; and the regulations may require a developer to pay his
pro-rata share of the cost of off-tract improvements in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
a. Minor Subdivisions. Minor subdivision approvals shall be granted or
denied within 45 days of the date of submission of a complete
application to the planning board or within such further time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Failure of the planning board to act
within the period prescribed shall constitute minor subdivision
approval and a certificate of the administrative officer as to the failure
of the planning board to act shall be issued on request of the applicant;
and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other
evidence of approval, herein required, and shall be so accepted by the
county recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision plats.
Whenever review or approval of the application by the county planning
board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, C. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3),
the municipal planning board shall condition any approval that it grants
upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
county planning board or approval by the county planning board by its
failure to report thereon within the required time period.
Approval of a minor subdivision shall expire 190 days from the date
of the planning board approval unless within such period a plat in
conformity with such approval and the provisions of the "Map Filing
Law", or a deed clearly describing the approved minor subdivision, is
filed by the developer with the county recording officer, the municipal
engineer and the municipal tax assessor. Any such plat or deed must be
signed by the chairman and secretary of the planning board before it
will be accepted for filing by the county recording officer.
The zoning requirements and general terms and conditions, whether
conditional or otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was
granted, shall not be changed for a period of two years after the
date of minor subdivision approval, provided that the approved minor
subdivision shall have been duly recorded.
§ 19-1.8 GENERAL § 19-1.9
1:585
§ 19-1.10. Site Plan Approval. [Ord. #1650]
b. Preliminary Approval Major Subdivisions. Upon submission of a
complete application for a subdivision of 10 or fewer lots, the planning
board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of the
date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Upon submission of a complete
application for a subdivision of more than 10 lots, the planning board
shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of the date of
such submission or within such further time as may be consented to by
the developer. Otherwise the planning board shall be deemed to have
granted preliminary approval for the subdivision.
Whenever review or approval of the application by the county planning
board is required by Section 5 of P. L. 1968, C. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3),
the municipal planning board shall condition any approval that it grants
upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
county planning board or approval by the county planning board by its
failure to report thereon within the required time period.
c. Ancillary Powers. Whenever the planning board is called upon to
exercise its ancillary powers before the granting of a variance as set
forth in subsection 19-1.6h of this section, the planning board shall
grant or deny approval of the application within 95 days after
submission by the developer of a complete application or within such
further time as may be consented to by the applicant. Failure of the
planning board to act within the period prescribed shall constitute
approval of the application and a certificate of the administrative officer
as to the failure of the planning board to act shall be issued on request
of the applicant.
d. Final Subdivision Approval. Application for final subdivision approval
shall be granted or denied within 45 days of submission of a complete
application or within such further time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
Whenever review or approval of the application by the county planning
board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, C. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3)
the municipal planning board shall condition any approval that it grants
upon timely receipt of a favorable report on the application by the
county planning board or approval by the county planning board by its
failure to report thereon within the required time period.
Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the
date of signing of the plat unless within such period the plat shall
have been duly filed by the developer with the county recording officer.
The planning board may, for good cause shown, extend the period for
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date
of signing of the plat.
a. Procedure for Preliminary Site Plan Approval.
§ 19-1.9 LYNDHURST CODE § 19-1.10
1:586
1. The developer shall submit to the construction official a site plan
and such other information as is reasonably necessary to make an
informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
preliminary site plan approval have been met. The site plan and any
engineering documents to be submitted shall be required in
tentative form for discussion purposes for preliminary approval. If
any architectural plans are required to be submitted for site plan
approval, the preliminary plans and elevations shall be sufficient. If
an application for development is found to be incomplete, the
developer shall be notified thereof within 45 days of the submission
of such application or it shall be deemed to be properly submitted.
2. If the planning board requires any substantial amendment in the
layout of improvements proposed by the developer that have been
the subject of a hearing, an amended application for development
shall be submitted and proceeded upon, as in the case of the
original application for development. The planning board shall, if
the proposed development complies with the ordinance and the
Municipal Land Use Law, grant preliminary site plan approval.
3. Upon the submission to the construction official of a complete
application for a site plan for 10 acres of land or less, the planning
board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 45 days of
the date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Upon the submission of a complete
application for a site plan of more than 10 acres, the planning
board shall grant or deny preliminary approval within 95 days of
the date of such submission or within such further time as may be
consented to by the developer. Otherwise, the planning board shall
be deemed to have granted preliminary approval.
b. Procedure for Final Site Plan Approval.
1. The planning board shall grant final approval if the detailed
drawings, specifications and estimates of the application for final
approval conform to the standards established by ordinance for
final approval and provided the conditions of preliminary approval
are met.
2. Final approval shall be granted or denied within 45 days after
submission of a complete application to the construction official, or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
Failure of the planning board to act within the period prescribed
shall constitute final approval and a certificate of the construction
official as to the failure of the planning board to act shall be issued
on request of the applicant, and it shall be sufficient in lieu of the
written endorsement or other evidence of approval herein
required.
3. Whenever review or approval of the application by the county
planning board is required, the municipal planning board shall
§ 19-1.10 GENERAL § 19-1.10
1:587
§ 19-1.11. Time for Applications Requiring More Than One
Approval. [Ord. #1650]
The longest time period for action by the planning board, whether it be for
subdivision, conditional use or site plan approval shall apply.
§ 19-1.12. Effect of Preliminary and Final Subdivision and Site Plan
Approval. [Ord. #1650]
condition any approval that it grants upon the timely receipt of a
favorable report on the application by the county planning board
or approval by the county planning board by its failure to report
thereon within the required time period.
a. Effect of Preliminary Approval of a Subdivision or Site Plan. Preliminary
approval of a major subdivision or of a site plan shall, except as
provided in subsection 19-1.12, paragraph a4 confer upon the applicant
the following rights for a three year period from the date of the
preliminary approval:
1. That the general terms and conditions of which preliminary
approval was granted shall not be changed, including but not
limited to use requirements; layout and design standards for
streets, curbs and sidewalks; lot size; yard dimensions and off-tract
improvements; and, in the case of a site plan, any requirements
peculiar to site plan approval pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-41 of this
Act; except that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the
township from modifying by ordinance such general terms and
conditions of preliminary approval as relate to public health and
safety.
2. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the
expiration date of preliminary approval the whole or a section or
sections of the preliminary subdivision plat or site plan, as the case
may be; and
3. That the applicant may apply for and the planning board may grant
extensions on such preliminary approval for additional periods of at
least one year but not to exceed a total extension of two years,
provided that if the design standards have been revised by
ordinance, such revised standards may govern.
4. In the case of a subdivision of or site plan for an area of 50 acres or
more, the planning board may grant the rights referred to in
paragraphs a1, a2 and a3 above for such period of time, longer than
three years as shall be determined by the planning board to be
reasonable taking into consideration: (a) the number of dwelling
units and nonresidential floor area permissible under preliminary
approval, (b) economic conditions, and (c) the comprehensiveness
of the development. The application may apply thereafter and the
planning board may thereafter grant an extension to preliminary
§ 19-1.10 LYNDHURST CODE § 19-1.12
1:588
§ 19-1.13. Exception in Application of Subdivision or Site Plan
Regulation; Simultaneous Review and Approval. [Ord. #1650]
approval for such additional period of time as shall be determined
by the planning board to be reasonable taking into consideration:
(a) the number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area
permissible under preliminary approval, and (b) the potential
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the
section or sections awaiting final approval, (c) economic conditions
and (d) the comprehensiveness of the development; provided that
if the design standards have been revised, such revised standards
may govern.
b. Effect of Final Approval of a Subdivision or Site Plan.
1. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval
first granted and all other rights conferred upon the developer
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-49 whether conditionally or otherwise,
shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of final
approval; provided that in the case of major subdivision all rights
conferred by this section shall expire if the plat has not been duly
recorded within the time period provided. If the developer has
followed the standards prescribed for final approval, and, in the
case of a subdivision, has duly recorded the plat as required in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-54, the planning board may extend such period of
protection for extensions of one year but not to exceed three
extensions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter,
the granting of final approval terminates the time period of
preliminary approval for the section granted final approval.
2. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned unit
development or planned unit residential development or residential
cluster of 50 acres or more or conventional subdivision or site plan
for 150 acres or more, the planning board may grant the rights
referred to in paragraph b1 of this subsection for such period of
time, longer than two years, as shall be determined by the planning
board to be reasonable taking into consideration: (a) the number of
dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible under final
approval, (b) economic conditions and (c) the comprehensiveness
of the development. The developer may apply for thereafter and the
planning board may thereafter grant, an extension of final approval
for such additional period of time as shall be determined by the
planning board to be reasonable taking into consideration: (a) the
number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under final approval, (b) the number of dwelling units and
nonresidential floor area remaining to be developed, (c) economic
conditions and (d) the comprehensiveness of the development.
a. The planning board when action upon applications for preliminary or
minor subdivision approval shall have the power to grant such
exceptions from the requirements for subdivision approval as may be
§ 19-1.12 GENERAL § 19-1.13
1:589
§ 19-1.14. Application and Procedure for Filing. [Ord. #1650; Ord.
#1891, § I; Ord. #1990, § I; Ord. #1999, § I; Ord. #2051, § III; Ord.
#2352, §§ I — III; Ord. #2412, § I; Ord. #2502, § I; Ord. #2567, § 1;
Ord. #2567, § 1; Ord. #2757, § 4; Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
reasonable and within the general purpose and intent of the provisions
for subdivision review and approval of an ordinance adopted pursuant
to this subsection, if the literal enforcement of one or more provisions
of the ordinance is impracticable or will exact undue hardship because
of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question.
b. The planning board when acting upon applications for preliminary site
plan approval shall have the power to grant such exceptions from the
requirements for site plan approval as may be reasonable and within
the general purpose and intent of the provisions for site plan review and
approval of an ordinance adopted pursuant to this subsection, if the
literal enforcement of one or more provisions of the ordinance is
impracticable or will exact undue hardship because of peculiar
conditions pertaining to the land in question.
c. The planning board shall have the power to review and approve or deny
conditional uses or site plans simultaneously with review for
subdivision approval without the developer being required to make
further application to the planning board or the planning board being
required to hold further hearings. The longest time period for action by
the planning board, whether it be for subdivision, conditional use or site
plan approval, shall apply. Whenever approval of a conditional use is
requested by the developer pursuant to this subsection, notice of the
hearing on the plat shall include reference to the request for such
conditional use.
a. Applications for development within the jurisdiction of the planning
board or the board of adjustment pursuant to the provisions of the
Municipal Land Use Law shall be filed with the land use administrator.
Applicant shall file at least 30 days before the date of the monthly
meeting of the board, two copies of a sketch plat; three copies of
applications for minor subdivision approval; six copies of application for
major subdivision approval or eight copies of an application for site plan
review, conditional use approval, or planned development. At the time
of filing the application but in no event less than 10 days prior to the
hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans, maps or other papers
required by virtue of any provision of this chapter or any other rule of
the planning board or board of adjustment. The applicant shall obtain
all necessary forms from the building department. The land use
administrator shall inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to
initiate applications and of the regular meeting dates of the boards.
b. Fees for Specific Services. The following fees shall be applicable for the
services described herein:
§ 19-1.13 LYNDHURST CODE § 19-1.14
1:590
1. Reproduction of documents or other reproduction costs: as
provided by statute.
2. Cost of transcripts to interested parties: at cost incurred by
municipality.
3. Certified list of persons requiring notice: $25.
4. Publication notice: to be paid directly by applicant.
c. Fees for Professional Services and Inspections.
1. Application Process. In addition to the required application fee
established herein, the following minimum escrow funds shall be
paid upon filing:
(a) Major subdivision or site plan - $3,500.
(b) Minor subdivision with or without bulk variance application -
$2,500.
(c) Planned retirement community - $5,000.
(d) Other planned developments, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-6 -
$5,000.
(e) Planning permits, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 and N.J.S.A.
40:55D-35 - $1,000.
(f) Applications for variances, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(a);
appeal from administrative office or agency - $1,000.
(g) Use variance, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(d) - $2,500.
(h) Conditional use (all conditions satisfied and heard by the
planning board, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67) - $2,500.
(i) Interpretation, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(b) - $500.
(j) Informal conceptual review:
(1) Proposed small-scale development (less than 10 acres) -
$750.
(2) Proposed large-scale development (more than 10 acres) -
$1,000.
(k) Bulk variances, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70(c) - $500.
(l) In the event that an approved subdivision application requires
revisions to or updating of the township's official tax map, the
applicant shall pay the additional amount of $500 to the
township for the cost of preparation of same.
Upon receipt of the application, application fees and escrow
fees, the land use administrator shall determine if review by
§ 19-1.14 GENERAL § 19-1.14
1:591
the township engineer, professional planning consultants or
attorney is required. If review is required, the secretary of
the appropriate board shall send a copy of the application and
one set of all maps and supportive data to the appropriate
professional. Within seven days said professional(s) shall
submit an estimate of funds sufficient in amount to undertake
technical reviews and findings of facts relative to the
application at hand. These anticipated fees shall be reasonably
documented as to time and hourly rates.
2. Review of Improvements Pursuant to Construction Permit. Up to
5% of the estimated construction costs or as otherwise authorized
by law of the improvements as determined by the township
engineer, planning consultant and land use administrator as
provided under the escrow provisions of paragraph e of this
subsection.
3. Allowable Charges. The application review and inspection charges
shall be limited only to professional charges for review of
applications, review and preparation of documents and inspections
of developments under construction and review by outside
consultants when an application is of a nature beyond the scope of
the expertise of the professionals normally utilized by the
municipality. A professional shall not review items which are
subject to approval by any state governmental agency and not
under municipal jurisdiction except to the extent consultation with
a state agency is necessary due to the effect of state approvals in
the subdivision or site plan. Inspection fees shall be charged only
for actual work shown on a subdivision or site plan or required by
an approving resolution. Professionals inspecting improvements
under construction shall charge only for inspections that are
reasonably necessary to check the progress and quality of the work
and such inspections shall be reasonably based on the approved
development plans and documents. The only costs that shall be
added to any such charges shall be actual out-of-pocket expenses of
any such professionals or consultants including normal and typical
expenses incurred in processing applications and inspecting
improvements. The municipality or approving authority shall not
bill the applicant, or charge any escrow account or deposit for any
municipal clerical or administrative functions, overhead expenses,
meeting room charges, or any other municipal costs and expenses
except as provided for in this section, nor shall a municipal
professional add any such charges to his bill.
d. Escrow Fees.
1. In addition to the required application fee established herein, the
following minimum escrow funds shall be paid upon filing:
(a) Major subdivision or site plan - $2,500.
§ 19-1.14 LYNDHURST CODE § 19-1.14
1:592
(b) Minor subdivision, variance application - $2,500.
(c) Additional legal fee for board attorney preparing the resolution
for all applications - $250.
Upon receipt of the application, application fees and escrow
fees, the approving authority shall determine if review by the
township engineer, professional planning consultants or
attorney is required. If review is required, the secretary of
the appropriate board shall send a copy of the application and
one set of all maps and supportive data to the appropriate
professional. Within seven days said professional(s) shall
submit an estimate of funds sufficient in amount to undertake
technical reviews and findings of facts relative to the
application at hand. These anticipated fees shall be reasonably
documented as to time and hourly rates. The applicant shall
be given a copy of the anticipated fees to be charged against
its escrow account before the fees are paid. The applicant
shall have the right to challenge the reasonableness of the fees
before the approving authority. The approving authority shall
determine the escrow fee to be deposited.
2. The engineer, planning consultant, approving authority attorney
and any other professionals engaged shall submit vouchers for all
necessary work done in examination, review or inspection which
shall be paid after a review as provided above.
3. Any of the aforesaid moneys left in the escrow account upon
completion of the project or phase of the application procedure, as
the case may be, shall be returned to the applicant as soon as it is
possible.
4. Should additional funds be required after the original funds are
exhausted, such funds as shall, in the judgment of the approving
authority, be necessary, shall be paid by the applicant to the
Township of Lyndhurst placed in the appropriate account or
accounts.
5. Upon receipt of sufficient funds for the escrow account, the
administrative officer shall notify the engineer, planning
consultant, approving authority attorney and any other
professionals engaged that all appropriate examinations and
reviews shall be undertaken.
6. The approving authority shall take no formal action unless all
application fees and escrow funds have been paid to the Township
of Lyndhurst.
e. Disbursement of Escrow Proceeds.
1. By Whom. The chief financial officer of a municipality shall make all
of the payments to professionals for services rendered to the
§ 19-1.14 GENERAL § 19-1.14
1:593
municipality or approving authority for review of applications for
development, review and preparation of documents, inspection of
improvement or other purposes under the provisions of Municipal
Land Use Law.
2. Payment to Professionals. Each payment charged to the deposit for
review of applications, review and preparation of documents and
inspection of improvements shall be pursuant to a voucher from the
professional, which voucher shall identify the personnel
performing the service, and for each date the services performed,
the hours spent to one-quarter hour increments, the hourly rate
and the expenses incurred. All professionals shall submit vouchers
to the land use administrator on a monthly basis in accordance with
schedules and procedures established by the chief financial officer
of the municipality. If the services are provided by a municipal
employee, the municipal employee shall prepare and submit to the
land use administrator a statement containing the same
information as required on a voucher, on a monthly basis. The
professional shall send an informational copy of all vouchers or
statements submitted to the land use administrator of the
municipality simultaneously to the applicant. The land use
administrator shall transmit the original of the vouchers to the
chief financial officer.
3. Accounting of Escrow Funds. The land use administrator, in
consultation with the chief financial officer of the municipality shall
prepare and send to the applicant a statement which shall include
an accounting of funds listing all deposits, interest earnings,
disbursements and the cumulative balance of the escrow account.
This information shall be provided on a quarterly basis, if monthly
charges are $1,000 or less, or on a monthly basis if monthly
charges exceed $1,000.
4. Insufficiency of Escrow Balance. If an escrow account or deposit
contains insufficient funds to enable the municipality or approving
authority to perform required application reviews or improvement
inspections, the land use administrator shall provide the applicant
with a notice of the insufficient escrow of deposit balance. In order
for work to continue on the development or the application, the
applicant shall within a reasonable time period post a deposit to the
account in an amount to be agreed upon by the municipality or
approving authority and the applicant. In the interim, any required
health and safety inspections shall be made and charged back
against the replenishment of funds.
5. Interest of Escrow Funds. Whenever an amount of money in excess
of $5,000 shall be deposited by an applicant for professional
services employed by the municipality to review applications for
development, for municipal inspection fees or to satisfy guarantee
requirements, the money, until repaid or applied to the purposes
for which it is deposited, including the applicant's portion of the
§ 19-1.14 LYNDHURST CODE § 19-1.14
1:594
interest earned thereon, except as otherwise provided in this
section, shall continue to be the property of the applicant and shall
be held in trust by the municipality. The township shall notify the
applicant in writing of the name and address of the institution or
depository in which the deposit is made and the amount of the
deposit. The township shall not be required to refund an amount
of interest paid on a deposit which does not exceed $100 for the
year. If the amount of interest exceeds $100, that entire amount
shall belong to the applicant and shall be refunded to him by the
municipality annually or at the time the deposit is repaid or applied
to the purposes for which it was deposited, as the case may be;
except that the municipality may retain for administrative expenses
a sum equivalent to 33 1/3% of the entire amount of interest, which
shall be in lieu of all other administrative and custodial expenses.
6. Close-Out Procedure. The following close-out procedure shall apply
to all deposits and escrow accounts established hereunder and
shall commence after the approving authority has granted final
approval and signed the subdivision plat or site plan, in the case of
application review escrows and deposits, or after the
improvements have been approved, in the case of improvement
inspection escrows and deposits.
(a) The applicant shall send written notice by certified mail to the
land use administrator and the approving authority, and to the
relevant municipal professional, that the application or the
improvements, as the case may be, are completed.
(b) After receipt of such notice, the professional shall render a
final bill to the land use administrator within 30 days, and shall
send a copy simultaneously to the applicant.
(c) The land use administrator in consultation with the chief
financial officer of the municipality shall render a written final
accounting to the applicant on the uses to which the deposit
was put within 45 days of receipt of the final bill.
(d) Any balances remaining in the deposit or escrow account,
including interest as appropriate, shall be refunded to the
developer along with the final accounting.
7. Dispute by Applicant Over Professional Fees.
(a) An applicant shall notify in writing the governing body with
copies to the land use administrator, chief financial officer, the
approving authority and the professional whenever the
applicant disputes the charges made by a professional for
service rendered to the municipality in reviewing applications
for development, review and preparation of documents,
inspection of improvements, or other charges. The governing
body, or its designee, shall within a reasonable time period
attempt to remediate any disputed charges. If the matter is not
§ 19-1.14 GENERAL § 19-1.14
1:595
resolved to the satisfaction of the applicant, the applicant may
appeal to the county construction board of appeals any charge
to an escrow account or a deposit by any municipal
professional or consultant, or the cost of the installation of
improvements estimated by the municipal engineer. An
applicant or his authorized agent shall submit the appeal in
writing to the county construction board of appeals. The
applicant or his authorized agent shall simultaneously send a
copy of the appeal to the municipality, approving authority, and
any professional whose charge is the subject of the appeal.
An applicant shall file an appeal within 45 days from receipt
of the informational copy of the professional's voucher, except
that if the professional has not supplied the applicant with
an informational copy of the voucher, then the applicant shall
file his appeal within 60 days from receipt of the municipal
statement of activity against the deposit or escrow account. An
applicant may file an appeal for an ongoing series of charges
by a professional during a period not exceeding six months
to demonstrate that they represent a pattern of excessive or
inaccurate charges. An applicant making use of this provision
need not appeal each charge individually.
(b) During the pendency of any appeal, the municipality or
approving authority shall continue to process, hear, and decide
the application for development, and to inspect the
development in the normal course, and shall not withhold,
delay, or deny reviews, inspections, signing of subdivision plats
or site plans, the reduction of the release of performance or
maintenance guarantees, the issuance of construction permits
or certificates of occupancy, or any other approval or permit
because an appeal has been filed or is pending under this
section. The chief financial officer of the municipality may pay
charges out of the appropriate escrow account or deposit for
which an appeal has been filed. If a charge is disallowed after
payment, the chief financial officer of the municipality shall
reimburse the deposit or escrow account in the amount of any
such disallowed charge or refund the amount to the applicant.
If a charge is disallowed after payment to a professional or
consultant who is not an employee of the municipality, the
professional or consultant shall reimburse the municipality in
the amount of any such disallowed charge.
f. Exception to Escrow Fee Requirements. An application for a singlefamily
residential home shall not be required to post the mandatory
escrow for professional fees unless the land use administrator, in his
discretion and for good cause, determines that an escrow for such
professional fees is required.
§ 19-1.14 LYNDHURST CODE § 19-1.15
1:596
§ 19-1.15. Signing of Plats, Site Plans and Conditional Uses. [Ord.
#1650]
Approved plats for minor subdivisions, preliminary major subdivisions and
final major subdivisions shall be signed by the planning board chairman and
secretary. Approved site plans and conditional uses shall be signed by the
planning board chairman and secretary.
§ 19-1.16. Advisory Committee. [Ord. #1650]
The mayor may appoint one or more persons as a citizens advisory
committee to assist or collaborate with the planning board in its duties, but
such person or persons shall have no power to vote or take other action
required of the board. Such person or persons shall serve at the pleasure of
the mayor.
§ 19-1.17. Site Plan Review Advisory Board. [Ord. #1650]
The mayor shall appoint a site plan review advisory board for the purpose
of reviewing all site plan applications and making recommendations to the
planning board in regard thereto. Members of the site plan review advisory
board shall include but need not be limited to: mayor, council liaison to
planning board, another member of the council appointed by the council,
township engineer, planning director, construction official, traffic engineer,
fire chief, health officer.
§ 19-1.18. Environmental Commission. [Ord. #1650]
Whenever the environmental commission has prepared and submitted to
the planning board an index of the natural resources of the municipality,
the planning board shall make available to the environmental commission
an informational copy of every application for development to the planning
board. Failure of the planning board to make such informational copy
available to the environmental commission shall not invalidate any hearing
or proceeding.
§ 19-1.19. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #1650]
The board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to
carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the issuance
of subpoenas, administration of oaths and taking of testimony the provisions
of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1
et seq.) shall apply.
§ 19-2. ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 19-2.1. Establishment; Composition. [Ord. #1650]
A zoning board of adjustment is hereby established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69 et seq. consisting of seven residents of the township appointed
by the mayor and confirmed by the board of commissioners to serve for
§ 19-1.15 GENERAL § 19-2.1
1:597
terms of four years from January 1 of the year of their appointment. The
terms of the members first appointed shall be so determined that to the
greatest practicable extent the expiration of such terms shall be distributed
evenly over the first four years after their appointment; provided that the
initial term of no member shall exceed four years. Thereafter the term of
each member shall be for four years. Nothing in this chapter shall, however,
be construed to affect the term of any present member of the zoning board
of adjustment, all of whom shall continue in office until the completion of
the term for which they were appointed.
No member of the zoning board of adjustment may hold any elective office
or position under the township.
A vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled for
the unexpired term only.
§ 19-2.2. Officers. [Ord. #1650]
The board of adjustment shall elect a chairman and vice chairman from its
members and shall also select a secretary who may, or may not be a board
member or another township employee.
§ 19-2.3. Experts and Staff. [Ord. #1650]
The zoning board of adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix
the compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may
deem necessary. The board shall not authorize expenditures which exceed,
exclusive of gifts or grants, the amount appropriated by the board of
commissioners for its use.
§ 19-2.4. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. #1650]
The board shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary
to carry into effect the provisions and purposes of this chapter. In the
issuance of subpoenas, administration of oaths, and taking of testimony, the
provisions of the County and Municipal Investigations Law of 1953 (N.J.S.A.
2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
§ 19-2.5. Powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Ord. #1650]
a. The powers of the zoning board of adjustment shall be in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-69 et seq. and amendments and supplements
thereto, and with the provisions of this chapter.
b. It is further the intent of this chapter to confer upon the zoning board of
adjustment as full and complete powers as may lawfully be conferred
upon such board, including not by way of limitation, the authority, in
connection with any case, action or proceeding before the board, to
interpret and construe the provisions of this chapter, or any term,
clause, sentence or word hereof, and the zoning map, in accordance
§ 19-2.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 19-2.5
1:598
with the general rules of construction, applicable to the legislative
enactments.
c. The board may, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate
conditions and safeguards, grant variances from the terms of this
ordinance in accordance with the general or specific rules contained
herein, and with the general rules hereby laid down that equity shall be
done in cases where the strict construction of the provisions of this
chapter would work undue hardship. The powers and duties of the
board having been delegated to and imposed upon it by statute, the
board shall in all cases follow the provisions applicable to it in C. 291,
P.L. 1975 or subsequent statutes in such case made and provided, that
the construction official shall from time to time furnish to any person
requesting the same a copy of its rules and information as to how
appeals or applications may properly be filed with the board for its
decision thereon.
d. The zoning board of adjustment shall have such powers as are granted
by law to:
1. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that
there is error in any order, requirement, decision or refusal made
by an administrative official or agency based on or made in the
enforcement of the zoning ordinance.
2. Hear and decide request for interpretation of the map or zoning
ordinance, or for decisions upon other special questions upon
which such board is authorized by the zoning ordinance to pass.
3. Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness, or shape
of a specific piece of property, or by reason of exceptional
topographic conditions or by reason of other extraordinary and
exceptional situation or condition of such piece of property, the
strict application of any regulation in the zoning ordinance would
result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties, to or
exceptional and undue hardship upon the owner of such property,
to grant upon an application or an appeal relating to such property
a variance from such strict application, so as to relieve such
difficulties or hardship; provided, however, that no variance shall
be granted under this paragraph to allow a structure or use in a
district restricted against such structures or use; and further
provided that the proposed development does not require approval
by the planning board of a subdivision, site plan, or conditional use
in conjunction with which the planning board shall review a request
for a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-60 of the Municipal Land
Use Law of 1975, C. 291, P.L. 1975.
4. Grant a variance to allow a structure or use in a district restricted
against such structure or use in particular cases and for special
reasons, but only by the affirmative vote of at least two-thirds of the
full authorized membership of the board.
§ 19-2.5 GENERAL § 19-2.5
1:599
§ 19-2.6. Board of Adjustment Action on Variances, Subdivisions
and Site Plans. [Ord. #1650; Ord. No. 1894, § I; Ord. No. 2051, § IV]
In granting variances, subdivisions or site plan approval the board of
adjustment shall follow the same procedures, where applicable, as the
planning board as contained in subsections 19-1.7 to 19-1.15.
§ 19-2.7. Appeals and Applications. [Ord. #1650; Ord. No. 1990, § I;
Ord. #2567, § 1]
e. No variance or other relief may be granted under the provisions of this
section unless such variance or other relief can be granted without
substantial detriment to the public good and will not substantially
impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and zoning ordinance.
Any application under any subsection of this section may be referred to
any appropriate person or agency, including the planning board, for its
report provided that such reference shall not extend the period of time
within which the zoning board of adjustment shall act.
f. The zoning board of adjustment shall in addition to the powers specified
in paragraph d of this subsection have power given by law to:
1. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for a
building or structure in the bed of a mapped street or public
drainageway, flood control basin or public area reserved on the
official map.
2. Direct issuance of a permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36 for a
building or structure not related to a street.
3. The zoning board of adjustment shall have the power to grant to the
same extent and subject to the same restrictions as the planning
board subdivision or site plan approval pursuant to Article 6 of C.
291, P.L. 1975 or conditional use approval pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-67 whenever the board is reviewing an application for
approval of a use variance pursuant to subsection 19-2.5 paragraph
d4.
a. Appeals to the zoning board of adjustment may be taken by any person
aggrieved, or by an officer, department, board or bureau of the
township affected by any decision of the administrative offices. Each
appeal shall be taken within the 65 days prescribed by the statute by
filing a notice of appeal with the officer from whom the appeal was
taken, together with ten copies of the notice with the construction
official. The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for the appeal.
The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to
the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
b. The developer may file an application for development with the board of
adjustment for action under any of its powers without prior application
§ 19-2.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 19-2.7
1:600
to an administrative officer. Applications addressed to the original
jurisdiction of the board of adjustment without prior application to an
administrative officer shall be filed with the secretary of the board of
adjustment. Four copies of the application shall be filed. At the time of
filing the appeal or application, but in no event less than ten days prior
to the date set for hearing, the applicant shall also file all plot plans,
maps, or other papers required by virtue of any provision of this chapter
or any rule of the board of adjustment. An application for a variance
shall contain a set of preliminary construction plans that provide side,
front, rear, and cross-section views showing the height from the top of
the curb to the top of the roof ridge, and the grade at each corner of
the basement. The applicant shall obtain all necessary forms from the
construction official. By appointment only, the construction official shall
inform the applicant of the steps to be taken to initiate proceedings and
of the regular meeting dates of the board.
c. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action in respect
of which the decision appealed from was made, unless the officer from
whom the appeal is taken certifies to the zoning board of adjustment
after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason
of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by
the board of adjustment or by the Superior Court of New Jersey on
application or notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and
on due cause shown.
d. An application for a single family residential home shall not be required
to post the mandatory escrow for professional fees unless the board
specifically requires it at a public meeting by majority vote of the
members present.
e. Fees for Special Meetings.
1. Special Professional Meeting. Any applicant for development may
request that a special meeting be scheduled between the applicant
and its professionals and the board's planner, engineer, and
attorney. Such meeting shall be scheduled upon request of the
applicant and at the discretion of the chairperson or board
attorney. If the request is directed to the board attorney, the
attorney shall notify the chairperson, in writing, of the scheduled
time and place of the meeting. The applicant shall post $750 for
such a meeting, which professional review escrow amount shall
provide for a meeting of one hour and shall be deemed to include,
for purposes of calculating the time of the board's professionals,
one-half hour of preparation time and one-half hour of post-meeting
time. Said professional review escrow amount shall be posted by
the applicant prior to or at the commencement of the meeting.
2. Special Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment Meeting.
Any applicant may request that a special meeting of a board be
§ 19-2.7 GENERAL § 19-2.7
1:601
§ 19-2.8. Hearings. [Ord. #1650]
Public notice on any application for variances shall be given in accordance
with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.
§ 19-2.9. Power to Reverse or Modify Decisions. [Ord. #1650]
In exercising the above mentioned power, the board of adjustment, may in
conformity with the provisions of C. 291, P.L. 1975 or amendments thereto
or subsequent statutes applying reverse or affirm wholly or partly or may
scheduled and devoted exclusively to a single application. Such
meeting shall be scheduled upon request of the applicant and at
the discretion of either the board chairperson or his/her designee.
Such special meeting shall not exceed three hours. The fee for such
special meeting shall be one thousand $1,500. If such a meeting
shall, by agreement of the board and the applicant, extend beyond
the three hour meeting time allotted, the applicant shall deposit
any additional funds into the professional review escrow account
which may be required to cover the costs of the additional time
expended by the board's professionals for such an extended
meeting. All such additional amounts shall be paid by applicant
promptly after the meeting.
3. Where an application for development includes several approval
requests, the sum of the individual required fees shall be paid,
except that there shall be no cumulative fees charged to an
applicant for individual bulk variances which may be part of a "d"
variance application (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d).
f. Waiver and Remission of Fees.
1. The land use administrator, when acting upon an application, shall
have the power, for good cause shown, to grant a remission or
waiver from all or any portion of the fees hereinabove established
based upon any of the following:
(a) The nonprofit status of the applicant.
(b) A determination that collection of the fees would constitute an
economic hardship upon the applicant.
(c) The unique characteristics of the application, making
collection of the full fees substantially disproportionate to the
regulatory costs applicable to review the application.
(d) For other good cause established in the record.
2. The fees set forth in this subsection are exclusive of any other
charges which may be required by the township to cover the costs
of the inspection of buildings or improvements in conjunction with
the issuance of construction permits or certificates of occupancy.
§ 19-2.7 LYNDHURST CODE § 19-2.9
1:602
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from,
and make such other requirement, decision or determination as ought to be
made, and to that end have all the powers of the administrative officer from
whom the appeal was taken.
§ 19-2.10. Expiration of Variance. [Ord. #1650]
Any variance from the terms of this chapter hereafter granted by the zoning
board of adjustment permitting the erection or alteration of any structure
or structures, or permitting a specified use of any premises shall expire by
limitation unless such construction or alteration shall have been actually
commenced on each and every structure permitted by the variance, or
unless such permitted use has actually been commenced within one year
from the date of entry of the judgment or determination of the board of
adjustment; except, however, in the case of a use variance which also
involves a subdivision or site plan approval of the variance shall extend
for the full period of preliminary approval, i.e. three years; and except
however, that the running of the period of limitation herein provided shall
be tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the decision of the board of
adjustment to the governing body, or to a court of competent jurisdiction,
until the termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding.
§ 19-2.11. Time for Decision. [Ord. #1650]
The zoning board of adjustment shall render its decision not later than
120 days after the date (1) an appeal is taken from the decision of an
administrative officer, or (2) the submission of a complete application for
development to the board pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70(B).
Failure of the board to render a decision within such 120-day period or
within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant shall
constitute a decision favorable to the applicant.
§ 19-2.12. Referral of Application. [Ord. #1650]
The board of adjustment may refer any application to any appropriate
person or agency, including the planning board, for its report, provided that
such reference shall not extend the period of time within which the board of
adjustment shall act.
§ 19-2.13. County Planning Board Approval. [Ord. #1650]
Whenever review or approval of the application by the county planning
board is required by Section 5 of P.L. 1968, C. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3) in the
case of a subdivision or Section 8 of P.L. 1968, C. 285 (N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.6)
in the case of a site plan, the municipal board of adjustment shall condition
any approval that it grants upon timely receipt of a favorable report on
the application by the county planning board or approval by the county
planning board by its failure to report thereon within the required time; in
the case of other variances, the county planning board shall be notified of
§ 19-2.9 GENERAL § 19-2.13
1:603
any application which fronts on an existing or proposed county road, adjoins
other county land or is within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
§ 19-3. PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO BOTH THE PLANNING
BOARD AND ZONING BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
§ 19-3.1. Conflicts of Interest. [Ord. #1650]
No member of the planning board or zoning board of adjustment shall act
on any matter in which he has either directly or indirectly any personal or
financial interest. Whenever any such member shall disqualify himself from
acting on a particular matter, he shall not continue to sit with the board
on the hearing of such matter nor participate in any discussion or decision
relating thereto.
§ 19-3.2. Meetings. [Ord. #1650]
§ 19-3.3. Minutes. [Ord. #1650]
Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include
the names of the persons appearing and addressing the board and of the
persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by the board, the findings, if
any, made by it and reasons therefor. The minutes shall thereafter be made
available for public inspection during normal business hours at the office
of the municipal clerk. Any interested party shall have the right to compel
production of the minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceeding
concerning the subject matter of such minutes. Such interested party may
a. Meetings of both the planning board and the zoning board of
adjustment shall be scheduled no less often than once a month and any
meeting so scheduled shall be held as scheduled unless cancelled for
lack of applications for development to process.
b. Special meetings may be provided for at the call of the chairman or on
the request of any two board members, which shall be held on notice to
its members and the public in accordance with all applicable legal
requirements.
c. No action shall be taken at any meeting without a quorum being
present.
d. All actions shall be taken by majority vote of a quorum except as
otherwise required by any provision of C. 291 Laws of New Jersey 1975.
e. All regular meetings and all special meetings shall be open to the
public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given in accordance with the
requirements of the Open Public Meetings Law, C. 231, Laws of New
Jersey 1975. An executive session for the purpose of discussing and
studying any matters to come before either board shall not be deemed a
regular or special meeting in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:55D-9.
§ 19-2.13 LYNDHURST CODE § 19-3.3
1:604
be charged a fee for reproduction of the minutes for his use as provided for
in the rules of the board.
§ 19-3.4. Fees. [Ord. #1650; Ord. #2352, § IV]
Fees for all applications or for the rendering of any service by the planning
board or board of adjustment or any member of their administrative staff
are adopted as part of the fee schedule adopted by the board of
commissioners. The escrow fees established in subsection 19-1.14 shall
be applicable to all applications before the planning board and board of
adjustment, and shall not be limited to site plan or subdivision applications
only. The fee schedule shall be available to the public.
§ 19-3.5. Hearings. [Ord. #1650]
§ 19-3.6. Notice Requirements for Hearing. [Ord. #1650]
Whenever a hearing is required on an application for development pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq. the applicant shall give notice thereof as follows:
a. Rules. The planning board and zoning board of adjustment may make
rules governing the conduct of hearings before such bodies which rules
shall not be inconsistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
or of this chapter.
b. Oaths. The officer presiding at the hearing or such person as he may
designate shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties,
and the provisions of the "County and Municipal Investigations Law"
P.L. 1953, C. 1938 (N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.) shall apply.
c. Testimony. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for
development shall be taken under oath or affirmation by the presiding
officer and the right of cross examination shall be permitted to all
interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if
not represented subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to
reasonable limitations as to time and number of witnesses.
d. Evidence. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the
hearing, but the board may exclude irrelevant, immaterial or unduly
repetitious evidence.
e. Records. Each board shall provide for the verbatim recording of the
proceedings by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means.
The board shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu
thereof on request to any interested party at his expense.
a. Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of
the municipality at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
§ 19-3.3 GENERAL § 19-3.6
1:605
b. Notice shall be given to the owners of all real property as shown on the
current tax duplicate or duplicates located within 200 feet in all
directions of the property which is the subject of such hearing and
whether located within or without the municipality in which the
applicant's land is located. Such notice shall be given by: (1) serving a
copy thereof on the owner as shown on the current tax duplicate or his
agent in charge of the property or (2) mailing a copy thereof by certified
mail to the property owner at his address as shown on the current tax
duplicate. A return receipt is not required. Notice to a partnership
owner may be made by service upon any partner. Notice to a corporate
owner may be made by service upon its president, a vice president,
secretary or other person authorized by appointment or by law to
accept service on behalf of the corporation.
c. Notice of all hearings on applications for development involving
property located within 200 feet of an adjoining municipality shall be
given by personal service or certified mail to the clerk of such
municipality, which notice shall be in addition to the notice required to
be given pursuant to subsection 19-3.6b to the owners of lands in such
adjoining municipality which are located within 200 feet of the subject
premises.
d. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the county
planning board of a hearing on an application for development of
property adjacent to an existing county road or proposed road shown on
the official county map or on the county master plan, adjoining other
county land or situated within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
e. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Commissioner of Transportation of a hearing on an application for
development of property adjacent to a state highway.
f. Notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail to the
Director of the Division of State and Regional Planning in the
Department of Community Affairs of a hearing on an application for
development of property which exceeds 150 acres or 500 dwelling
units. Such notice shall include a copy of any maps or documents
required to be on file with the township clerk pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-10.
g. All notices hereinabove specified in this section shall be given at least
10 days prior to the date fixed for hearing and the applicant shall file an
affidavit or proof of service with the board holding the hearing on the
application for development.
h. Any notice made by certified mail as hereinabove required shall be
deemed to be complete upon mailing in accordance with the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-14.
i. Form of Notice. All notices required to be given pursuant to the terms of
this chapter shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, the
nature of the matters to be considered and identification of the property
§ 19-3.6 LYNDHURST CODE § 19-3.6
1:606
§ 19-3.7. List of Property Owners Furnished. [Ord. #1650]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12C, the tax assessor of the
township shall within seven days after receipt of a request therefor and
upon receipt of payment of a fee of $10 make and certify a list from
the current tax duplicate of names and addresses of owners to whom
the applicant is required to give notice pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 19-3.8. Decisions. [Ord. #1650]
§ 19-3.9. Publication of Decision. [Ord. #1650]
A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in the official
newspaper of the township. Such publication shall be arranged by the
construction official without separate charge to the applicant. The notice
shall be sent to the official newspaper for publication within 10 days of the
date of any such decision.
§ 19-3.10. Payment of Taxes. [Ord. #1650]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65,
every application for development submitted to the planning board or to
the zoning board of adjustment shall be accompanied by proof that no
taxes or assessments for local improvements are due or delinquent on the
property which is the subject of such application; or, if it is shown that
taxes or assessments are delinquent on the property, any approvals or
other relief granted by either board shall be conditioned upon either the
prompt payment of such taxes or assessments, or the making of adequate
provision for the payment thereof in such manner that the municipality will
be adequately protected.
proposed for development by street address, if any, or by reference to
lot and block numbers as shown on the current tax duplicate in the
municipal tax assessor's office and the location and times at which
any maps and documents for which approval is sought are available as
required by law.
a. Each decision on any application for development shall be set forth in
writing as a resolution of the board which shall include findings of fact
and legal conclusions based thereon.
b. A copy of the decision shall be mailed by the board within 10 days of the
date of decision to the applicant, or if represented, then to his attorney,
without separate charge. A copy of the decision shall also be mailed to
all persons who have requested it and who have paid the fee prescribed
by the board for such service. A copy of the decision shall also be filed in
the office of the township clerk, who shall make a copy of such filed
decision available to any interested party upon payment of a fee
calculated in the same manner as those established for copies of other
public documents in the municipality.
§ 19-3.6 GENERAL § 19-3.11
1:607
§ 19-3.11. Hearings Carried Over; Eligibility of Board Members.
[Ord. #1650]
When any hearing before the planning board or board of adjustment shall
carry over two or more meetings, a member of the board who was absent
for one or more of the meetings shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon
which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his absence from one
or more of the meetings; provided, however, that such board member has
available to him a transcript or recording of the meetings from which he was
absent, and certifies in writing to the board that he had read such transcript
or listened to such recording.
§ 19-4. APPEALS.
§ 19-4.1. Appeals to Zoning Board of Adjustment. [Ord. #1650]
An appeal to the board of adjustment may be taken by any interested party
affected by any decision of the administrative officer of the township based
on or made in the enforcement of the zoning ordinance or official map.
Such appeal shall be taken within 65 days of filing a notice of appeal in
the manner set forth in subsection 19-2.7a, and in accordance with the
provisions of Article 9 of the Municipal Land Use Law of 1975.
§ 19-4.2. Appeals from Zoning Board of Adjustment to Board of
Commissioners. [Ord. #1650]
An appeal from any final decision of the board of adjustment on a use
variance may be taken to the board of commissioners provided such an
appeal shall be made within 10 days of the date of publication of such
decision of the zoning board of adjustment. Such appeal shall be made in
accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17.
§ 19-5. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
§ 19-5.1. Definitions of Terms. [Ord. #1650]
Whenever a term is used in this chapter which is defined in C. 291 Laws of
New Jersey 1975, such term is intended to have the meaning set forth in the
definition of such term found in the statute, unless a contrary intention is
clearly expressed from the context of this chapter.
§ 19-5.2. Repeals. [Ord. #1650]
All sections of the land subdivision ordinance and zoning ordinance, or any
other ordinance of the township which contains provisions contrary to the
provisions of this chapter shall be and are hereby (to the extent of such
inconsistency) repealed.
§ 19-3.11 LYNDHURST CODE § 19-5.3
1:608
§ 19-5.3. Pending Applications. [Ord. #1650]
All applications for development filed prior to the effective date of this
chapter may be continued, but any appeals arising out of decisions made on
any such application shall be governed by the provisions of Section 19-5.
§ 19-5.4. Enforcement. [Ord. #1650]
The board of commissioners shall enforce this chapter and any regulations
made and adopted hereunder. To that end the board of commissioners may
require the issuance of specified permits, certificates or authorizations as a
condition precedent to:
§ 19-5.5. Tolling of Running of Period of Approval. [Ord. #1650]
In the event that, during the period of approval heretofore or hereafter
granted to an application for development, the developer is barred or
prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the development
otherwise permitted under such approval by a legal action instituted by
any state agency, political subdivision or other party to protect the public
health and welfare or by a directive or order issued by any state agency,
political subdivision or court of competent jurisdiction to protect the public
health or welfare and the developer is otherwise ready, willing and able to
proceed with the development, the running of the period of approval under
this chapter or under any ordinance repealed by this chapter, as the case
a. The erection, construction, alteration, repair, remodeling, conversion,
removal or destruction of any building or structure.
b. The use or occupancy of any building, structure or land, and
c. The subdivision or resubdivision of any land; and shall establish an
administrative officer and offices for the purpose of issuing such
permits, certificates or authorizations; and may condition the issuance
of such permits, certificates and authorizations upon the submission of
such data, materials, plans, plats, and information as is authorized
hereunder and upon the express approval of the appropriate state,
county or municipal agencies; and may establish reasonable fees to
cover administrative costs for the issuance of such permits, certificates
and authorizations. In case any building or structure is erected,
constructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any
building, structure or land is used in violation of this chapter or other
regulation made under authority conferred hereby, the proper local
authorities of the municipality or an interested party, in addition to
other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to
prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct
or abate such violation, to prevent the occupancy of the building,
structure or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use
in or about such premises.
§ 19-5.3 GENERAL § 19-5.5
1:609
may be, shall be suspended for the period of time the legal action is pending
or such directive or order is in effect.
§ 19-5.6. Title. [Ord. #1650]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Land Development
Procedures Ordinance of the Township of Lyndhurst."
§ 19-5.7. Effective Date. [Ord. #1650]
This chapter shall take effect on January 1, 1977.
§ 19-5.8. Copy to Be Filed with County Planning Board.
Immediately upon adoption of this chapter, the municipal clerk shall file a
copy of this chapter with the county planning board as required by law.
The clerk shall also file with the county planning board copies of all other
ordinances of the municipality relating to land use, such as the subdivision,
zoning and site plan review ordinance.
§ 19-5.9. (Reserved)38
§ 19-6. APPLICATION CHECKLISTS.
§ 19-6.1. Adoption. [Ord. #2122, § 1]
The purpose of this section is to adopt a checklist outlining the
requirements of submissions of all applications to the planning board and
zoning board of adjustment of the Township of Lyndhurst. Such
requirements shall be necessary to allow the administrative officer to rule
on whether or not an application may be deemed complete and placed on
the respective board's agenda for a hearing.
§ 19-6.2. Submitting Applications. [Ord. #2122, § 2]
a. Every application for development submitted to the Township of
Lyndhurst for review by the planning board or zoning board of
adjustment shall first be submitted to the administrative officer for a
determination as to whether or not the application may be deemed
complete. An application shall be deemed complete by the
administrative officer if such application furnishes all required
information as outlined in the Completion Checklist set forth in
Appendix A.39 In the event that an applicant does not wish to supply all
information as required in the Completion Checklist, applicant must
request that a specific submission requirement be waived. Each
38.Editor’s Note: The fee schedule previously contained herein as adopted by Ordinance No.
1650 was superseded by Ordinance No. 2067. See Chapter 21, subsection 21-11.4 for the
current fee schedule.
39.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included an attachment to this chapter.
§ 19-5.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 19-6.2
1:610
Chapter 20
LAND SUBDIVISION
§ 20-1. TITLE. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as: The Land Subdivision
Ordinance of the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 20-2. PURPOSE. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
The purpose of this chapter shall be to provide rules, regulations and
standards to guide land subdivision in the township in order to promote the
public health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the township. It
shall be administered to insure the orderly growth and development, the
conservation, protection and proper use of the land and adequate provision
for circulation, utilities and services.
§ 20-3. APPROVING AGENCY. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
The approval provisions of the chapter shall be administered by the board
of commissioners after favorable referral by the township planning board in
accordance with Section 15 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of 1953.
§ 20-4. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
As used in this chapter:
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean the lands required for the
installation of storm water sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a
natural stream or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for
the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage in
accordance with Chapter 1 of Title 58 of the Revised Statutes.
FINAL PLAT — Shall mean the final map of all or a portion of the subdivision
which is presented to the planning board for final approval in accordance
applicant shall be entitled to receive a copy of the Completion Checklist
form.
b. The administrative officer shall notify each applicant, in writing, within
45 days of submission of the application, as to whether or not the
application has been deemed complete and/or whether or not the
application is deficient due to applicant's failure to furnish information
as required pursuant to the Completion Checklist.
c. Compliance with the application requirements of this section does not
bar the respective boards from requesting additional relevant data not
already specified herein.
d. Compliance with the application requirements does not in any way
signify approval of the zoning relief requested.
§ 19-6.2 GENERAL § 20-4
1:611
with these regulations, and which, if approved, shall be filed with the proper
county recording officer.
LOT — Shall mean a parcel or portion of land separated from other parcels
or portions by description as on a subdivision or record of survey may or by
metes and bounds for purpose of sale, lease, or separate use.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean all subdivisions not classified as minor
subdivisions.
MASTER PLAN — Shall mean a composite of the mapped and written
proposals recommending the physical development of the municipality
which shall have been duly adopted by the planning board.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — Shall mean any subdivision containing not more
than three lots fronting on an existing minor street, not involving any new
street or road or the extension of municipal facilities and not adversely
affecting the development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining
property and not in conflict with any provision or portion of the master plan,
official map, zoning ordinance or this chapter.
OFFICIAL MAP — Shall mean a map adopted in accordance with the Official
Map and Building Permit Act, Chapter 434 of the laws of 1953, or any
prior act authorizing such adoption. Such a map shall be deemed to be
conclusive with respect to the location and width of the streets, public parks
and playgrounds, and drainage right-of-way shown thereon.
OWNER — Shall mean any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership or corporation having sufficient proprietary interest in the
land sought to be subdivided to commence and maintain proceedings to
subdivide the same under this chapter.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Shall mean any security which may be
accepted in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made before
the planning board or other approving body approves a plat, including
performance bonds, escrow agreements, and other similar collateral or
surety agreements.
PLAT — Shall mean the map of a subdivision.
PRELIMINARY PLAT — Shall mean the preliminary map indicating the
proposed layout of the subdivision which is submitted to the township clerk
for planning board consideration and tentative approval and meeting the
requirements of Section 20-6.
SKETCH PLAT — Shall mean the sketch map of a subdivision of sufficient
accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification and
meeting the requirements of Section 20-6.
STREET — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway,
viaduct, alley or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal
roadway, or a street or way shown upon a plat heretofore approved
pursuant to law or approved by official action or a street or way on a plat
duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior
to the appointment of a planning board and the grant to such board of
§ 20-4 LYNDHURST CODE § 20-4
1:612
the power to review plats, and includes the land between the street lines
whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavements, shoulders,
gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within the street lines.
For the purpose of this chapter streets shall be classified as follows:
SUBDIVIDER — Shall mean any individual, firm, association, syndicate,
copartnership, corporation, trust or any other legal unity commencing
proceedings under this chapter to effect a subdivision of land hereunder for
himself or for another.
SUBDIVISION — Shall mean the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into
two or more lots, sites or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, or sale or building development; except that the
following divisions shall not be considered subdivisions provided, however,
that no new streets or roads are involved: divisions of land for agricultural
purposes where the resulting parcels are three acres or larger in size,
divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions, or upon Court
order. Subdivision also includes resubdivision, and where appropriate to the
context, relates to the process of subdividing or division of property to the
lands or territory divided.
SUBDIVISION COMMITTEE — Shall mean a committee of at least three
planning board members appointed by the chairman of the board for the
purpose of classifying subdivisions in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and such other duties relating to land subdivision which may be
conferred on this committee by the board.
§ 20-5. PROCEDURE.
§ 20-5.1. Submission of Sketch Plat and Exemption. [Ord. #1424,
§ 11]
Arterial streets are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy
traffic.
1.
Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the
major system of arterial streets including the principal entrance streets
of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a
development.
2.
Minor streets are those which are used primarily for access to the
abutting properties.
3.
Marginal access streets are streets which are parallel to and adjacent
to arterial streets and highways; and which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
4.
Alleys are minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service
access to the back of the side of properties otherwise abutting on a
street.
5.
a. Any owner of land within the township shall prior to subdividing or
resubdividing land, as defined in this chapter, submit to the secretary of
§ 20-4 GENERAL § 20-5.1
1:613
§ 20-5.2. Submission of Preliminary Plat of Major Subdivision for
Tentative Approval. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
the planning board (or other designated official) at least two weeks
prior to the regular meeting of the board a sketch plat of the proposed
subdivision for purposes of classification and preliminary discussion.
b. If classified and approved as a minor subdivision by the subdivision
committee a notation to that effect will be made on the sketch plat. The
plat will then be forwarded to the mayor and the township clerk for
their signatures and returned to the subdivider within one week
following the next regular meeting of the governing body. No further
board of commissioners' approval shall be required.
c. Before the township clerk returns any approved sketch plat to the
subdivider, the clerk shall have sufficient copies made to furnish one
copy to each of the following:
1. Township clerk.
2. Township engineer.
3. Construction official or zoning officer.
4. Tax assessor.
5. Secretary of the planning board.
6. County planning board.
The cost of the copies will be charged to the subdivider and shall
be collected before the return of the original sketch plat to the
subdivider.
d. Either a deed description or plat map drawn in compliance with
Chapter 358 of the Laws of 1953 shall be filed by the subdivider with
the county recording officer within 90 days from the date of return of
the approved sketch plat.
e. If the plat is classified as a major subdivision, a notation to that effect
shall be made on the plat which will be returned to the subdivider for
compliance with the procedure in subsections 20-5.2 and 20-5.3.
f. Any subdivision which provides for only one new lot, site, or division of
land or which provides for the transfer of a part of one lot, tract or
parcel of land to become a part of an adjacent lot, tract or parcel of
land, shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. In all cases
involving such an exempted subdivision, the mayor and township clerk
shall certify the exemption on the plat, deed or instruments to be filed
with the county recording officer.
a. At least eight black on white prints of the preliminary plat together with
four completed application forms for preliminary approval shall be
§ 20-5.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 20-5.2
1:614
submitted to the township clerk two weeks prior to the planning board
meeting at which consideration is desired.
b. The applicant for a subdivision shall notify by mail at least five days
prior to the hearing all property owners within 200 feet of the extreme
limits of the subdivision as their names appear on the municipal tax
record. The notice shall state time and place of hearing, a brief
description of the subdivision and that a copy of the subdivision has
been filed with the township clerk for public inspection. The applicant
shall also cause notice of the hearing to be published in the official
newspaper or a newspaper of general circulation in the township at
least 10 days prior to the hearing. Proofs of such mailing and publishing
shall be filed with the secretary of the planning board not later than the
day of such hearing.
c. Copies of the preliminary plat shall be forwarded by the secretary of the
planning board prior to the hearing to the following persons:
1. Secretary of county planning board.
2. Township engineer.
3. Secretary of board of health.
4. Such other municipal, county or state officials as directed by the
planning board.
d. The planning board shall act on the preliminary plat within 90 days
after submission to the township clerk, but in no case before the
expiration of the twenty-day period within which the county planning
board may submit a report on the subdivision. In all cases the
recommendations of the county board shall be given careful
consideration in the final decision of the local planning board. If the
county planning board has approval authority pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:27-12, its action shall be noted on the plat, and if disapproved, two
copies of the reasons for disapproval shall be returned with the plat. If
either the planning board or county planning board disapprove a plat,
the reasons for disapproval shall be remedied prior to further
consideration. The person submitting a plat shall be notified of the
action of the planning board within 90 days of its submission. If
approval is required by any other officer or public body, the same
procedure as applies to submission and approval by the county
planning board shall apply.
e. If the planning board acts favorably on a preliminary plat, a notation to
that effect shall be made on the plat and it shall be referred to the board
of commissioners for action. The board of commissioners shall act
within 30 days. Its action shall be noted on the plat, signed by the
mayor and be returned to the subdivider for compliance with final
approval requirements.
§ 20-5.2 GENERAL § 20-5.2
1:615
§ 20-5.3. Improvements or Guarantees Prior to Final Approval.
[Ord. #1424, § 11]
Before consideration of a final subdivision plat, the subdivider will have
installed the improvements required under Section 20-7 or the planning
board shall require the posting of adequate performance guarantees to
assure the installation of the required improvements.
§ 20-5.4. Submission of Final Plat of Major Subdivision; Fees. [Ord.
#1424, § 11]
f. Preliminary approval shall confer upon the applicant the following
rights for a three-year period from the date of approval:
1. That the general terms and conditions under which the preliminary
approval was granted will not be changed.
2. That the applicant may submit on or before the expiration date the
whole or part or parts of the plat for final approval.
a. The final plat shall be submitted to the township clerk for forwarding to
the planning board for final approval within three years from the date of
preliminary approval. The township clerk shall immediately notify the
secretary of the planning board upon receipt of a final plat and the
planning board shall act upon the final plat within 45 days after the date
of submission for final approval to the township clerk.
b. The original tracing, one translucent tracing cloth copy, two cloth
prints, six black on white prints and four copies of the application form
for final approval shall be submitted to the secretary of the planning
board at least five days prior to the date of a regular planning board
meeting. Unless the preliminary plat is approved without changes, the
final plat shall have incorporated all changes or modifications required
by the planning board.
c. The final plat shall be accompanied by a statement by the township
engineer that he is in receipt of a map showing all utilities in exact
location and elevation identifying those portions already installed and
those to be installed and that the subdivider has complied with one or
both of the following:
1. Installed all improvements in accordance with the requirements of
those regulations, or,
2. A performance guarantee has been posted with the municipal clerk
in sufficient amount to assure the completion of all required
improvements.
d. Any plat which requires county planning board approval pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:27-12 shall be forwarded to the county planning board for its
action prior to final approval by the board of commissioners.
§ 20-5.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 20-5.4
1:616
e. If the planning board favorably refers a final plat to the board of
commissioners, the board of commissioners shall take action not later
than the second regular meeting following the referral, noting its action
on the plat, and the mayor affixing his signature thereto if the action is
favorable.
f. Failure of the planning board and board of commissioners to act within
the allotted time or a mutually agreed upon extension shall be deemed
to be favorable approval and the township clerk shall issue a certificate
to that effect.
g. If any person shall be aggrieved by the action of the planning board,
appeal in writing to the board of commissioners may be taken within 10
days after the date of the action of the planning board. A hearing
thereon shall be had on notice to all parties in interest, who shall be
afforded an opportunity to be heard. After such hearing the board of
commissioners may affirm or reverse the action of the planning board
by a recorded vote of a majority of the total members thereof. The
findings and reasons for the disposition of the appeal shall be stated on
the records of the board of commissioners and the applying party shall
be given a copy.
h. Upon final approval, copies of the final plat shall be filed by the
planning board with the following:
1. Township clerk.
2. Township engineer.
3. Construction official.
4. Tax assessor.
5. County planning board.
6. Official issuing certificates for approved lots.
i. The final plat, after final approval, shall be filed by the subdivider with
the county recording officer within 90 days from the date of such
approval. If any final plat is not filed within this period the approval
shall expire.
j. No plat shall be accepted for filing by the county recording officer
unless it has been duly approved by the board of commissioners of the
township and signed by the mayor.
k. The following filing fees shall be deposited with the township clerk to
cover the cost of processing subdivision plats:
1. Minor subdivisions - a fee of $25.
2. Exempt subdivisions - a fee of $25.
3. Major subdivisions - a fee of $250.
§ 20-5.4 GENERAL § 20-6
1:617
§ 20-6. PLAT DETAILS.
§ 20-6.1. Sketch Plat. [Ord. #1424, § 11; Ord. #1484, § 2]
The sketch plat shall be based on tax map information or some other
similarly accurate base at a scale of 200 feet to the inch 200 feet = one
inch to enable the entire tract to be shown on one sheet and shall show or
include the following information:
§ 20-6.2. Preliminary Plat. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn or reproduced at a
scale of not less than one-inch equals 200 feet. Preliminary plats shall be
designed and drawn by a civil engineer or land surveyor licensed to practice
as such by the State of New Jersey. The plat shall be designed in compliance
with the provisions of Section 20-6 and shall show or be accompanied by the
following information:
a. The location of that portion which is to be subdivided in relation to the
entire tract.
b. All existing structures within 200 feet thereof.
c. The name of the owner and of all adjoining property owners as
disclosed by the most recent municipal tax records.
d. The tax map sheet, block and lot numbers.
e. All streets or roads and streams within 500 feet of the subdivision.
a. A key map at 1/4 scale of the plat showing the subdivision and its
relation to surrounding areas for an entire depth of 400 feet from the
boundary of the subdivision.
b. The tract name, tax map sheet, block and lot number, date, reference
meridian, graphic scale and the following names and addresses:
1. Name and address of record owner or owners.
2. Name and address of the subdivider.
3. Name and address of person who prepared map.
c. Acreage of tract to be subdivided calculated to nearest tenth of an acre.
d. Sufficient elevations or contours to determine the general slope and
natural drainage of the land and the high and low points and tentative
cross-sections and center line profiles for all proposed new streets.
e. The location of existing and proposed property lines, streets, buildings,
watercourses, railroads, bridges, culverts, drain pipes, and any natural
features such as wooded areas and rock formations.
§ 20-6 LYNDHURST CODE § 20-6.2
1:618
§ 20-6.3. Final Plat. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
The final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth at a scale of not less than
one inch equals 40 feet and in compliance with all the provisions of Chapter
358 of the Laws of 1953. The final plat shall show or be accompanied by the
following:
f. Plans of proposed utility layouts (sewers, storm drains, water, gas, and
electricity) showing feasible connections to existing or any proposed
utility systems. When an individual water supply and/or sewage
disposal system is proposed, the plan for such system must be approved
by the appropriate local, county or state health agency. When a public
sewage disposal system is not available, the developer shall have
percolation tests made and submit the results with the preliminary plat.
Any subdivision or part thereof which does not meet with the
established requirements of this chapter or other applicable regulations
shall not be approved. Any remedy proposed to overcome such a
situation shall first be approved by the appropriate local, county or
state agency.
g. A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying to the
land being subdivided shall be submitted with the preliminary plat.
a. Date, name and location of the subdivision, name of owner, graphic
scale and reference meridian.
b. Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, street names,
easements and other rights-of-way, land to be reserved or dedicated to
public use, all lot lines and other site lines; with accurate dimensions,
bearings or deflection angles, and radii, arcs, and central angles of all
curves.
c. The purpose of any easement or land reserved or dedicated to public
use shall be designated, and the proposed use of sites other than
residential shall be noted.
d. Each block shall be numbered, and the lots within each block shall be
numbered consecutively beginning with number one.
e. Minimum building set-back-line on all lots and other sites in conformity
with zoning regulations.
f. Location and description of all monuments.
g. Names of owners of adjoining unsubdivided land.
h. Certification by a New Jersey licensed engineer or surveyor as to the
accuracy of details of the plat.
i. Certification that the applicant is agent or owner of the land, or that the
owner has given consent under an option agreement.
§ 20-6.2 GENERAL § 20-6.3
1:619
§ 20-7. IMPROVEMENTS.
§ 20-7.1. General Design and Provisions. [Ord. #1424, § 11; Ord.
#2557, § 2]
Prior to the granting of final approval, the subdivider shall have installed or
shall have furnished performance guarantees for the ultimate installation of
the following:
j. When approval of a plat is required by any officer or body of such a
municipality, county or state, approval shall be certified on the plat.
k. Cross sections and profiles of streets, approved by the municipal
engineer shall be required to accompany the final plat.
l. Contours at five-foot intervals for slopes averaging 10% or greater and
at two-foot intervals for land of lesser slope.
m. Plans and profiles of storm and sanitary sewers and water mains.
n. Certificate from tax collector that all taxes are paid to date.
o. Formal releases, in the form required by law for filing with the county
clerk, duly executed by holders of any encumbrances or liens of any
lands to be reserved or dedicated to public use.
a. Streets. Arterial streets shall be eight inches deep and shall be
constructed as follows:
1. Base course shall consist of four inches of compacted 2 1/2 inch
crushed trap rock which shall be bound with dust.
2. Intermediate course shall be two inches of compacted 1 1/2 inch
crushed trap rock and shall be penetrated with one and seventenths
gallons per square yard of OA-4 Asphalt Road Oil. Voids shall
be filled with a light cover of five-eighths inch crushed trap rock.
3. Surface course shall be two inches of compacted bituminous
concrete, hot mixed. Bituminous concrete shall be of type SM-1 as
set forth in the New Jersey State Highway Standard Specifications
dated 1941 or equal. Streets other than arterial streets shall be
seven inches deep and of a type known as bituminous penetration
macadam. Pavement shall consist of a four-inch base course of
compacted 2 1/2 inch crushed trap rock bound with dust and a
three inch surface course of compacted 1 1/2 inch crushed trap
rock penetrated with between 2 1/2 to three gallons of road oil per
square yard. Road oil to be applied in three applications with voids
to be filled with five-eighths inch, three-eighths inch, and onequarter
inch crushed trap rock successively.
b. Street Signs. To conform with the type, style and quality of those in use.
§ 20-6.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 20-7.1
1:620
§ 20-7.2. Submission to Planning Board; Performance Guarantee.
[Ord. #1424, § 11; Ord. #1484, § 3]
No final plat shall be approved by the planning board until the completion
of all such required improvements has been certified to the planning board
by the township engineer, unless the subdivision owner shall have filed with
the township a performance guarantee sufficient in amount to cover the
cost of all such improvements or uncompleted portions thereof as estimated
by the township engineer, and assuring the installation of such uncompleted
improvements on or before an agreed date. Such performance guarantee
may be in the form of a performance bond which shall be issued by a
bonding or surety company approved by the board of commissioners; a
certified check, returnable to the subdivider after full compliance; or any
other type of surety approved by the township attorney.
The performance guarantee shall be approved by the township attorney
as to form, sufficiency and execution. Such performance guarantee shall
c. Curbs. Curbs shall be constructed of concrete having a composition of
one part best quality Portland cement, two parts of clean sharp sand,
and three parts of machine broken trap rock. Curbs shall be six inches
wide at top, nine inches wide at bottom, and 20 inches deep.
d. Sidewalks. The standards, regulations, and requirements for the
installation, construction, reconstruction, and replacement of sidewalks
are set forth in subsection 14-1.9 of the township ordinance.
e. Street Lighting. To conform with good practice and the rules of the
utility company making the installation.
f. Shade Trees. To be located and of size and shall be of species approved
by the director of public works or the shade tree commission.
g. Top Soil Protection. No top soil shall be removed from the site or used
as spoil. Top soil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed so as to provide at least six inches of cover to all areas of
the subdivision and shall be stabilized by seeding or planting.
h. Monuments. To be the size and shape required by Section 4 of Chapter
358 of the Laws of 1953, and shall be placed in accordance with the
statute.
i. Water Mains, Culverts, Storm Sewers and Sanitary Sewers. All such
installments shall be properly connected with an approved system and
shall be adequate to handle all present and probable future
development.
All of the above listed improvements shall be subject to inspection
and approval by the township engineer who shall be notified by the
developer at least 24 hours prior to the start of construction. No
underground installation shall be covered until inspected and
approved.
§ 20-7.1 GENERAL § 20-7.2
1:621
run for a period to be fixed by the planning board but, in no case, for a
term of more than three years. However with the consent of the owner and
the surety company, if there be one, the board of commissioners may, by
resolution, extend the term of such performance guarantee for an additional
period not to exceed three years.
The amount of the performance guarantee may be reduced by the board of
commissioners by resolution when portions of the required improvements
have been installed.
If the required improvements have not been installed in accordance with
the performance guarantee, the obligor and surety company shall be liable
thereon to the township for the reasonable cost of the improvement not
installed and upon receipt of the proceeds thereof the township shall install
such improvements.
No final plat shall be approved until the applicant shall have deposited
with the township a cash performance bond in an amount of 100% of the
cost of the construction of the improvements as estimated by the township
engineer, together with a fee of 7% of the estimated cost of construction as
estimated by the township engineer, to cover the expenses incurred by the
township for legal services and engineering services in connection with the
inspection and certification of improvements within the development.
§ 20-8. DESIGN STANDARDS.
§ 20-8.1. Requirements and Principles. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
§ 20-8.2. Streets. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
a. General. The subdivision plat shall conform to design standards that
will encourage good development patterns within the township. Where
either or both an official map or master plan has or have been adopted,
the subdivision shall conform to the proposals and conditions shown
thereon. The streets, drainage rights-of-way, school sites, public parks
and playgrounds shown on an officially adopted master plan or official
map shall be considered in approval of subdivision plats. Where no
master plan or official map exists, streets and drainage rights-of-way
shall be shown on the final plat in accordance with Section 20 of
Chapter 433 of Laws of 1953 and shall be such as to lend themselves to
the harmonious development of the township and enhance the public
welfare in accordance with the following standards.
a. The arrangement of streets now shown on the master plan or official
map shall be such as to provide for the appropriate extension of existing
streets.
b. Minor streets shall be so designed as to discourage through traffic.
c. Subdivisions abutting arterial streets shall provide a marginal service
road or reverse frontage with a buffer strip for planting, or some other
§ 20-7.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 20-8.2
1:622
means of separation of through and local traffic as the planning board
may determine appropriate.
d. The right-of-way width shall be measured from lot line to lot line and
shall not be less than the following:
1. Arterial streets 80 feet.
2. Collector streets 60 feet.
3. Minor streets 50 feet.
4. Marginal access streets 40 feet.
5. The right-of-way width for internal roads and alleys in multi-family,
commercial and industrial developments shall be determined on an
individual basis, and shall in all cases be of sufficient width and
design to safely accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and
loading needs and maximum access for fire fighting equipment.
e. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall
be approved.
f. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform
to widths as shown on the master plan or official map or the street
width requirement of this chapter shall dedicate additional width along
either one or both sides of the road. If the subdivision is along one side
only, one-half of the required extra width shall be dedicated.
g. Grades of arterial and collector streets shall not exceed 4%. Grades on
other streets shall not exceed 10%. No streets shall have a minimum
grade of less than 1/2 of 1%.
h. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and
in no case shall be less than 60°. The block corners at intersections
shall be rounded at the curb line with a curve having a radius of not less
than 20 feet.
i. Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
prohibited.
j. A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse
curves on arterial and collector streets.
k. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at any one point
by more than 10° and not more than 45°, they shall be connected by a
curve with a radius of not less than 100 feet for minor streets and 300
feet for arterial and collector streets.
l. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient
radius to provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.
§ 20-8.2 GENERAL § 20-8.2
1:623
§ 20-8.3. Blocks. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
§ 20-8.4. Lots. [Ord. #1424, § 11; Ord. #2567, § 2]
m. Dead-end streets (culs-de-sac) shall not be longer than 600 feet and
shall provide a turn around at the end with a radius of not less than 50
feet and tangent whenever possible to the right side of the street.
If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turn around shall
be provided and provisions made for future extension of the street and
reversion of the excess right-of-way to the adjoining properties.
n. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate
as to be confused with the names of existing streets. The continuation
of an existing street shall have the same name.
a. Block length and width or acreage within bounding roads shall be such
as to accommodate the size of lot required in the area by the zoning
ordinance and to provide for convenient access, circulation control and
safety of street traffic.
b. In blocks over 1,000 feet long, pedestrian crosswalks may be required
in locations deemed necessary by the planning board. Such walkway
shall be 10 feet wide and be straight from street to street.
c. For commercial, group housing or industrial use, block size shall be
sufficient to meet all area and yard requirements for such use.
a. Lot dimensions and area shall not be less than the requirements of the
zoning ordinance.
b. Insofar as is practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight
streets, and radial to curved streets.
c. Each lot must front upon an approved street at least 60 feet in width
except lots fronting on streets described in this subsection, paragraphs
b and d.
d. Where extra width has been dedicated for widening of existing streets,
lots shall begin at such extra width line, and all setbacks shall be
measured from such line.
e. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their
intended use due to factors such as rock formations, flood conditions or
similar circumstances the planning board may, after adequate
investigation, withhold approval of such lots.
f. No subdivision shall be permitted for a lot upon which a two family
dwelling is located that would result in dimensions of less than 55 feet
in width and frontage, 100 feet in depth, and 5,500 square feet in area.
No subdivision shall be permitted for a lot upon which a one family
dwelling is located that would result in dimensions of less than 50 feet
of frontage and width, 100 feet in depth, and 5,000 square feet in area.
§ 20-8.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 20-8.5
1:624
§ 20-8.5. Public Use and Service Areas. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
§ 20-8.6. Recycling Facilities in New Multifamily Housing Facilities.
[Ord. #2245, §§ 1 - 7]
a. In large scale development, easements along rear property lines or
elsewhere for utility installation may be required. Such easements shall
be at least 15 feet wide and located in consultation with the companies
or municipal departments concerned.
b. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way,
channel or street, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or
drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose.
c. Natural features such as trees, brooks, hilltops, and views shall be
preserved whenever possible in designing any subdivision containing
such features.
a. Definitions as used in this paragraph:
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean a building
containing three or more dwelling units occupied or intended to be
occupied by persons living independently of each other, or a group of
such buildings;
RECYCLING AREA — Shall mean space allocated for collection and
storage of source separated recyclable materials.
b. Required. There shall be included in any new multifamily housing
development that requires subdivision or site plan approval an indoor
or outdoor recycling area for the collection and storage of residentially
generated recyclable materials. The dimensions of the recycling area
shall be sufficient to accommodate recycling bins or containers which
are of adequate size and number, and which are consistent with
anticipated usage and with current methods of collection in the area in
which the project is located. The dimensions of the recycling area and
the bins or containers shall be determined in consultation with the
district recycling coordinator, and shall be consistent with the district
recycling plan adopted pursuant to section 3 of P.L. 1987, c. 192
(N.J.S.A. 13:1E-99.13) and any applicable requirements of the municipal
master plan, adopted pursuant to section 26 of P.L. 1987, c. 102.
c. Location. The recycling area shall be conveniently located for all
residential disposition of source separated recyclable materials,
preferably near, but clearly separated from, a refuse dumpster.
d. Accessibility. The recycling area shall be well lit, and shall be safely and
easily accessible by recycling personnel and vehicles. Collection
vehicles shall be able to access the recycling area without interference
from parked cars or other obstacles. Reasonable measures shall be
§ 20-8.5 GENERAL § 20-8.6
1:625
§ 20-9. ADMINISTRATION. [Ord. #1424, § 11]
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum
requirements for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the township. Any action taken by the board of
commissioners and the planning board under the terms of this chapter
shall give primary consideration to the above mentioned matters and to the
welfare of the entire community. However, if the subdivider or his agent
can clearly demonstrate that, because of peculiar conditions pertaining
to his land, the literal enforcement of one or more of these regulations
is impracticable or will exact undue hardship, the planning board may
permit such variance or variances as may be reasonable within the general
purpose and intent of the rules, regulations and standards established by
this chapter.
§ 20-10. PENALTY. [Ord. #1424, § 11; New]
If, before favorable referral and final approval has been obtained, any
person transfers or sells or agrees to sell, as owner or agent, any land which
forms a part of a subdivision on which by ordinance, the planning board and
the board of commissioners is required to act, such person shall be subject
to the penalty as stated in Chapter 3, § 3-1, and each parcel, plot or lot so
disposed of shall be deemed a separate violation.
In addition to the foregoing, if the streets in the subdivision are not such
that a structure on the land in the subdivision would meet requirements for
a building permit under Section 3 of the Official Map and Building Permit
Act (Chapter 424 of the Laws of 1953) the municipality may institute and
maintain a civil action:
taken to protect the recycling area, and the bins or containers placed
therein, against theft of recyclable materials, bins or containers.
e. Bins and Containers. The recycling area or the bins or containers
placed therein shall be designed so as to provide protection against
adverse environmental conditions which might render the collected
materials unmarketable. Any bins or containers which are used for the
collection of recyclable papers or cardboard, and which are located in
an outdoor recycling area, shall be equipped with a lid, or otherwise
covered, so as to keep the paper or cardboard dry.
f. Signs. Signs clearly identifying the recycling area and the materials
accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of access to the
recycling area. Individual bins or containers shall be equipped with
signs indicating the materials to be placed therein.
g. Landscaping and/or Fencing. Landscaping and/or fencing shall be
provided around any outdoor recycling area and shall be developed in
an aesthetically pleasing manner.
a. For injunctive relief.
§ 20-8.6 LYNDHURST CODE § 20-10
1:626
Chapter 21
ZONING
[Editor's Note: Zoning Ordinance Nos. 1564, 1592, 1654, 1669, 1711,
1745, 1828, 1964, 1976, 1981, 2012, 2047 and §§ I and II of 2051
previously codified herein were superseded in their entirety by
Ordinance #2067.]
§ 21-1. PURPOSES.
§ 21-1.1. Short Title. [Ord. No. 2067]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Zoning Ordinance of
the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 21-1.2. Purposes. [Ord. No. 2067]
A comprehensive zoning plan for the township which is set forth in the
text, maps and schedule that constitute this chapter is adopted for the
purposes set forth in Section N.J.S.A. 40:55D-2 and more particularly for
the protection and promotion of the public health, safety and welfare in the
following manner.
b. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a
contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued in
accordance with Section 24 of Chapter 433 of the Laws of 1953.
In any such action the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled
to a lien upon the portion of the land from which the subdivision was
made that remains in the possession of the subdivider or his assigns
or successors, to secure the return of any deposit made or purchase
price paid, and also a reasonable search fee, survey expense and title
closing expense, if any. Any such action must be brought within two
years after the date of the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale
or conveyance of the land, or within six years if unrecorded.
a. Guiding the future growth and development of the township in
accordance with a comprehensive plan of land use as set forth in the
master plan of the township which represents the most beneficial,
economically productive, and socially satisfactory relationships among
the residential, commercial and industrial areas within the township,
having regard to their suitability for the various uses appropriate to
each of them and their potentiality for such uses, as indicated by
existing conditions and trends in population, in building development,
and in economic activity, considering such conditions and trends both
within the township and with respect to its relation to adjacent areas.
b. Protecting and conserving the value of land throughout the township
and the value of buildings appropriate to the various districts
established by this chapter.
§ 20-10 GENERAL § 21-1.2
1:627
§ 21-2. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
§ 21-2.1. Districts Listed. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No. 2486, § I; Ord.
No. 2522, § I; Ord. No. 2534, § 1; amended 1-16-2018 by Ord. No.
2982-17]
For the purpose of this chapter, the township is hereby divided into classes
of districts as follows:
R-A - One Family Residence
R-B - One and Two Family Residence
R-C - Multi-Family Residential
B - Business
M-1 - Light Industrial
M-2 - Heavy Industrial
C-GI - Commercial - General Industrial
SHRC - Senior Housing and Residential - Commercial
BR - Business Restaurant Overlay Zone
§ 21-2.2. District Boundaries. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No. 2486, § I;
Ord. No. 2589, § 1]
The districts are bounded and defined as shown on a map entitled, "Zoning
Map of the Township of Lyndhurst, N.J." revised July 12, 1988, which map
shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the township clerk, which map
accompanies and which, with all explanatory matter thereon is hereby made
a part of this chapter.40
c. Assuring a harmonious relationship among the various districts
established by this chapter minimizing such conflicts among uses in
connection with the orderly development or redevelopment of various
use districts.
d. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which
will promote the free flow of traffic while discouraging locations of such
facilities and routes which result in congestion or blight.
e. Aiding in providing a guide for public policy and action in the efficient
provision of public facilities and services, and for private enterprise in
building development, investment and other economic activity relating
to the uses of land and buildings throughout the township.
f. Bringing about the gradual conformity of the uses of land and buildings
throughout the township to the comprehensive zoning plan as set forth
in this chapter.
40.Editor’s Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 21-1.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-2.2
1:628
§ 21-2.3. Rules for Interpretation of District Boundaries. [Ord. No.
2067]
§ 21-3. APPLICATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS. [Ord. No. 2067]
Except as hereinafter provided:
a. Amendments.
1. SHRC - Block 170, Lots 1, 2, 3, 1.01 and 3.01.
2. All of the lots situated on the north side of New York Avenue
between the intersection of the said New York Avenue with the
westerly sideline of Ridge Road to and including the intersection of
the said New York Avenue with the easterly sideline of Lafayette
Place shall be rezoned from B (Business) use to R-B (Two Family
Residential) use.
b. The Business Restaurant Overlay Zone shall include all properties
situated along Stuyvesant Avenue, specifically between the
northernmost intersection with Court Avenue and the northernmost
intersection with Tontine Avenue, having any portion of a parcel of land
adjacent to Stuyvesant Avenue, and located in the Business Zone.
[Added 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2982-17]
a. Where a boundary line is shown as approximately following the center
line of a street or highway, a street line or highway right-of-way line,
such center line, street line or right-of-way line shall be construed to be
such boundary. The boundary line will be changed automatically
whenever the center line, street line or highway right-of-way line is
changed, provided that the change does not exceed 20 feet.
b. Where a boundary line is shown as following a lot line, such lot line shall
be construed to be the boundary.
c. Where a boundary line is shown as following a railroad line, such
boundary shall be deemed to be located as the center line of such
railroad line easement, right-of-way, property, etc.
d. Where a district boundary line is shown as approximately following the
township limits, such boundary shall be construed to be the township
limits.
e. Where a boundary line follows a stream, such boundary shall be
deemed to be the center line of the stream. For any lake, pond,
reservoir, river or other body of water, the regulations of the district in
which they are located shall apply.
f. Where a boundary line is shown as approximately parallel to a street,
highway, stream, or railroad line, such boundary shall be construed as
being parallel thereto and at such distance from the center line thereof
as indicated on the zoning map.
§ 21-2.2 GENERAL § 21-3
1:629
a. No land or building hereafter shall be used, occupied, erected, moved
or altered unless in conformity with the regulations hereinafter
specified for the district in which it is located.
b. No building shall hereafter be erected or altered:
1. To exceed the height limit;
2. To exceed the floor area ratio;
3. To occupy a greater percentage of lot area;
4. To accommodate or house a greater number of families; or
5. To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards or side yards,
than is specified for the district in which such building is located.
c. No part of a yard or other open space required for any building for the
purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be
included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for
another building.
d. No lot shall be reduced in area that it does not meet the area
requirements or that any required open space will be smaller than
prescribed in the Schedule of Regulations, Section 21-6, (which
schedule accompanies, and which is made a part of this chapter), for
the district in which the lot is located. Yards or lots created after July 1,
1988 shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this
chapter.
e. Off-street parking space and off-street loading space shall be provided
as specified in this chapter and shall be provided with necessary
passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto and giving access
thereto. All such parking space and loading space, together with such
passageways and driveways, shall be deemed to be required space on
the lot on which the same is situated and shall not thereafter be
encroached on or reduced in any manner except as otherwise provided
in this chapter.
f. No off-street parking or loading space required for one building or use
shall be included as meeting, in whole or part, the off-street parking or
loading space required for another building or use.
g. No off-street parking or loading and unloading space shall be so
reduced in area that it does not meet the requirements of Section 21-8.
h. Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in the plans,
construction or designated use of a building complying with existing
law, a permit for which shall have been issued and the construction of at
least the foundation or slab of the building shall have been started
before the date of final adoption of this ordinance, which date is June
14, 1988.
§ 21-3 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-3
1:630
§ 21-4. DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
§ 21-4.1. Uses Permitted in Any District. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord.
#2434, § I]
i. Marijuana facilities. [Added 12-19-2018 by Ord. No. 3009-18]
1. In every zoning district referred to in this chapter, no land or
building shall be:
(a) Used or allowed to be used for the growing, cultivating,
processing, storing, transporting, or selling of recreational
and/or medicinal marijuana, its derivatives or agents; and/or
(b) The manufacture, distribution, storing or transporting of
paraphernalia that facilitates the use of recreational and/or
medicinal marijuana; and/or
(c) The distribution or sale of recreational and/or medicinal
marijuana to retail and/or wholesale stores; and/or
(d) The manufacture, storage, and/or transportation of any and all
recreational and/or medicinal marijuana products,
manufacturing facilities, retail and wholesale recreational and/
or medicinal marijuana products, retail and wholesale
recreational and/or medicinal marijuana testing facilities, and
the operation of retail and wholesale recreational and/or
medicinal marijuana social clubs.
2. All activities related to the above-mentioned retail and wholesale
uses, such as, but not limited to, cultivation, possession, extraction,
manufacturing, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling,
transporting, delivering, dispensing, transferring and distributing
of recreational and/or medicinal marijuana, are expressly
prohibited within the Township. The foregoing shall not be
construed to limit any privileges or rights of a qualifying patient or
primary caregiver pursuant to the New Jersey Compassionate Use
Medical Marijuana Act, N.J.S.A. 24:61-1.
3. Fines and penalties. The maximum penalty for violation of any
provision of this Subsection i shall, upon conviction, be a fine not
exceeding $2,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90
days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, at the
discretion of the Municipal Court Judge.
a. The following uses may be established in any district:
1. Public parks and playgrounds, together with recreational,
administrative and service buildings appurtenant thereto.
2. Firehouses and other governmental functions.
§ 21-3 GENERAL § 21-4.1
1:631
§ 21-4.2. Uses Permitted in an R-A District. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No.
2340, § I; Ord. No. 2690, § 2; Ord. No. 2833-12; Ord. No. 2913-15
§ 2]
3. Public and private elementary and secondary schools, in
accordance with the following requirements:
(a) Such use shall be subject to site plan review and approval.
(b) Lot area. Minimum lot area shall be 1 1/2 acres.
(c) Frontage. Minimum street frontage shall be 200 feet.
(d) Front yard. Minimum front yard depth shall be 100 feet.
(e) Side yards. Minimum side yard shall be 50 feet each.
(f) Rear yard. Minimum rear yard depth shall be 100 feet.
(g) Height. No building shall exceed the height limit permitted in
the zone district in which it is located.
(h) Floor area ratio. The building floor area ratio shall not exceed
.25 of the lot area.
(i) Impervious coverage. The impervious coverage shall not
exceed 70% of the lot area.
(j) Parking. All parking shall be located in the rear or side yards,
at a minimum of 25 feet from any property line, and shall be
screened from view from adjacent properties.
4. Any agricultural or horticultural use not involving the raising,
keeping of poultry or livestock or the erection or alteration of
commercial greenhouses.
5. Places of worship including parish house, rectory, parsonage,
convent and other religious buildings provided the principal and
accessory buildings conform to the minimum area and bulk
requirements for a one-family dwelling in an R District and further
conform to the minimum requirements for off-street parking as
established in Section 21-8.
6. Customary accessory uses as limited by subsection 21-5.2.
7. Satellite earth stations as a conditional use under conditions set
forth by Section 21-17.
a. Uses Allowed by Right.
1. Single family homes, not to exceed one such dwelling on each lot.
2. Accessory use as further defined in subsection 21-5.2.
§ 21-4.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-4.2
1:632
3. Community residence for the developmentally disabled and
community shelter for victims of domestic violence as defined by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1 for not more than six persons exclusive of
resident staff.
4. A professional office shall be permitted as conditional uses
provided that:
(a) The use is carried on wholly within the completely enclosed
building; and
(b) Not more than 50% of the floor space is devoted to the
professional office with the remaining 50% to be devoted for
residential use; and
(c) One off-street parking space shall be provided for every 300
square feet of usable office area.
(d) There shall be no exterior storage of materials and equipment;
and
(e) Such professional office must be in keeping with the residential
character of the neighborhood and shall not materially
depreciate property values in the immediate area.
(f) There can be no more than two principal uses associated with
the property in question, i.e., professional office and residence.
A professional occupation includes, but is not limited to,
architect, artist, accountant, contractor, dentist, surgeon or
physician, chiropractor, engineer, land surveyor, and lawyer. A
professional occupation for purposes of this section, does not
include but is not limited to the occupation of cabinet making
and furniture repair work, musician, real estate agent or
broker, construction trades which include on site work areas,
an animal hospital or kennel, an automotive repair shop, a
barber shop, a restaurant, tearoom or tavern, a store,
mortuary, limousine and livery services, or other similar uses.
Also for purposes of this section, a professional office does not
include any hospital, clinic, or outpatient treatment center. If
the professional office to be located in a home is not stated as
permitted, then it is prohibited. [Ord. No. 2913-15 § 2]
b. Conditional Uses. Conditional uses allowed, subject to approval by the
planning board.
1. Nonprofit clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations.
2. Community residences for the developmentally disabled and
victims of domestic violence as defined by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1 for
more than six residents excluding resident staff subject to
provisions of subsection 21-5.12.
§ 21-4.2 GENERAL § 21-4.3
1:633
§ 21-4.3. Uses Permitted in R-B District. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No.
2567, § 3]
§ 21-4.4. Uses Permitted in R-C District. [Ord. No. 2067]
a. Uses Allowed by Right.
1. All uses allowed in the R-A District.
2. Two-family homes, not exceeding one such building on each lot.
b. Conditional Uses. Conditional uses allowed subject to approval by the
planning board.
1. All conditional uses allowed in the R-A District.
a. Uses Allowed by Right.
1. All uses allowed in the R-B District.
2. Multi-family dwellings subject to the special provisions listed in
subsection 21-4.4c.
b. Conditional Uses. Conditional uses allowed subject to approval by the
planning board:
1. Nursery schools and day care centers up to a maximum of ten
children subject to the following conditions:
(a) Bulk regulations of R-B District.
(b) Off-street drop-off with an on-site turn around.
(c) Screening of outdoor play area with 5 foot solid evergreen
hedges or fences.
2. All conditional uses as permitted in the R-B District.
c. Special Regulations. Special regulations applying to multi-family
dwellings and garden apartment style dwellings.
1. Requirements as to minimum lot size, setbacks, density, coverage
and height, as contained in the Schedule of Regulations, Section
21-6.
2. All space not needed for building or parking shall be landscaped. A
minimum landscaped open space of 2,000 square feet shall be
provided.
3. The minimum distance between structures within the development
shall be 30 feet.
4. The main entrance to the building shall not face the parking area.
§ 21-4.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-4.4
1:634
§ 21-4.5. Uses Permitted in Business District. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord.
No. 2351, § I; Ord. No. 2394, § I; Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2618,
§ I; Ord. No. 2840-12; Ord. No. 2872-12, § 4]
5. No structure shall be more than 150 feet in longest dimension. No
structure within 50 feet of the front lot line shall have a dimension
of more than 100 feet parallel or nearly parallel to the front of the
lot.
6. Structures more than 50 feet in length shall have facade set backs
of at least two feet, not more than 50 feet apart.
7. Parking areas and access drives shall be paved; uncovered parking
areas shall be landscaped in accordance with subsection 21-8.10.
8. Adequate facilities shall be provided for the handling and storage
of garbage by maintaining an enclosed and screened area or a
separate building into which all garbage and waste materials shall
be deposited.
9. A minimum of 100 square feet of recreation space per dwelling unit
shall be provided. The least dimension of such space shall be no
less than 20 feet.
10. All driveways shall be at least five feet from any side lot line. All
driveways and parking areas shall be at least five feet from any
principal building.
a. Uses Allowed by Right.
1. Retail stores, markets and shops for the conducting of any retail
business, except those specifically prohibited under subsection
21-4.5c.
2. Service establishments as defined by this chapter, excluding
automotive, laundry and dry cleaning establishments where
laundry and dry cleaning is done on the premises and drive-in
windows or facilities. Coin operated laundries and dry cleaners are
permitted provided there is an attendant present whenever the
establishment is open. A hand laundry is permitted provided that
no more than three persons are employed and provided that the
laundry is housed in a fully enclosed structure.
3. Business, professional and governmental offices.
4. Banks, without drive-in facilities.
5. Nursery schools and day care centers.
6. Restaurants applicable to the B-R Overlay Zone: eating and
drinking establishments, including delicatessens, having table
service to a minimum of 10 seats. The definition of "restaurant," for
§ 21-4.4 GENERAL § 21-4.5
1:635
the purpose of this subsection, shall not include fast-food
establishments. [Added 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2982-17]
7. Dwellings applicable to the B-R Overlay Zone: residences above the
ground floor where the ground floor has a restaurant establishment
(use) having a minimum of 2,000 square feet. "Dwellings" are
defined as residential units having a minimum of 700 square feet.
[Added 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2982-17]
b. Conditional uses. The following uses may be established as conditional
uses subject to approval by the planning board.
1. Drive-in windows for financial institutions provided that:
(a) The applicant demonstrates that there is sufficient space on
the site to provide for the maximum line of cars that may be
reasonably expected; and
(b) Measures to increase traffic safety recommended in reports
from the police department and planning consultant be
considered and may be made a condition of approval.
2. Automobile sales rooms provided that automotive repair or
servicing not normally incidental to the sale of automobiles is
prohibited.
3. Telephone exchanges and other public utility substations provided
they are housed in a building or suitably enclosed to harmonize
with the character of the neighborhood.
4. Funeral parlors.
5. Fully enclosed theaters.
6. Gasoline stations, and repair garages in accordance with the
following conditions:
(a) No gasoline station shall have an entrance or exit for vehicles
within 200 feet along the same side of a street of any school,
playground, church, hospital, public building or institution,
except where such property is in another block or abuts
another street which the lot in question does not abut.
(b) No gasoline station or repair garage shall be permitted where
any oil draining pit or visible appliance for any purpose (other
than gasoline filling pumps or air pumps) is located within 50
feet of any existing or future street line or within 150 feet of
any residential district. All such appliances or pits other than
gasoline filling pumps or air pumps, shall be within a building.
Gasoline and air pumps shall be permitted within the required
front yard space of a gasoline station, but shall be no closer
than 20 feet to any existing or future street line.
§ 21-4.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-4.5
1:636
(c) No abandoned or unregistered motor vehicle shall be
permitted on the premises of any gasoline station or repair
garage unless within a closed and roofed building. Six motor
vehicles may be located upon any gasoline station or repair
garage outside of a closed or roofed building for a reasonable
time while the motor vehicles are awaiting repair by the
gasoline station or repair garage.
7. Fully enclosed eating and drinking establishment where food and
drink is served within the building only, or where take out
customers constitute less than 50% of the total customers.
8. Hospitals and nursing homes, subject to the provisions of
subsection 21-5.10 and subsection 21-5.11.
9. Emergency medical treatment centers provided that an off-street
space for an ambulance is provided.
10. Private and commercial schools.
11. Body art, including permanent cosmetics, tattooing and body
piercing, as defined in this chapter, subject to the following
conditions:
(a) Compliance with all requirements of the township department
of health, pursuant to Section 22-9 et seq. of the Township
ordinance.
(b) Compliance with all requirements of the State Department of
Health pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:1A-7 et seq., and the regulations
promulgated thereunder pursuant to N.J.A.C. 8:27-1 et seq.
c. Excluded Uses. The following uses are specifically excluded from
Business District:
1. Hotels, motels and motor inns.
2. Shooting galleries, skating rinks, bowling alleys, billiard parlors,
dance halls, discotheques, model slot car racing, amusement
arcades and other similar amusements, drug paraphernalia sales
and fortune tellers.
3. Automobile laundries.
4. Automotive storage or repair garage.
5. Used car lots.
6. Boarding of animals.
7. Truck terminals.
8. Manufacturing, processing and assembly enterprises.
9. Building or construction supply business.
§ 21-4.5 GENERAL § 21-4.5
1:637
§ 21-4.6. Uses Permitted in M-1 District (Light Industrial). [Ord.
No. 2067; Ord. No. 2331; Ord. No. 2338, § I; Ord. No. 2361]
10. Milk depots.
11. Warehouse and similar storage facilities.
12. Wholesale establishments.
13. Dwellings.
14. Outdoor storage.
15. Check cashing facilities.
d. All business uses must be buffered from any adjacent residential use or
zone with a six foot high evergreen or decorative fence screen, except
that within ten feet of a public sidewalk, the buffer shall be no more
than 2 1/2 feet in height.
a. Uses Permitted by Right.
1. Research laboratory, business office and offices accessory to an
industrial use.
2. Animal hospital and veterinary office.
3. Warehousing, except the storage of combustible matter, explosive
matter, dismantled vehicles, baled paper, rags, used building
materials or fuel.
4. Manufacture by processing, distillation, fabrication assembly or
other handling of products, provided that in its design and
continued operation, compliance is had with the performance
standards enumerated in subsection 21-4.6c.
5. Living quarters for caretaker or watchman.
6. Dry cleaning plants and laundries.
7. Wholesale and/or storage conducted in enclosed building.
8. The entire M-1 Zone and M-2 Zone property fronting on Schuyler
Avenue current permitted uses shall be expanded to permit the
following uses:
(a) All uses currently permitted in the township's B (Business)
Zone.
(b) Indoor public storage facilities.
(c) Food establishments which are defined as delicatessens,
bakeries, butchers, grocery stores and supermarkets. The food
establishment(s) building operation footprint can be no more
than 60,000 square feet of usable area.
§ 21-4.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-4.6
1:638
(d) Senior living center which includes nursing home and
intermediate convalescent care.
(e) Post Office or governmental professional office facilities.
(f) Garden center retail sale of fruits, vegetables, plants, and/or
related products. In addition, the outside usage must be
approved by the Lyndhurst Health Department.
(g) This zone shall not permit any residential housing.
b. Prohibited Uses. Uses specifically prohibited in the M-1 District (Light
Industrial).
1. The storage of crude oil or any of its volatile by-products in tanks,
except as incidental to a permitted manufacturing process.
2. Junk yards, automobile graveyards or dismantling plants or the
storage of secondhand materials derived therefrom.
3. The baling or treatment of junk, iron, rags, bottles, glass or scrap
paper; or storage in connection therewith.
4. Entertainment and amusement establishments and amusement
arcades.
5. Building materials storage yard, including such materials as sand,
plaster, brick, cement, lumber, roofing materials, boilers, tanks,
radiators, pipes and fittings.
6. Outdoor storage of any material or product.
7. Dog pounds or kennels.
8. Any manufacturing, processing, treating, packaging or other
industrial operation which cannot comply with the performance
standards enumerated in subsection 21-4.6c.
c. Performance Standards for M-1 Districts. Before any building permit
shall be issued for a use in any M-1 District satisfactory evidence shall
be presented to the construction official with the application that the
proposed use shall conform to the following performance standards.
1. Vibration - no vibration shall be discernible at the lot lines or
beyond.
2. Smoke - no emission of visible grey smoke of a shade equal to or
darker than No. 1 Ringelmann Chart.
3. Odors - no odor shall be noticeable at the lot line or beyond.
4. Fly-ash, dust - no emission which can cause any damage to health,
to animals or vegetation or other forms of property or any excessive
soiling at the lot line or beyond.
§ 21-4.6 GENERAL § 21-4.6
1:639
§ 21-4.7. Uses Permitted in M-2 District (Heavy Industrial). [Ord.
No. 2067; Ord. No. 2331; Ord. No. 2338, § II; Ord. No. 2348; Ord.
No. 2361, § II]
5. Glare - no direct or sky reflected glare shall be visible at the lot line
or beyond.
6. Liquid or solid wastes - no discharge into any disposal system,
public or private, or streams, or into the ground of any materials of
such nature or temperature that can contaminate any water supply,
including ground water supply.
7. Noise - no emission or noise shall exceed the minimum standards
set by the most current regulation of the New Jersey State
Department of Environmental Protection.
8. Fire and explosion hazard - no process or storage of material in
such manner as to create undue hazard by reason of fire or
explosion.
9. Any use or structure to be constructed in the M-1 District shall
meet the standards adopted by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection for the control of air and water pollution.
d. Where a light industrial area abuts a residential district there shall be
provided along any rear and/or side lot line coincidental with any light
industrial-residential district boundary an open buffer strip not less
than 15 feet in width measured at right angles to the line, the exterior
ten feet of which abutting the residential district shall not be used for
the parking of automotive vehicles or the storage of any materials and
shall be landscaped. The interior five feet of the buffer strip may be
devoted to parking, but not to the storage of any materials.
e. The following uses may be established as conditional uses subject to
approval by the planning board.
1. Hospitals and nursing homes as regulated by subsection 21-5.10
and subsection 21-5.11.
a. Uses Permitted by Right.
1. Research laboratory, business office and offices accessory to an
industrial use.
2. Living quarters for caretaker or watchman but no other residential
uses.
3. Repair and machine shops.
4. Dyeing and cleaning establishments.
5. Commercial warehouses, lumber and coal yards and building
materials storage yards.
§ 21-4.6 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-4.7
1:640
6. Manufacture by processing, distillation, fabrication assembly of
other handling products.
7. Animal boarding or hospitalization, veterinary office.
8. Wholesale and/or storage establishments conducted in completely
enclosed buildings.
9. The entire M-1 Zone and M-2 Zone property fronting on Schuyler
Avenue current permitted uses shall be expanded to permit the
following uses:
(a) All uses currently permitted in the town-ship's B (Business)
Zone.
(b) Indoor public storage facilities.
(c) Food establishments which are defined as delicatessens,
bakeries, butchers, grocery stores and supermarkets. The food
establishment(s) building operation footprint can be no more
than 60,000 square feet of usable area.
(d) Senior living center which includes nursing home and
intermediate convalescent care.
(e) Post Office or governmental professional office facilities.
(f) Garden center retail sale of fruits, vegetables, plants, and/or
related products. In addition, the outside usage must be
approved by the Lyndhurst Health Department.
(g) This zone shall not permit any residential housing.
b. Prohibited Uses. Uses specifically prohibited in the M-2 District (Heavy
Industrial).
1. Any use which cannot comply with the performance standards
enumerated in subsection 21-4.6c or which constitutes a fire,
explosion, atomic radiation, or other safety hazard.
2. Residential uses except living quarters for a caretaker or
watchman.
3. Trailer camps.
4. Automobile or other junk yards.
5. Unscreened open storage yards and unscreened open storage of
rags, glass, iron or junk.
6. Amusement arcades.
c. Where an industrial district abuts a residential district there shall be
provided along any rear and/or side lot line coincidental with any
industrial-residential district boundary an open buffer strip not less
§ 21-4.7 GENERAL § 21-4.7
1:641
§ 21-4.8. Uses Permitted in C-GI District. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No.
2168, §§ I — IX; Ord. No. 2394, § II]
than 30 feet in width, measured at right angles to the line, the exterior
15 feet of which abutting the residential district shall not be used for
the parking of automotive vehicles or the storage of any materials and
shall be landscaped. The interior 15 feet of the buffer strip may be
devoted to parking, but not to the storage of any materials.
d. The following uses may be established as conditional uses subject to
approval by the planning board.
1. Hospital and nursing homes, as regulated by subsection 21-5.10
and subsection 21-5.11.
a. Uses Permitted by Right.
1. Research laboratory, commercial office buildings and offices
accessory to an industrial use.
2. Automobile salesrooms; automobile repair shop only in connection
with a franchised automobile dealership and as part thereof. A used
car lot shall be permitted as an accessory use to a franchised dealer
of new automobiles, provided it is located on the same lot as the
principal use.
3. Banking offices.
4. Hotels and motels.
5. Restaurants, but not including drive-in establishments, bars,
taverns, retail and service uses such as apparel stores, drug stores,
gift shops, newsstands, beauty shops, and barber shops but only
when located as an accessory to a structure containing a permitted
use and accessible to the public only through the principal use.
6. Manufacture by processing, fabrication, assembly or other
handling of products.
7. Wholesale and/or storage establishments conducted in completely
enclosed buildings.
8. Check cashing facilities, providing same is not located within 1,000
feet from an elementary or secondary school building or property
used for elementary or secondary school or athletic purposes.
b. Excluded Uses. Uses specifically excluded in the C-GI District:
1. Any uses which cannot comply with the performance standards
enumerated in subsection 21-4.6c, any use which exceeds in
intensity and frequency the noise of street traffic at the adjoining
street or streets, any use which constitutes a fire explosion, atomic
radiation, or other safety hazard.
§ 21-4.7 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-4.8
1:642
2. Trailer camps, trailer leasing agency, trucking terminals and truck
leasing agency.
3. Automobile junk yards; building street improvement contractors
storage yards.
4. Unscreened open storage yards and unscreened open storage of
rags, glass, iron, junk or lumber.
5. Manufacture, storage, transmission of chemicals and explosives of
any nature including plastic factories.
6. Drive-in restaurants and drive-in eating establishments.
c. The following uses may be established as conditional uses subject to
approval by the planning board.
1. Hospital and nursing homes, as regulated by subsection 21-5.10
and subsection 21-5.11.
2. Gasoline stations subject to the provisions of subsection 21-4.5b6.
3. Drive-in banking services as regulated by subsection 21-4.5b1.
4. Recreational entertainment uses, provided that such use is limited
to that part of the district including the east side of Chubb Avenue
and extending eastward, provided that such use is accessory to a
structure containing a permitted use and accessible to the public
only through the principal use.
5. Offensive uses in existing residential, commercial and industrial
zones.
(a) Purpose. In that there are some uses which, due to their very
nature, are recognized as being so offensive on their face so as
to affront the community standards of decency.
In that it is further recognized that there are some uses which
have serious objectionable operational characteristics, and
accordingly having a deleterious effect upon the use and
enjoyment of adjacent areas, as well as upon minors who
frequent said areas and accordingly must be limited in terms
of location within a specific zone in the township.
In that specific regulations of the uses are required so as
to insure against blighting and/or downgrading of the
surrounding neighborhood and properties.
The primary purpose of this paragraph c5 is the prevention
of such offensive, deleterious uses in existing residential,
commercial and industrial zones within the township and
further, prevention of the operation of patently offensive
business enterprises which appeal to the prurient interests of
§ 21-4.8 GENERAL § 21-4.8
1:643
individuals in such residential, commercial, industrial, mixed
use and/or any zone in question.
In that it is recognized that certain uses, despite their offensive
nature, are protected by virtue of the New Jersey and United
States Constitutions, it is the purpose and intent of this
paragraph 5 to limit such offensive and deleterious uses within
the township to a specific zone, all within the confines of the
state and federal constitutions.
(b) Uses Subject to Control. The paragraph c5 is specifically
addressed to adult only book stores, adult only motion picture
theaters, massage parlors, rap parlors, saunas, go-go-bars,
juice bars, and such establishments having paid dancers where
such enterprises engage in activities hereinafter described in
this paragraph c5.
(c) Definitions. For purposes of this paragraph c5, the following
words and/or phrases shall have the meaning hereafter
ascribed to them:
(1) Adult type uses shall mean any use which includes adult
only book stores, adult only motion picture theaters,
massage parlors, rap parlors, saunas, go-go-bars, juice
bars, dance establishments having paid dancers and any
such other uses which are recognized to engage in or
display acts or materials hereinafter described.
(2) Adult only book store shall mean any establishment having
30% or more of its dollar volume in trade, books,
magazines or other periodicals, which are distinguished or
characterized by their principal emphasis on matters
depicting, describing or relating to nudity, sexual conduct,
sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, obscenity, for
sale to patrons therein.
(3) Adult only motion picture theaters shall mean any
enclosed building or premises for use in presenting 30% or
more of its program material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting,
describing or relating to nudity, sexual conduct, sexual
excitement or sadomasochistic abuse, obscenity, for sale to
patrons therein.
(4) Dance establishments shall mean any establishment or
location where dancers are paid by the business enterprise
or someone on their behalf.
(5) Massage parlor shall mean any establishment primarily
engaged in the business of providing massage services.
§ 21-4.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-4.8
1:644
(6) Nudity shall mean any exhibiting or the showing of the
human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks
with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of
the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of
any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the
depiction of covered male genitals in a discernible turgid
state.
(7) Obscene material shall mean any description, narrative,
account or display or depiction of a specified anatomical
area or specified sexual conduct activity contained in, or
consisting of, a picture, or other representation,
publication, sound recording, live performance or film,
which by means of posing, composition, format or
animated sensual details, emits sensuality with sufficient
impact to coordinate prurient interest on the area or
activity as defined under the laws of the State of New
Jersey.
(8) Obscene film shall mean any motion picture film or
preview or trailer to a film, not including newsreels,
portraying actual current events or pictorial news of the
day, in which a scene, taken by itself:
(i) Depicts a specific anatomical area or specified sexual
activity or the simulation of a specified sexual activity,
or verbalization concerning a specified sexual activity,
and
(ii) Emits sensuality sufficient, in terms of the duration
and impact of the depiction, to appeal to prurient
interest; and as more fully defined under the laws of
the State of New Jersey.
(9) Specified anatomical area shall mean:
(i) Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock or female breasts
below a point immediately above the top of the areola;
or
(ii) Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state,
even if covered.
(10) Specified sexual activity shall mean:
(i) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal; or
(ii) Any act of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
deviate sexual intercourse; or
§ 21-4.8 GENERAL § 21-4.8
1:645
(iii) Fondling or other erotic touching of covered or
uncovered human genitals, pubic region, buttock or
female breast.
(11) Knowingly shall mean:
(i) Having knowledge of the character and content of the
material or film described herein; or
(ii) Having failed to engage in a reasonable inspection
which would disclose its character and content.
(12)Rap parlor shall mean an establishment primarily in the
business of providing nonprofessional conversation or
similar services for adults.
(13) Sauna shall mean an establishment primarily in the
business of providing (1) a steam bath and (2) massage
services.
(14) Sexual conduct shall mean acts of masturbation,
homosexuality, sexual intercourse, or physical contact with
a person's unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or if
such person be a female, her breast.
(15) Sexual excitement shall mean the condition of human male
or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal.
(16) Sadomasochistic shall mean abusive flagellation or torture
by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask or
bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound
or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so
clothed.
(d) Permissible adult type uses shall only be permitted in a C-G1
Zone to the extent that they are permitted by federal, state
(See N.J.S.A. 2C:34-1), county and local applicable laws.
Nothing in this paragraph shall permit the sale, rental,
exhibition use or operation of any obscene materials, obscene
films or obscene products.
(e) No permissible adult-type uses, as set forth above, shall be
operated or maintained within 500 feet of any residentially
zoned district, office-resident zoned district, any church, any
state licensed day care facility, any schools or public
educational facilities.
(f) The 500 foot distance limitations set forth above shall be
measured via a straight line from the property line of the
premises in question to the property line of the residential,
school or church as set forth above.
§ 21-4.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-4.8
1:646
§ 21-4.9. Uses Permitted in the SHRC District (Senior Housing and
Residential-Commercial Zone). [Ord. No. 2486, § I]
(g) Any nonconforming use presently in existence shall be
permitted to remain, for the purpose for which it is operating,
provided it does not violate state or federal obscenity laws.
(h) Severability clause. It is an express intention of this paragraph
c5 that if any portion of the same should become determined
by a court of proper jurisdiction as being invalid or unlawful,
the remainder of the paragraph c5 shall continue in full effect.
(i) Violations. Any violation of this paragraph c5 shall be subject
to the fines or penalties existing under the violation section of
the Township of Lyndhurst Zoning Code Chapter.
a. Permitted Principal Uses. The following principal uses shall be
permitted in connection with a public access walkway constructed
along the western property lines and the required community amenities
provided:
1. Multi-family senior and other housing facilities.
2. Community or private senior citizen recreational and activity
centers.
3. Multi-family housing.
b. Accessory Uses.
1. Off-street parking, laundry facilities, beauty parlor, gyms, banks,
food establishments, professional offices and service uses, signage,
retail business supportive to senior and other housing uses.
2. Public/private access walkways.
c. Redevelopment Area Density. The residential portion of this
Redevelopment Area shall be limited to a maximum of 200 units with a
minimum of 80 affordable senior age restricted housing units and the
balance market rate rentals with first preference given to persons 55
years of age and older.
d. Standards
Minimum lot area 1 acre
Minimum lot width 100 feet
Minimum lot depth 100 feet
Minimum yard dimensions See below
Maximum (building)
coverage
60%
Maximum building height 8 stories above existing building ± 3%
§ 21-4.8 GENERAL § 21-4.9
1:647
1. Minimum Setbacks.
(a) Ten feet from Riverwalk.
(b) Existing setbacks for building(s) on site may remain + 5%
deviation.
2. Parking.
(a) One-half space for each senior citizen unit.
(b) One visitor space per 10 units.
(c) One space per full time employee.
3. Signage.
(a) One nameplate per user which shall not exceed four square
feet in area and shall have only interior illumination, if any.
(b) Freestanding sign - Maximum area of 48 square feet, maximum
height of four feet; setback in one-half of required setback
(existing pylon exempted).
(c) Parking area informational signs shall be limited to those that
provide information pertaining to direction, identification of
areas in which parking is available, identification of pedestrian
activity, warning about clearance, oncoming traffic, and shall
be easily readable.
(d) Seasonal banners on light fixtures or display poles shall be
allowed along with other signage which can develop the
character and theme of the area and is specified in the
project's site plan.
4. Landscaping.
(a) Street trees shall be planted 50 feet on center with a minimum
diameter at breast height (DBH) three inches along the
redevelopment area property boundaries.
(b) All areas not containing buildings, sidewalks, driveways,
utilities or walkways shall be landscaped.
(c) Trash receptacles shall be adequately secured, enclosed and
screened on all sides by landscaping or other type attractive
material.
5. Unit Size. The apartment(s) to be created shall have the following
minimum sizes:
(a) One bedroom apartment - 600 square feet.
(b) Two bedroom apartment - 850 square feet.
§ 21-4.9 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-4.9
1:648
6. Lighting. Adequate lighting shall be provided to promote a sense of
security in the redevelopment area. Artificial lighting used to
illuminate the premises shall be directed away from adjacent
properties and streets shining only on the subject site. Lighting
fixtures and posts shall conform architecturally and stylistically to
buildings and surrounding areas.
7. The senior housing units to be created shall comply fully with the
township's building, health, plumbing and fire codes. Prior to the
granting of the site plan approval by the Planning Board, each
department shall inspect the plans and shall make any
recommendations it may deem to be necessary to insure the health,
safety and welfare of the public. All existing dwelling units within
the building shall be inspected prior to the granting of the
temporary certificate of occupancy which shall not be issued until
the existing dwelling units comply with fire and life safety codes.
8. Senior Housing Design Criteria.
(a) Exterior access to units shall be accessible to the handicapped.
(b) Streetscape: Buildings shall have varied and interesting
facades.
e. Waterfront Walkway Design Guidelines.
1. The Walkway area shall be a minimum of 15 feet in unobstructed
width. Additional width shall be provided in areas with additional
amenities such as benches or planters.
2. All design specifications shall be in accordance with the standards
set herein.
3. Amenities and design elements shall be to the extent reasonably
feasible designed to be vandal resistant.
4. All materials and street furniture shall be chosen to complement
the design of the surrounding developments in scale, color and
style.
5. Hard surfaces shall be used in all cases or paved areas of the
waterfront and connecting walkways.
6. Sufficient landscaping and planting shall be designed so as to
soften the impact of the built environment, provide shade, define
the use areas of the walkway and provide visual buffers.
7. Lighting shall be adequate to provide for safety and provide vision
to be maintained along the Walkway. Decorative and period lighting
at the option of the developer is encouraged and permitted.
8. Trash receptacles for recyclable and nonrecyclable trash shall be
provided.
§ 21-4.9 GENERAL § 21-4.9
1:649
§ 21-5. SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS.
§ 21-5.1. Conditional Uses. [Ord. No. 2067]
9. Both pedestrian and bicycle access shall be provided.
a. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-67, the planning board may on
application, and after public notice and hearing, authorize the issuance
of conditional uses, for any of the conditional uses which this chapter
allows, in the district in which such use is proposed to be located. In
authorizing the issuance of conditional uses, the board shall take into
consideration the public health, safety and welfare and shall prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards to insure the accomplishment of
the following objectives:
1. That all proposed structures, equipment or material shall be readily
accessible for fire and police protection.
2. That the proposed use shall be of such location, size and character
that, in general, it will be in harmony with the appropriate and
orderly development of the district in which it is proposed and will
not be detrimental to the orderly development of adjacent
properties in accordance with the zoning classification of such
properties.
b. Before approval of a conditional use in any district, the planning board
shall find the following:
1. That there is no adverse impact upon traffic and circulation.
2. That there is no undue impact upon the enjoyment of proximate
land use.
3. That there is no undue impact of conditional use activities upon
real estate values of proximate properties.
4. That there is no adverse impact of conditional use activities upon
utility systems.
c. In case of any use located in, or directly adjacent to, a Residential
District, the planning board shall find, in addition to the above, that:
1. The location and size of such use, the nature and intensity of
operations involved in or conducted in connection therewith, its
site layout and its relation to access streets shall be such that both
pedestrian and vehicular traffic to and from the use and assembly
of persons in connection therewith will not be hazardous or
inconvenient to or incongruous with, the residential district or
conflict with the normal traffic of the neighborhood; and
2. The location and height of buildings; the location, the nature and
height of walls and fences; and the nature and extent of
landscaping on the site shall be such that the use will not hinder or
§ 21-4.9 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-5.1
1:650
§ 21-5.2. Accessory Buildings and Uses in Residential Districts.
[Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. #2658, § 1]
§ 21-5.3. Fences. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No. 2164, § I; Ord. No. 2354,
§ I; Ord. No. 2567, § 3]
discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land
and buildings or impair the value thereof.
a. No accessory building or use shall be located in front yard, nor nearer
than three feet to a rear or side lot line. In case of a corner lot fronting
on two streets, no accessory building or use shall be located closer than
10 feet to the street side lot line. Accessory buildings shall be separated
from the principal building by a distance of at least 10 feet.
b. Any accessory building attached to a principal building shall be
considered part of the principal building and the total structure shall
adhere to the yard requirements for the principal building regardless of
the technique of connecting the principal and accessory building.
c. No accessory building shall exceed a height of 15 feet.
d. No accessory buildings except swimming pools shall occupy an area
greater than 25% of the area of the required rear yard.
e. Accessory uses in residential districts shall be limited to the following:
1. Private garage for not more than four vehicles.
2. Garden house, tool house, playhouse, greenhouse, flagpole or other
similar uses customarily incidental to residential use.
3. Private swimming pool provided same shall be subject to the
swimming pool and health ordinances of the township.
4. Fences subject to subsection 21-5.3.
5. Signs as permitted by Section 21-9.
6. Driveways and parking spaces subject to subsections 21-8.11 and
21-8.18.
7. Recreational playground facilities or equipment.
f. A/C compressor units to be a minimum of three feet from property line
in all districts.
a. Within a residential zone no rear or side yard fence, hedge or dividing
wall (serving as a fence) shall exceed six feet in height. The six foot
fence in question may extend from the rear yard to the beginning of the
home in question.
b. Within any residential zone no front yard fence, hedge, or dividing wall
(serving as a fence) shall exceed three feet in height.
§ 21-5.1 GENERAL § 21-5.3
1:651
§ 21-5.4. Restrictions Concerning Principal Building on Single Lot.
[Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No. 2398, § I]
In all districts, except for (1) garden apartment developments, and (2) lots
containing more than 10.0 acres of land, there shall be only one principal
building on any single lot as designated by the tax and assessment map of
the township.
§ 21-5.5. Street Frontage for Single-Family Dwelling. [Ord. No.
2067]
Every single-family or two-family dwelling hereafter erected shall have one
entire wall, without any intervening structure, facing upon a public street.
No detached building shall be constructed in front of, or moved to the front
of a dwelling on the same lot.
§ 21-5.6. Outdoor Storage. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No. 2652]
In any zone where outdoor storage is permitted, outdoor storage of any
material, products, supplies or waste shall be prohibited unless it is suitably
screened by a decorative fence. The outdoor storage shall not be greater
than 10 feet in height and the fence shall be at least as high as the storage
but no greater than 12 feet. No outdoor storage area shall be permitted
which infringes on the off-street parking area required by this chapter.
§ 21-5.7. Garages Below Street Level; Permit Not to Be Issued.
[Ord. No. 2067]
No permit shall be issued for the construction of a garage for the parking
or storage of a motor vehicle or motor vehicles in a residential zone, if any
portion of the garage excepting the foundation is below the street level of
the lot upon which the garage is to be constructed.
§ 21-5.8. Drainage. [Ord. No. 2067]
c. In a business or industrial zone no fence or wall shall be over eight feet
in height.
d. No fence, shrubs or other obstructions to visibility shall be erected,
planted or maintained upon a corner lot within 25 feet of any street
intersection.
e. A dog run may have fencing of a maximum of six feet in height, provided
that such area is located in the rear yard areas only and is set back from
any lot line at least ten feet. The base of the dog run fence must have an
aluminum coping of at least six inches in height. In no case may a dog
run be closer to a neighboring building than it is to the principal
building on the lot.
f. Fences in residential zones shall be installed so that the finished side
faces the street or the neighboring property.
§ 21-5.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-5.8
1:652
§ 21-5.9. Regulations Concerning Front and Side Yards; Use of
Concrete and Macadam. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No. 2567, § 1]
Except for permitted driveways and walkways, all parts of any front yard
or side yard which abut the street shall be landscaped with grass or plant
material and shall not be covered by concrete, bituminous macadam or
similar or artificial nonporous substances. The grass or planting area must
be maintained in front side yards for a minimum distance of eight feet from
the back line of a sidewalk, with the exception that one side yard may have
a driveway with a width not to exceed eight feet leading to the back yard
parking area or garage(s).
§ 21-5.10. Hospitals. [Ord. No. 2067]
Hospitals shall be allowed in the zones as set forth in this chapter subject to
the following requirements:
§ 21-5.11. Nursing Homes. [Ord. No. 2067]
Nursing homes shall be allowed in the zones as set forth in this chapter
subject to the following requirements:
a. Buildings in all zones are required to have gutters and leader pipes for
water drainage.
b. All leader pipes are required to be piped to curb lines or if it is not
possible to be piped to a curb line then they must drain into either a
storm water or dry well system or any other underground system
approved by the township engineer.
c. Buildings and property in all zones are required to be constructed and
landscaped in such manner that their drainage will not adversely affect
neighboring property.
a. Minimum lot size: two acres.
b. Maximum coverage: 30%.
c. Setbacks: front yard - 35 feet; rear yard - 50 feet; side yards - 1/4 height
of the building but not less than 20 feet each.
d. Height: 40 feet in the B, M-1 and M-2 zones; 100 feet in the C-G-1 zone.
e. Parking: One space for each three beds; plus one space for each doctor
on staff; plus one space for each two employees on the maximum shift
plus one space for each ten daily visitors to out-patient facilities.
a. Minimum lot size: one acre.
b. Maximum coverage: 30%.
c. Setbacks: front yard - 25 feet; rear yard - 35 feet; side yards - 1/2 height
of the building but not less than 15 feet each.
§ 21-5.8 GENERAL § 21-5.11
1:653
§ 21-5.12. Community Residences for the Developmentally Disabled
and Community Shelters for Victims of Domestic Violence for Over
Six Residents Not Including Resident Staff. [Ord. No. 2067]
Such residential facilities shall be allowed in the zones as set forth in this
chapter subject to the following requirements:
§ 21-5.13. Public Right-of-Way to Remain Open During
Construction in Connection with Residential Building. [Ord. No.
2547, § 1]
During construction of a new building or remodeling or renovation of an
existing building, all or a portion of which consists of, or is intended to
consist of, a residential use, the public right-of-way or sidewalk fronting the
building shall remain open and protected in order for pedestrians to pass
safely. No permit shall be issued for construction unless a proposed plan
demonstrating the manner in which the right-of-way or sidewalk will remain
open and protected is submitted and approved by the construction official.
Barricades which block the right-of-way or sidewalk for more than a period
of one day shall be prohibited. The use of gravel, or a similar material, in
the right-of-way during construction shall be acceptable until new sidewalks
are installed. In the event that the right-of-way or sidewalk does not remain
open during construction in accordance with the requirements of this
subsection, the department of public works of the Township of Lyndhurst
shall have the authority to take appropriate action to keep the right-of-way
open and protected. The cost of such service by the department of public
works shall be imposed against the owner, contractor, or other person
interested as general agent, architect, building contractor, owner, tenant, or
any other persons who commit, take part, or assist in any violation of this
d. Parking: one space for each five beds; plus one space for each staff
member; and one space for each two employees on the maximum shift.
a. Minimum lot size, coverage, set-backs, height as required in the R-C
District, for multiple family dwellings of five units or over.
b. Parking space - one space per resident; plus one space per employee.
c. Approval by the health department, fire department and construction
official, as to conformance with applicable codes.
d. The proposed residence or shelter is not within 1,500 feet of an existing
such residence or shelter.
e. The number of persons, other than resident staff, resident at existing
such community residences or shelters within the municipality does not
exceed 50 persons or .5% of the population, whichever is greater.
f. Any outdoor sitting and recreation areas shall be screened with a solid
evergreen hedge or solid fence at least five feet but not over six feet in
height designed to screen the view of such areas from adjacent
properties and from the street.
§ 21-5.11 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-5.13
1:654
subsection. A fine shall also be imposed for any violation of this subsection,
pursuant to Section 21-14 of this chapter. The director of the department of
public works, or his duly designated representative, shall certify to the tax
collector/treasurer/chief financial officer of the department of revenue and
finance the cost of the performance of the work and any penalty imposed,
and upon the filing of the certificate by the director of the department of
public works or his duly designated representative with the tax collector/
treasurer/chief financial officer, it shall thereafter cause a lien to be placed
upon the abutting lands wherein the work was performed.
§ 21-5.14. Design Standards. [Ord. No. 2567 § 1; Ord. No. 2612, § 1;
Ord. No. 2594, § 1; Ord. No. 2622, § 1; Ord. No. 2633, § 1; Ord. No.
2766, § 1; Ord. No. 2839-12; Ord. No. 2867-12]
a. Residential Structures.
1. Main Entrance.
(a) In the R-A and R-C Zones, the entire main entrance wall of all
residential structures shall face the approved street upon
which they are located, and shall have an articulated facade
and architectural setback sufficient to mitigate the bulk and
size of the building.
(b) In the R-B Zone, at least one main entrance of all residential
structures shall face the street upon which it is located. The
other main entrance, if any, shall not be required to face the
street upon which it is located, but the landing and stairs to
this entrance shall be located not less than six feet from any
property line.
(c) In all residential zones, the main entrance door of all
residential structures shall lead only to a walkway, and not
directly to a driveway or off-street parking area.
2. Building facade shall be consistent with the size, scale, and
setbacks of adjacent buildings, including those where there is an
aesthetic relationship. Any new building or development plan shall
not openly conflict with the dominant design features of the
character of the neighborhood. Continuity shall be achieved
through consideration of elements of facade composition such as
fenestration, cornice, soffit line, and floor-to-floor elevation and the
use of related materials; and by maintaining the roof pitch,
continuing a line of street trees, placement of sidewalks and
driveways, and building orientation.
3. Flat roofs shall not be permitted in the R-A or R-B Zones. All roofs
in the R-A and R-B Zones shall have a minimum 4 1/2 inch on
twelve-inch pitch, with the exception that one-family homes 1 1/2
stories in height may have a roof up to a minimum 8 1/2 inch on
twelve-inch pitch. Floor space above 2 1/2 stories created by a roof
§ 21-5.13 GENERAL § 21-5.14
1:655
shall be considered an attic, but not a story. A habitable attic shall
constitute a story only when it has a stairway as a means of access,
and when the ceiling has a height of at least seven feet, six inches
above the attic floor, and is no more than one-third the area of the
floor below. There shall be no plumbing fixtures in the attic.
4. No residential structure in the R-A and R-B Zones shall be erected
or altered which would result in coverage in excess of 30% of the
entire lot. Open decks in R-A and R-B Zones shall not exceed an
area of 360 square feet. Decks covered with a roof shall be included
in the lot coverage, which shall not exceed 30%. Roofed unenclosed
entrance landings shall not be included in lot coverage. A porch
shall be included in lot coverage.
5. The front, rear, or side yard setbacks shall be measured from the
cantilevered extension of a residential structure in the R-A and R-B
Zones.
6. The grades at the four corners of a residential structure in the R-A
and R-B Zones shall not be higher than eight inches above the
adjoining properties at 90° angle to each corner.
7. Only one electrical and one gas meter shall be permitted for each
dwelling unit in a one- or two-family dwelling.
b. Nonresidential Structures. Buildings shall be designed so as to prevent
exterior elevations from containing large expanses of blank or
featureless walls on the front, side, and rear elevations where visible.
All mechanical equipment shall be hidden from view from the street by
maintaining such equipment at the rear or on the top of the building.
c. Location and Topographical Survey Required.
1. For new construction, a foundation location survey showing all
building corners of the foundation shall be submitted to the
construction official after backfill and before framing commences.
A land surveyor licensed in the State of New Jersey shall prepare
the survey. The proposed foundation location as shown on the
original plot plan shall also be shown on the foundation location
survey.
2. The Township of Lyndhurst also requires a topographical survey
showing the height of the built in garage floor (if there is one) and
grade at four corners of the foundation and the average height of
the curb in front of garage. A built in garage floor shall be a
minimum of six inches above the average curb height in front of
garage. Compliance with the applicable requirements contained in
this chapter must also be shown, including those set forth in the
definitions of "story above grade," "basement," "grade plane" and
"building height."
§ 21-5.14 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-6
1:656
§ 21-6. SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS.41 [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No.
2567; Ord. No. 2679, § 2; Ord. No. 2875-12, § 2]
The schedule entitled "Schedule of Regulations" is hereby adopted and
declared to be a part of this zoning chapter, and may be amended in the
same manner as any other part of this zoning chapter. The regulations listed
in the schedule for each district are hereby adopted and prescribed for such
district and unless otherwise indicated, shall be deemed to be the minimum
requirements in every instance of their application.
§ 21-7. SITE PLAN APPROVAL.
§ 21-7.1. Compliance with Site Plan. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No. 2567,
§ 3]
No building shall be erected, altered or expanded on any lot in any district
requiring site plan approval and no building permit shall be issued in
connection with any use of such lot except in accordance with all the
regulations of this section and in accordance with the site plan for such
lot reviewed by the planning board or board of adjustment as permitted by
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-76, in the light of the standards set forth in this chapter.
§ 21-7.2. Required Site Plan Approval. [Ord. No. 2067]
Site plan approval shall be required for all uses in all districts except that no
site plan approval shall be required for single-family and two-family homes,
unless attached at the lot line to a building on an adjacent lot.
In cases where the building permit applied for covers renovations only
without increasing the floor area, affecting the number of dwelling units, or
affecting the off-street parking requirements, the construction official may
waive the full requirements for site plan approval. This exemption shall not
apply to a conditional use application.
§ 21-7.3. Filing of Plans for Site Plan Approval. [Ord. No. 2067]
Twelve copies of the required plans for site plan approval shall first be
filed with the construction official for review as to compliance with all
provisions of this chapter and all other applicable codes and regulations.
If the application complies with all applicable codes and regulations other
than the Zoning Ordinance, the construction official shall within five days
after receipt of such plans or following any additional length of time as
agreed to by the applicant, file the site plans with the planning board or the
board of adjustment as the case may be for review and recommendations
in the manner set forth below. The clerk of the building department shall
distribute copies of the plans to the township engineer, planning consultant,
chief fire inspector, traffic safety officer, and for all uses permitted in the B,
M-1, M-2 or CGI zones, to the hazardous chemical control board. A list of all
41.Editor’s Note: The Schedule of Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 21-6 GENERAL § 21-7.3
1:657
corrosive, combustible toxic or flammable chemicals to be used or stored at
the site shall accompany plans for uses in such zones.
§ 21-7.4. Objectives in Considering the Site Plan. [Ord. No. 2067]
In considering and approving the site plan, the municipal agency shall
take into consideration, the public health, safety and general welfare, the
comfort and convenience of the public in general and the residents of the
immediate neighborhood, and shall make any appropriate conditions and
safeguards in harmony with the general purposes and intent of this chapter
and particularly with regard to achieving the following objectives:
§ 21-7.5. Notice of Hearing. [Ord. No. 2067]
Upon certification of the planning consultant or secretary of the municipal
agency that the site plans and two sets of preliminary building plans of the
proposed building or structure submitted by the applicant are complete, the
applicant shall be advised as to the date of the public hearing. Prior to the
hearing, the applicant shall at its own expense cause notice of the hearing
to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in Lyndhurst at least
10 days prior to the hearing, and shall give personal notice to all owners
of property within 200 feet of the property of the applicant in the same
manner as prescribed in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12. The site plan of the proposed
development shall be available for study prior to the public hearing at the
office of the planning and zoning boards.
a. Maximum safety of traffic access and egress, and access by pedestrians
to buildings on the lot.
b. A site layout which would have no adverse effect upon any adjoining
properties or districts by impairing the established character or
potential use of properties in such districts.
c. The reasonable screening of all parking and service areas from the view
of adjacent properties and streets;
d. Conformance of the proposed plan with such portions of master plan as
may be in existence from time to time;
e. In applicable cases, a drainage system and layout which would afford
the best practical solution to any drainage problems. The municipal
agency shall have the township engineer review and approve the
proposed system and layout.
f. The display of signs with due regard for public safety and welfare.
g. The provisions of water lines and facilities for sanitary sewerage
adequate to serve the proposed use and to cause no adverse impact on
existing township facilities as approved by the township engineer.
h. The effect of the development on surrounding properties.
§ 21-7.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-7.6
1:658
§ 21-7.6. Determination of the Municipal Agency. [Ord. No. 2067]
The planning board or board of adjustment, as the case may be, shall hold a
public hearing on the application and upon completion of the public hearing
make a determination on the application.
§ 21-7.7. Time Allowed. [Ord. No. 2067]
The municipal agency shall take action on the site plan pursuant to the
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46(c) and 40:55D-50(b).
§ 21-7.8. Standards for Site Plans. [Ord. No. 2067]
The developer shall observe the following standards and principles in the
design of any subdivision or site plan and the municipal agency and all
reviewing agencies and officials shall be guided by these standards in
reviewing any subdivision or site plan.
a. Off-Street Parking.
1. The municipal agency shall approve the most appropriate location
on the site for the proposed parking area, in view of the size and
topography of the property, considerations of safety and aesthetics,
the requirement of adequate buffer and the elimination of glare,
dust and noise caused by traffic. There shall be provided for each
building subject to this chapter the number and size of off-street
parking spaces as required by the Zoning Ordinance.
2. If off-site, off-street parking is contemplated, the municipal agency
shall determine what provisions, if any, are required for the safe
and adequate circulation of pedestrians between the parking area
and the property.
3. The parking plan shall provide adequate access to and egress from
each parking space and shall provide for safe and adequate
circulation of pedestrians and vehicles. The width of all aisles or
driveways providing direct access to four or more individual
parking stalls shall be in accordance with the following
requirements:
Parking Angle
(Degrees)
Aisle Width
(Feet)
0° (parallel parking) 12
30° 11
45° 13
60° 18
90° (perpendicular parking) 24
§ 21-7.6 GENERAL § 21-7.8
1:659
Where possible, only one-way traffic shall be permitted in aisles or
driveways providing direct access to spaces placed at an angle of
other than 90° to the aisles or driveway. Any such aisle or driveway
providing two-way traffic shall be at least 24 feet in width.
4. Off-street parking areas shall be designed to prevent the
maneuvering of vehicles into or out of parking spaces within any
portion of an entrance driveway that is within the right-of-way line
of any street. Off-street parking areas shall be designed so as to
avoid the necessity of vehicles backing onto any street from the
site. One-, two- and three-family dwellings shall be exempt from the
provisions of this paragraph.
5. Where an off-street parking plan for the site in question is shown on
the Lyndhurst Master Plan, the municipal agency shall require that
the parking plan conform as closely as is practicable to the master
plan. Where immediate conformance is not practicable the
municipal agency shall require that the parking plan be adaptable
to future conformance to the master plan.
b. Access Driveways.
1. Driveway Location. All entrance and exit driveways shall be located
so as to afford maximum safety to and minimum disruption of traffic
on the street. Where practicable, no part of any driveway entrance
or exit to a public street shall be closer than 50 feet to the
intersection of the street lot lines of two intersecting streets.
Where the frontage of the lot is too narrow to permit the above
distance, the driveway shall be located as far from the intersection
as possible.
2. Traffic Signs. To facilitate the safe and efficient movement of traffic
into and out of a site, the municipal agency may require the
installation of specified directional regulatory or advisory signs or
pavement markings at designated locations on the site or on the
right-of-way. Such signs shall be of a size, color and design
specified in accordance with the "Uniform Manual of Traffic
Control Devices".
c. Customer Service Areas. In addition to the parking spaces required
under Section 21-8, any use such as a bank or gasoline station that
provides or expects to provide temporary stopping space or
maneuvering space for vehicles of patrons seeking service while seated
in a vehicle, shall show such space on the site plan. A gasoline station
shall provide at least two stopping spaces per pump. A bank shall
provide at least five stopping spaces per drive-in teller station. All such
stopping spaces shall be located so as not to block any entrance or exit
driveway, unless such driveway is designed for the exclusive use of cars
patronizing a drive-in bank window. Stopping spaces shall be at least 20
§ 21-7.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-7.8
1:660
feet long and eight feet wide and shall be located entirely within the
confines of the lot.
d. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall connect the main entrance of each building
with the street or with the interior road giving access to the building.
Interior roads giving access to buildings shall have a sidewalk on at
least one side of such road. Sidewalks shall further be provided where
needed to protect the safety of pedestrians.
e. Sidewalks in the Street Right-of-Way. In residential zones a sidewalk of
a minimum of 44 inches and a maximum of 52 inches is to be placed
with a minimum distance of three feet between the sidewalk and curb
line or where there are sidewalks already in place on abutting
properties, must conform to same.
f. Landscaping.
1. In residential zones the area between the curb line and the
sidewalk area is required to be landscaped with live plant materials
and with a tree planted a minimum of one tree for every 40 feet of
lot frontage. In business or industrial zones a minimum of one tree
for every 25 feet of lot frontage is required either in the street
right-of-way or within 10 feet of the right-of-way.
2. In all districts all areas not utilized for building, parking, loading,
ingress, egress, patios, tennis courts or swimming pools or
pedestrian walkways shall be attractively landscaped with live
plant or organic material.
Existing trees of six inch caliper or over shall not be removed
unless they are so located as to interfere unduly with construction.
No tree, hedge or shrub over three feet in height shall be located
or maintained within a 25 foot radius of a lot corner formed by two
intersecting street lines.
g. Paving and Curbs. Paving of interior roadways, driveways and
sidewalks, shall be of bituminous concrete or other dustless durable,
all-weather pavement. Curbs shall be concrete and shall be adequate in
size and location to direct surface water runoff away from neighboring
properties and toward approved drainage systems. Construction of all
roadways, driveways, curbs and sidewalks shall be in accordance with
any specifications heretofore or hereafter established for these
purposes by or pursuant to township ordinance. Paved areas within a
lot shall be maintained so as to be free of holes and ruts.
h. Drainage - Surface Runoff. Provisions shall be made for safe and
adequate drainage of the surface runoff waters in and from the
premises so that flooding and erosion of the development and the
property of others will be prevented.
i. Sewage Disposal and Water Supply. Provisions shall be made in
accordance with applicable regulations of all boards and bodies with
§ 21-7.8 GENERAL § 21-7.8
1:661
jurisdiction over the collection and disposal of sewage and the supply of
water, respectively. If the municipal agency deems necessary, approval
may be withheld until the board of health and/or the township engineer
have certified that the sanitary and water supply systems have been
designed to their satisfaction.
j. Buffer Strips, Fencing and Screening. The site plan shall indicate buffer
strips and planting strips as required by the Zoning Ordinance of the
Township of Lyndhurst as it may be amended from time to time, or by or
pursuant to any other township ordinance. In the event the municipal
agency shall determine that additional buffer strips or planting strips
are required to protect public areas or neighboring properties from
adverse effects of the proposed building or addition, the agency may
require such additional buffer or planting strips. Provision shall be
made for the protection, fencing and screening of such portions of the
property as the municipal agency may deem necessary for the safety
and welfare of those persons most likely to be exposed to the property.
k. Garbage and Refuse. Provision shall be made for the indoor or enclosed
storage of garbage and refuse. In multiple dwellings provision shall be
made to conform to Lyndhurst Recycling Program. Sufficient space in
appropriate location must be provided for separation, storage and
pickup of recyclable items.42
l. Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage, when permitted by the Lyndhurst
Zoning Ordinance or by variance of the board of adjustment, shall be
permitted only in areas of the lot approved by the municipal agency.
Such areas, as nearly as may be practicable, shall be shielded from
public view and protected by adequate fencing or screening.
m. Retaining Walls. Retaining walls shall be designed to be safe and
adequate for the purpose intended.
n. Performance Standards. Any use requiring site plan approval shall
conform to the performance standards of the Lyndhurst Zoning
Ordinance. Satisfactory evidence of conformance shall be presented to
the municipal agency with the development application. The agency
may obtain expert advice, at the expense of the applicant, regarding
compliance with the performance standards where there is reasonable
doubt that a proposed development will conform.
o. Additional Measures. The municipal agency may require provision of
such additional measures as it deems necessary to protect public areas
or neighboring properties from adverse effects of the proposed
development which would be harmful to health, safety, conservation of
property values and general welfare.
42.Editor’s Note: See subsection 20-8.6 for regulations for recycling facilities in new
multifamily housing developments.
§ 21-7.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-7.9
1:662
§ 21-7.9. Recommendations or Conditions of Approval. [Ord. No.
2067]
Upon approval of the site plan, the municipal agency shall notify the
applicant and the construction official in writing, together with such
recommendations, conditions and limitations as it may be empowered to
suggest or impose by this chapter or under the N.J.S.A. 40:55D-37 et seq.
§ 21-7.10. Conditions Transmitted to Construction Official;
Expiration of Approval. [Ord. No. 2067]
The conditions of site plan approval shall be transmitted to the construction
official by the municipal agency, and it shall be their responsibility to see
that all conditions of site plan approval are met.
All site plan details, including building construction, parking areas,
landscaping and screening shall be commenced within one year from the
date of issuance of a building permit. No certificate of occupancy shall be
issued until all site plan approval requirements have been fully met.
Preliminary and final site plan approval shall expire as provided by N.J.S.A.
40:55D-49 and 52, unless the applicant seeks and is granted an extension
of time. The applicant whose site plan approval has expired may resubmit a
site plan.
§ 21-7.11. The Municipal Agency May Permit Posting of
Performance Bond. [Ord. No. 2067]
In the event it is determined that the site work to be performed in order to
comply with the requirements of the municipal agency cannot be completed
before the building or buildings are ready for occupancy, the municipal
agency may allow the applicant to post a performance bond to cover the
cost of the work remaining to be done. The amount of the bond shall be
determined by the construction official or township engineer, as designated
by the municipal agency.
§ 21-7.12. Approval. [Ord. No. 2067]
In cases where a use requiring site plan approval is located on a county
road, the applicant shall submit the site plan to the Bergen County Planning
Board for approval in conformance with the county site plan resolution prior
to receiving final approval from the municipal agency.
§ 21-8. OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
§ 21-8.1. Parking Spaces Required. [Ord. No. 2067]
No building or premises shall be built or erected, nor shall any building
be altered so as to expand its usable floor area, nor shall the use of any
building or premises be expanded unless there is provided parking space in
accordance with the requirements of this section.
§ 21-7.9 GENERAL § 21-8.2
1:663
§ 21-8.2. Computation of Spaces. [Ord. No. 2067]
Required spaces shall be computed on the basis of 162 square feet per
space. The dimensions of individual spaces shall be at least nine feet by 18
feet. When the number of required spaces result in a fraction the fraction
shall require one parking space.
§ 21-8.3. Use to Determine Number of Spaces Required. [Ord. No.
2067]
If a use is not listed in subsection 21-8.18 then the number of required offstreet
parking spaces shall be the number of spaces required for the use
which most nearly approximates the proposed use.
§ 21-8.4. Paving of Off-Street Parking. [Ord. No. 2067]
All off-street parking areas shall be paved according to specifications
established for this purpose by the township engineer.
§ 21-8.5. (Reserved) [Ord. No. 2067]
§ 21-8.6. Parking Stalls to Be Designated. [Ord. No. 2067]
All off-street parking spaces within any parking area shall be clearly marked
to show the parking arrangement within the parking area, and shall be
easily accessible.
§ 21-8.7. Lighting for Off-Street Parking. [Ord. No. 2067]
All lighting for off-street parking areas shall be so arranged and shielded as
to reflect the light downward and prevent any light from shining directly on
adjoining streets, residential zones and buildings.
§ 21-8.8. Use of Front Yard Not Permitted; Setback. [Ord. No. 2067;
Ord. No. 2567, § 1]
Off-street parking spaces shall not be located in any required front yard,
except for one family and two family homes as permitted by subsection
21-8.14. No off-street parking areas shall be located any closer than five feet
to any lot line, except for one or two family dwellings. No tandem parking
shall be permitted in the R-A and R-B Residential Zoning Districts.
§ 21-8.9. Access to Parking Lot. [Ord. No. 2067]
Unobstructed access to and from a street shall be provided. No access to
a parking lot in a Business or Industrial District shall be located within a
Residential District.
§ 21-8.10. Landscaping Requirement. [Ord. No. 2067]
§ 21-8.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-8.10
1:664
§ 21-8.11. Driveways and Curb Cuts. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No. 2567,
§ 3]
a. All off-street parking areas which are located in front of a building other
than a one-and-two-family home shall be landscaped with a bordering
hedge, decorative concrete wall, or fence not less than 2 1/2 feet in
height.
b. All parking areas of 15 parking spaces or more shall be landscaped with
a tree for every 15 spaces, and a landscaped island at least three feet
wide separating every 15 spaces.
a. Access to an egress from off-street parking areas shall be limited to one
driveway for the following:
1. One, two, three family dwelling lots.
2. All other uses with a street frontage of 100 feet or less.
b. Curb cuts for one, two, and three family dwelling lots shall lead directly
to the driveway and garage.
c. Except for one, two, three family dwelling lots, access to an egress from
off-street parking areas shall be limited to two driveways for each
frontage of over 100 feet, provided a minimum distance of three feet
shall separate the closest edges of such driveways.
d. No driveway curb cut shall be closer than 20 feet to the point where the
curb return radius of an intersection meets the curb line of the street.
e. No driveway curb cut in the RC, M-1, M-2, or GC-I zone shall be closer
than 10 feet to the side or rear property line.
f. Widths of driveways and curb cuts shall be limited by the following
schedule:
Minimum and Maximum Widths, Driveways and Curb Openings
Width in Feet
One-Way Operation
Width in Feet
Two-Way Operations
Drive
Curb
Opening Drive
Curb
Opening
1-3 Family Residence: 10 12
2-Car Attached Garage
or in Basement
20 22 N/A N/A
1-Car Garage 10 12 N/A N/A
All Other Uses Except
One, Two, and Three
Family
Dwellings 10-13 12-15 20-24 22-26
§ 21-8.10 GENERAL § 21-8.12
1:665
§ 21-8.12. Clear Vision at Entrances and Exits. [Ord. No. 2067]
Entrances or exit drives shall have at least 60 feet of unobstructed vision in
both directions along the street into which the drive enters measured from
the center line of the drive at the point where it enters the street, and the
center line of such drive shall be at least 60 feet from the center line of any
street intersecting the street onto which the drive enters.
§ 21-8.13. Parking and Loading Within Designated Area Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 2067]
Such drives shall have on each side a triangular area formed by the
intersection of the driveway line, the street line and a straight line adjoining
these lines at points 30 feet distant from their point of intersection. Within
such triangular area no parking or loading or unloading shall be permitted,
nor shall there be located therein any sign, fence, other structure or plant
material over 2 1/2 feet in height.
§ 21-8.14. Parking of Vehicles in Residential Districts. [Ord. No.
2067; Ord. No. 2567, § 1; Ord. No. 2567, § 1]
In a residential districts, unregistered vehicles, commercial vehicles,
automobiles, motor homes, motorcycles, or utility and recreational trailers,
trailers for carting, and trucks over 1 1/2 tons shall not be parked or left
standing or stored in any front yard, side yard, or rear yard area abutting a
street; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply to the parking
or standing of registered automobiles or motorcycles on driveways of one
family and two family, or motor home dwellings.
The use of a driveway for the parking of motor vehicles shall be subject to
the following limitations.
§ 21-8.15. Vehicles Prohibited from Parking in Residential Districts.
[Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No. 2567, § 3]
In residential districts, the following motor vehicles and boats shall not be
parked or left standing in any yard area or on a driveway:
a. Front Yard. The driveway shall consist of an area directly opposite and
adjacent to the front of an attached garage, detached garage, the
extension of the side year into the front yard.
b. Side Yard of Corner Lots. The driveway shall consist of the area directly
opposite and adjacent to an attached garage, detached garage or the
extension of the rear yard into the side yard which abuts a street.
a. Unregistered motor vehicles of any type or design.
b. Buses.
c. Trailers used for dwelling, camping, and carting purposes; motor
homes; trucks over 1 1/2 tons; and boats exceeding 18 feet in length.
§ 21-8.12 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-8.15
1:666
§ 21-8.16. Exception for Certain Commercial Vehicles in Garage.
[Ord. No. 2067]
Nothing herein shall prohibit the storing or garaging of commercial vehicles
having a capacity of one ton or less in an enclosed garage.
§ 21-8.17. Conditional Use Required to Allow Parking On Additional
Land. [Ord. No. 2067]
A conditional use may be granted by the municipal agency to permit certain
required off-street parking space to be located elsewhere than on the same
lot with the use to which it is appurtenant, provided that: all such space,
through ownership or permanent easement, shall be under the control of
the owner or operator of the use to which such space is appurtenant; such
space shall not be in a residential zone and such space shall be not more
than 500 feet from the property to be used.
§ 21-8.18. Schedule of Required Parking Spaces. [Ord. No. 2067;
Ord. No. 2679, § 1]
No building or premises shall be used nor shall any building be built or
erected, nor shall any building be altered so as to expand its usable floor
area, unless there is provided parking spaces upon the same premises upon
which the use or structure is located in accordance with the following
schedule:
Use Required Number of Parking Spaces
Single-family dwelling 2 spaces
Two-family dwelling 4 spaces43
Multi-family dwelling 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Dwellings with 5 or more
units
1 visitor space per 5 units
Retail stores 1 space per 200 square feet of sales area
(in excess of 1,000 square feet)
d. Trucks, meaning every motor vehicle with commercial plates and
designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of
property in a business and having a capacity of more than 1,500
pounds; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply to trucks
being used in the rendering of services to the premises.
e. Trailers used for dwelling purposes; camping trailers exceeding 18 feet
in length.
f. Boats of any type or design in excess of 18 feet in length.
43.The parking for more than two motor vehicle in tandem, or behind one another, shall not
be permitted so as to satisfy off-street parking requirements. This is inclusive of garage
parking.
§ 21-8.15 GENERAL § 21-8.18
1:667
Use Required Number of Parking Spaces
Service establishments 1 space per 300 square feet of usable floor
area
Business, professional and
governmental offices
1 space per 300 square feet of usable floor
area
Banks 1 space per 300 square feet of usable floor
area
Eating and drinking
establishments
1 space per each 3 seats in excess of 10
Bowling alleys 4 parking spaces per alley
Theaters 1 space per each 2 seats
Meeting rooms, clubs, places
of public assembly
1 space per 50 square feet of seating area
House of worship 1 space per each 2 seats
Funeral homes 20 spaces per visiting room
Elementary schools 1 space per classroom
High schools 5 spaces per classroom
Automobile showroom 1 space per 800 square feet of usable floor
area
Industrial uses 1 space per each 2 employees but not less
than 1 space for each 500 square feet of
usable floor area
Warehouses 1 space per each 2 employees but not less
than 1 space for each 2,000 square feet of
floor area
Motor inns and hotels 1 space per unit; plus 1 space for each 2
employees plus space for meeting rooms
and restaurants as provided above
Uses not listed above According to that category which most
nearly approximates the use
More than 1 use on a
premises
The sum of the component requirements
Amusement arcades 3 spaces per electronic game or pinball
machine
Day care center 1 space per employee
§ 21-8.19. Off-Street Loading. [Ord. No. 2067]
Off-street loading space shall be provided in such amount and manner
that all loading, unloading and maneuvering manner use public streets,
§ 21-8.18 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-8.19
1:668
sidewalks or rights-of-way for loading or unloading operations, other than
ingress or egress to the lot.
§ 21-8.20. Off-Street Loading Not Permitted in Required Front Yard.
[Ord. No. 2067]
Off-street loading space shall not be located in the required front yard.
§ 21-9. SIGNS.
§ 21-9.1. Permitted in Any District. [Ord. No. 2067]
§ 21-9.2. Residential Districts. [Ord. No. 2067]
Permitted in all residential districts:
§ 21-9.3. R-C District. [Ord. No. 2067]
Permitted in R-C: one identification sign for each entrance to a
development, which signs shall not exceed six square feet in area.
§ 21-9.4. Business District. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No. 2493, § I; Ord.
No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2760, § 1; Ord. #2897-13]
Permitted in Business District:
a. A non-illuminated real estate sign not more than six feet in area
advertising the sale, rental or lease of only the premises on which such
signs are located are permitted, provided same is set back 10 feet from
street lines. Not more than two such signs shall be permitted per
hundred feet of lot frontage.
b. Political Signs. For each lot, one non-illuminated temporary sign of not
more than 24 square feet in area announcing a political campaign. Such
sign must be removed within 24 hours following the election to which it
pertains.
a. One name plate with any residential building which shall not: exceed
two square feet in area and shall have only interior illumination if any.
b. One bulletin board sign, not exceeding 12 square feet in surface display
area shall be permitted for a house of worship, school or permitted
institutional use provided that if the bulletin board sign is not attached
to the facade of the building, it shall be located no closer than 10 feet to
a street line. Such signs may be illuminated by backlighting or by direct
lighting provided the latter is so screened that light is not directed or
reflected toward any adjacent property. Any lighting must be white or
yellow.
a. Awnings.
1. Awnings shall not project into the public right-of-way.
§ 21-8.19 GENERAL § 21-9.4
1:669
§ 21-9.5. M-1 and M-2 Districts. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No. 2567, § 3]
Permitted in M-1 and M-2 Districts:
2. Only one line of lettering shall be permitted which shall be painted
on the lowest 12 inches of the awning and shall not be illuminated.
The lettering shall not exceed six inches in height.
3. Awnings shall consist of a canvas material. All other materials,
including but not limited to, vinyl, wood or plastic, shall be
prohibited.
4. Awnings and lettering shall each consist of only one solid color. The
colors of the awning or lettering shall be limited to forest green,
black, burgundy, brown or dark blue, except that lettering may also
be white.
5. Awnings shall not be illuminated, except that goose lighting above
the awning shall be permitted.
b. Window Signs. The total sign area in any one window shall not exceed
10% of the window area. Internal illumination of a window sign shall be
prohibited.
c. Wall Mounted Signs.
1. Wall mounted signs shall be no larger than 24 square feet and shall
not extend beyond the business front to which they are attached.
2. Wall mounted signs shall be mounted flat onto the building.
Painting of a sign directly on the building shall be prohibited.
3. Internal illumination of wall signs is prohibited.
4. Neon framing signs are prohibited.
d. Freestanding Signs. Where the building is set back from the street line
a distance of 25 feet or more, not more than one freestanding sign, with
a total area of not more than 40 square feet, may be erected.
e. Closing of Business. All signs shall be removed upon the closing of the
business to which they pertain.
a. Business signs attached to the main wall of the building, or ground
signs which comply with the setback regulations, and are no more than
15 feet in height. The total permitted surface display area of permitted
signs shall not exceed the square footage figures produced by
application of the following formula (street frontage being expressed
here in linear feet): 0.75 times the total principal street frontage plus
0.30 times the secondary street frontage in the case of a corner lot.
b. Permitted as a conditional use to be granted by the planning board:
advertising signs. The total permitted surface display area of permitted
signs shall not exceed the square footage figure produced by
§ 21-9.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-9.5
1:670
§ 21-9.6. Prohibited Signs. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No. 2587, § 1]
The following signs shall be prohibited in all zoning districts:
application of the following formula (street frontage being expressed
here in linear feet): .5 times the total principal street frontage plus 1.0
times the secondary street frontage in the case of a corner lot; but in no
case larger than 500 square feet in area. The height shall be not more
than .50 times the length of the sign.
Advertising signs shall be limited to the number in existence on
February 13, 1973 and may be replaced or relocated in permitted
district within one year after the sign is destroyed or removed from the
original location.
c. Freestanding signs shall be permitted as follows:
1. One freestanding sign, which may have interior lighting, may be
erected. It shall be not more than six feet in height, nor more than
six feet in length and have not more than two sides and be set back
at least 1/2 the distance of the required building setback from the
street right-of-way.
2. Where the building is set back from the street line a distance of 25
feet or more, not more than one freestanding sign with a total area
of not more than 40 square feet may be erected.
a. Rooftop signs, and any signs which shall extend above the height of the
roof of the building to which it is attached.
b. Signs which project over any point of any street or public right-of-way.
c. Signs illuminated by intermittent rotating or flashing lights, and no
rotating or moving signs shall be permitted.
d. Signs in which the colors red, green, and amber are used in direct
illumination or high reflection by the use of special preparations such as
fluorescent paint or glass within a radius of 60 feet of any intersection.
e. Signs which consist of banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers,
strings of light bulbs, spinners, or other similarly moving devices. These
devices when not part of any sign are similarly prohibited. On the
opening of a new business, banners, pennants, ribbons, or streamers
may be permitted for a period not to exceed 30 days.
f. Signs affixed or erected within the public right-of-way of any street, and
no sign shall be located so as to constitute a traffic hazard.
g. Signs painted on, or affixed to any public building, structure, or fixture.
h. Signs printed on or affixed to water towers, storage tanks, smoke
stacks, or similar structures.
§ 21-9.5 GENERAL § 21-9.6
1:671
§ 21-9.7. Nonconforming Signs. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No. 2587, § 1]
A sign existing on the effective date of adoption of this section44 which does
not conform to any provision thereof, shall be deemed a nonconforming use
and may be continued, maintained, and repaired upon its present premises,
provided that such sign was lawful under any prior ordinance. Any legal
nonconforming sign on any premises involving a change in tenancy of said
premises or involving a change in the physical appearance of the sign shall
revoke the nonconforming rights as soon as the physical appearance of
the sign is changed in any manner whatsoever. Nothing herein shall be
construed to prohibit the normal maintenance of a legal, nonconforming
sign, such as bulb replacement, painting, or replacement of existing
lettering.
§ 21-9.8. Prior Unlawful Signs. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No. 2587, § 1]
Any sign unlawful under any prior ordinance shall remain unlawful unless it
complies with the provisions of this chapter. Any new sign hereafter erected
either for a new building or a change in tenancy of an existing building,
shall comply with all of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 21-9.9. Deterioration of Signs. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No. 2587, § 1]
If the construction code official determines that any sign has been erected
in such a manner or has deteriorated to such a degree as to be unsightly
or to constitute a hazard to the general public, it shall be removed or
repaired to the satisfaction of the construction code official within 48 hours
after written notice of such condition has been served upon the owner,
owner's agent, lessee, or occupant. Failure to comply therewith shall be a
violation of this zoning code and subject to its penalties. The construction
code official may cause any sign which is an immediate peril to persons or
property to be removed summarily and without notice.
i. Signs placed so as to interfere with or be mistaken for a traffic light or
similar safety device, or which interfere with traffic visibility.
j. Signs placed, located, or displayed upon any sidewalk, right-of-way, or
passageway.
k. Off-site signs.
l. Projecting signs.
m. Signs on trees or utility poles.
n. Advertising search lights outside of a building or structure.
o. Freestanding pole-type signs, except for automotive service stations.
44.Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 2587, codified herein, was adopted January 16, 2007.
§ 21-9.6 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-9.10
1:672
§ 21-9.10. Extinguishment of Exterior Illuminated Signs. [Ord. No.
2067; Ord. No. 2515, § I; Ord. No. 2587, § 1]
All exterior illuminated signs shall be extinguished by 11:00 p.m., or at the
close of business, whichever is later.
§ 21-9.11. Signs to Be Removed at Termination of Business. [Ord.
No. 2067]
At the termination of a business, commercial or industrial enterprise, all
signs pertaining thereto shall forthwith be removed from the public view.
Responsibility for violation shall resides with the property owner, according
to the latest official tax rolls listing.
§ 21-10. NONCONFORMING USES.
§ 21-10.1. Restrictions. [Ord. No. 2067]
A nonconforming use or structure may be continued but shall not be
enlarged or extended. In the event a nonresidential nonconforming use or
structure is partially damaged to an extent less than 50% of the equalized
assessed value of the damaged structure, it may be rebuilt to the extent
which previously existed within one year from the date of damage. In the
event such a use or building is damaged to an extent greater than 50% it
may only be rebuilt upon approval of a use variance or such other variance
as is provided by the Municipal Land Use Act 40:55D-1 et seq. In the case of
nonconforming radio transmitters, these uses may be rebuilt if changes in
technology produce a more advanced type of transmitter provided site plan
approval first be obtained from the planning board.
§ 21-10.2. Nonconforming Use Abandoned. [Ord. No. 2067]
A nonconforming use discontinued for a period of one year or changed to
a conforming use shall be considered abandoned and such nonconforming
use shall not be reestablished.
§ 21-10.3. Maintenance and Repair of One and Two Family Houses
Permitted. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. #2478]
Normal maintenance and repair, structural alteration, moving,
reconstruction or enlargement of a one and two family home which does
not house a nonconforming use, but is a nonconforming structure as to the
district regulations, is permitted, if the same does not increase the degree
of, or create any new nonconformity with such regulations in such building.
§ 21-10.4. Repair of Unsafe Structure. [Ord. No. 2067]
Any structure or portion thereof declared unsafe by a proper authority may
be restored to a safe condition.
§ 21-9.10 GENERAL § 21-10.5
1:673
§ 21-10.5. Use or Buildings Under Construction. [Ord. No. 2067]
A nonconforming use or structure lawfully under construction at the time of
passage of this chapter, February 13, 1973 which has any part of the actual
structure including footings and foundations in place, may be completed
according to the plans filed with the construction official at the time of the
passage of this chapter or amendment.
§ 21-10.6. Nonconforming Lots of Record. [Ord. No. 2067]
In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted,
notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a
single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected
on any single lot of record on July 1, 1988.
A two-family dwelling may be erected on a single lot of record on July 1,
1988, provided such lot is located in a district which permits two-family
dwellings and further provided that at least 25% of all other lots fronting
on the street upon which the lot fronts, between intersecting streets, are
of lesser width and area than the average of all substandard lots fronting
on the street in question between intersecting streets. Such lot shall be
in separate ownership and not of continuous frontage with other lots in
the same ownership. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails
to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are applicable
in the district, provided that the yard dimensions and other requirements
not involving area or width, or both, of lot shall conform to the regulations
for the district in which such lot is located. Variance of yard requirements
shall be obtained only through action of the board of adjustment. Sale of
nonconforming use is allowed if all provisions are met.
§ 21-11. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
§ 21-11.1. Minimum Requirements. [Ord. No. 2067]
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of public
health, safety, morals and general welfare.
§ 21-11.2. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2067]
This chapter shall be enforced by the construction official who shall in
no case except under a written order of the municipal agency, issue any
permit for the erection or structural alteration of any building, nor grant
any occupancy permit for any building or land where the proposed erection,
structural alteration, or use thereof would be in violation of any provisions
of this chapter. Proof of all taxes paid, three sets of plans, lot and location
of building staked out prior to beginning construction.
§ 21-10.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-11.3
1:674
§ 21-11.3. Recording of Building Permits. [Ord. No. 2067]
It shall be the duty of the construction official to keep a record of all
applications for permits and a record of all permits issued, with a notation
of all special conditions involved. He shall file and safely keep copies of all
applications, plot plans and other plans submitted, and the same shall form
a part of the records of his office. These records shall be available for use of
all municipal boards and officials.
§ 21-11.4. Fee Schedule.45 [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No. 2213, § I; Ord.
No. 2352, § V]
§ 21-11.5. Certificate of Occupancy. [Ord. No. 2067]
A certificate of occupancy and a certificate of fire code status shall be
obtained from the construction official for any of the following.
a. Professional services as billed by professional for any development
application referred to the professional for a report in accordance with
Chapter 19, subsection 19-1.14. Funds for above fees shall be placed in
a trust account pursuant to township ordinance.
b. Subdivision Applications.
1. Minor Subdivision - $100 per lot.
2. Major Subdivisions - preliminary application $100 per lot; final
application $100 per lot.
c. Site Plan Applications. All applications for site plan approval for all uses
and in all zones shall be $250.
d. Variance Applications.
1. Residential (one and two family) - $50 per unit with a minimum fee
of $50.
2. Commercial (including three family and multiple family) - $200.
e. Conditional Uses - $100.
f. Transcript Costs - full costs.
g. Transcript Copies - $1 per page.
h. Publication of Decisions - cost.
i. Copies of Resolution - $1 per page.
j. List of Property Owners within 200 feet - $10.
k. Certificate of Subdivision - $25.
45.Editor’s Note: See also Chapter 19, Subsection 19-1.14 for additional fee requirements.
§ 21-11.3 GENERAL § 21-11.5
1:675
§ 21-11.6. Application for Certificate of Occupancy. [Ord. No. 2067]
Every application for a certificate of occupancy shall refer to the building
permit issued, or (if none was required) shall set forth the additional data
required in an application for building permit.
§ 21-11.7. Certificate of Occupancy Required Prior to Occupancy,
Use or Change of Use. [Ord. No. 2067]
No such occupancy, use or change of use shall take place until a certificate
of occupancy therefore has been issued by the construction official. No
certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless the proposed occupancy is in
full conformity of this chapter.
§ 21-11.8. Term of Certificate of Occupancy. [Ord. No. 2067]
A certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to authorize, and is required
for, both initial and continued occupancy and use of the building or land to
which it applies, and shall continue in effect so long as such building and the
use thereof or the use of such land is in full conformity with the provisions of
this chapter and any requirements made pursuant thereto. However, on the
serving of notice of any violation of any of the provisions or requirements
with respect to any building or the use thereof or of land, the certificate of
occupancy for such use shall thereupon, without further action, be null and
void, and a new certificate of occupancy shall be required for any further
use of such building or land.
§ 21-11.9. Filing of Duplicate Copies. [Ord. No. 2067]
Duplicate copies of every certificate of occupancy issued hereafter shall
be filed with the town assessor. A record of all certificates of occupancy
shall be kept in the office of the construction official, and copies shall be
furnished, on request, to the zoning board of adjustment or to any person
having any legal interest in the building or land affected.
§ 21-12. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No. 2165, § I; Ord. No.
2206, § 1; Ord. No. 2522, § III; Ord. No. 2534, § 1; Ord. No. 2567,
§ 3; Ord. No. 2618, § 1; Ord. No. 2624, § 1; Ord. No. 2679, § 1; Ord.
No. 2867-12; Ord. No. 2872-12; Ord. No. 2914-15]
a. Occupancy and use of building hereafter constructed including
additions for commercial, industrial and multi-family structures.
b. A change in the use of an existing building.
c. Occupancy and use of vacant land, or change in the use of land except
for any use consisting primarily of tilling the soil.
Certificates of occupancy shall be obtained for each dwelling unit in a
multi-family structure.
d. Any change of ownership for occupancy of an existing building.
§ 21-11.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-12
1:676
a. General Interpretation. Except where specifically defined herein all
words used in this chapter shall carry their customary meanings. Words
used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the
singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word
"may" is permissive; the word "building" includes all other structures of
every kind regardless of similarity to buildings; and the phrase "used
for" shall include the phrases "intended for", "maintained for" and
"occupied for".
b. Definitions. As used in this chapter:
ACCESSORY BUILDING — Shall mean a building subordinate to the
main building on a lot the use of which is customarily incidental to the
use of the main building.
ACCESSORY USE — Shall mean a use customarily incidental to the
principal use of a building or land, such as the office of a professional
person, a driveway or a parking area.
ADVERTISING SIGNS — See Sign, advertising.
ALTERATIONS — Shall mean, as applied to a building or structure,
a change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in the existing
facilities of an enlargement, whether by extending on a side or by
increasing in height, or the moving from one location or position to
another.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — Shall mean any business that provides for
use by the public, six or more video games, electronic games, pin ball
machines, or other similar type games.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — Shall mean any place where animals are offered
medical treatment, boarding, or breeding.
APPLICANT — Shall mean a developer submitting an application for
development.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean the application form
and all accompanying documents required by ordinance for approval
of a subdivision plot, site plan, planned development, conditional use,
zoning variance or direction of the issuance of a permit pursuant by law.
AUTO LAUNDRY — Shall mean a building or premises where
automobiles are washed either by automatic equipment or by hand.
BASEMENT — Shall mean that portion of a building that is partly
or completely below grade plane (see "story above grade plan"). A
basement shall be considered as a full story above grade where the
finished surface of the floor above the basement is more than six feet
above the finished ground level for more than 50% of the total building
perimeter. Where there is a two car garage located in the basement
with minimum dimensions of 22 feet in depth and 26 feet in width, a
basement shall be considered 1/2 story. There shall be no installation of
walls, berms, fill, or build-up of soil to reduce the height of the building.
§ 21-12 GENERAL § 21-12
1:677
From the rear line of the building the rear yard may be leveled with
walls and fill on both sides and the rear yard thereby splitting the
difference equally in grade.
BEAUTY PARLOR — Shall mean any business providing hair cutting,
manicures, pedicures, facials, or other cosmetic treatments, or tanning
salons.
BLOCK — Shall mean an area bounded by streets and streams or
township boundary lines.
BOARDER — Shall mean an individual, other than a domestic employee
or home health caregiver, who is given lodging in a dwelling unit in
exchange for a fee. Ingress and egress to and from the dwelling unit
shall be shared by such individual with the housekeeping unit residing
in the dwelling unit. Sleeping facilities for such individual shall be
located in a room or area within the dwelling unit.
BODY ART — Shall mean the practice of physical body adornment
in permitted establishments by operators utilizing, but not limited to,
the following techniques: (1) body piercing, (2) tattooing, and (3)
permanent cosmetics.
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean any place or premises,
whether public or private, temporary or permanent in nature or
location, where the practices of body art, whether or not for profit, are
performed.
BODY PIERCING — Shall mean the puncturing or penetration of the
skin of a person using presterilized, single-use needles and the
insertion of presterilized or disinfected jewelry or other adornment
thereto in the opening.
BUILDING — Shall mean any structure built for the support, shelter,
or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or movable property of any
kind, and which is permanently affixed to the land.
BUILDING COVERAGE — Shall mean the ratio of the lot area which lies
within the outside lines of the exterior walls of principal buildings on
the lot to the total area of the lot, expressed as a percentage.
BUILDING HEIGHT — Shall mean the vertical distance measured from
the top of the average curb height in front of the building to the highest
point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to
the top of the ridge line for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING, DETACHED — Shall mean a building surrounded by open
space on the same lot.
BUILDING, FULLY ENCLOSED — Shall mean a building separated on
all sides from the adjacent open space or from other buildings or other
structures by a permanent roof and by exterior or party walls, pierced
only by windows and normal entrance or exit doors.
§ 21-12 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-12
1:678
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL or PRINCIPAL BUILDING — Shall mean a
nonaccessory building in which a principal use of the lot on which it is
located is conducted.
BULK — Shall mean the volume and shape of a building or of a
nonbuilding use in relation to lot lines, center lines of streets, other
buildings and all open spaces appurtenant to a building or a
nonbuilding use.
BULK, NONCONFORMING — Shall mean that part of a building or
nonbuilding use which does not conform to one or more of the
applicable bulk regulations prescribing the maximum floor area ratio,
maximum height per foot of distance from each lot line, length, or
height of building or nonbuilding use, or the minimum lot area per
dwelling unit, lot frontage yards, courts, required spacing between
detached buildings on the same lot and usable open space on the lot for
the district in which such building or nonbuilding use is located.
CONDOMINIUM — Shall mean an apartment or townhouse building(s)
where each dwelling unit is individually owned, while common property
is collectively owned and maintained by all residents of the building.
DAY CARE CENTER — Shall mean any building or part thereof used for
the purpose of care for, supervising or babysitting six or more children
at any given time. This definition shall not apply to any licensed
educational or medical institution.
DRIVEWAY — Shall mean an open area used as a means to provide
vehicular ingress or egress to a property.
DWELLING — Shall mean a building or portion thereof, but not an
automobile house trailer, designed or used exclusively for residential
occupancy, including one and two family dwellings, and multiple family
dwellings, but not including hotels.
DWELLING UNIT — Shall mean living quarters for one housekeeping
unit and up to two boarders or roomers. A dwelling shall be selfcontained
and shall not require the use of outside stairs or common
hallways passing through another dwelling unit or other indirect
route(s) for access to any portion of the dwelling unit, nor shall there
be shared facilities with another housekeeping unit.
DWELLING, DETACHED — Shall mean a building physically detached
from other buildings or portions of buildings, which is occupied or
intended to be occupied for residential purposes by one housekeeping
unit.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY or MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING —
Shall mean a building, or portion thereof, containing three or more
dwelling units.
DWELLING, ONE FAMILY or ONE-FAMILY DWELLING — Shall mean a
detached dwelling containing one dwelling unit.
§ 21-12 GENERAL § 21-12
1:679
DWELLING, TWO FAMILY or TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — Shall mean a
dwelling containing two dwelling units.
FAMILY — Shall mean one or more persons, including domestic
employees, occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single
housekeeping unit.
FLOOR AREA OF BUILDING — Shall mean the sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the several floors of the building and its accessory
buildings on the same lot. The floor area shall include kitchens, closets,
bathrooms, basements, hallways, and areas of enclosed roofed porches,
terraces, and any other habitable space within the dwelling unit in
addition to the area of all other rooms within the dwelling unit. In
residential buildings, the areas of an attached garage, cellar, or
uncovered patio and decks are excluded. All dimensions shall be
measured between the exterior faces of walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — Shall mean the floor area of all buildings on a
lot, divided by the area of such lot.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT, TAKE OUT — Shall mean any business
primarily (50% or more in customer volume) engaged in preparation
and/or sale of prepared meals for walk-in or delivery take-outs. This
definition will include, but not be limited to, the following businesses:
pizza parlors, sub shops, ice cream or cappuccino parlors, or businesses
offering other types of American or other ethnic prepared meals for
sale. This definition does not include those businesses where take out
meal service is ancillary to the primary business, or businesses which
sell food products but not prepared meals, such as: supermarkets,
delicatessens, bakeries and butchers.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — Shall mean an enclosed space for the storage of
one or more motor vehicles, provided that no business, occupation or
service is conducted for profit therein nor space therein for more than
one car is rented to a non-resident of the premises.
GARAGE, REPAIR — Shall mean an enclosed space other than a private
garage, available to the public, operated for gain and which is used for
repair, rental, greasing, washing, servicing, adjusting or equipping of
automobiles.
GARAGE, STORAGE — Shall mean a garage available to the public,
operated for gain, used for storage of motor vehicles.
GARDEN APARTMENT DEVELOPMENT — Shall mean a development
containing two or more multiple family dwelling structures on the same
lot or parcel of land.
GASOLINE STATION — Shall mean an area of land including structures
thereon which is used for the retail sale and direct delivery to motor
vehicles of gasoline and lubricating oil and may include in the building
facilities for lubricating, washing or otherwise servicing of vehicles
but not to include auto body work, nor welding, nor painting, nor the
§ 21-12 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-12
1:680
repairing in any manner of buses or of trucks of 1 1/2 ton capacity or
more, nor the renting of cars, trailers or trucks.
GRADE PLANE — Shall mean a reference plane representing the
average of finished ground level adjoining the building at exterior walls.
Where the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls,
the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the
area between the building and the lot line or, where the lot line is more
than six feet from the building, between the building and a point six feet
from the building.
HOSPITAL — Shall mean a facility for general medical and surgical
treatment of patients, for in-hospital or out-patient care, but not to
include treatment for drug addiction, alcoholism, mental health
disturbances. Anything inconsistent with this definition will not be
considered a permitted hospital use.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — Shall mean one or more persons living
together in one dwelling unit on a nonseasonal basis and sharing living,
sleeping, cooking and sanitary facilities on a nonprofit basis.
JUNK YARD — Shall mean the use of more than 100 square feet of
open area of any lot for the deposit, collection, storage, keeping or
abandonment of wrecked or inoperative automobiles or other vehicles
or parts thereof, waste paper rags, sheet metal, used building
materials, house furnishings, machinery or other scrap materials or
junk.
LANDING — Shall mean the floor at the head or foot of a flight of stairs
or a platform between flights of stairs, which shall not exceed 10 feet in
length across the front of a residential structure and 50 square feet in
area. In the event that such dimensions are exceeded, such floor shall
be deemed to be a porch.
LOADING SPACE — Shall mean any off-street space not less than 10
feet wide and 25 feet long, surfaced to be available in all weather,
suitable for the loading or unloading of goods, and having direct access
to a street.
LOT — Shall mean one or more contiguous parcels of land united by a
common interest or use considered as a unit, occupied or designed to
be occupied by a principal building or use and its accessory buildings
and uses, if any, including the open spaces of such unit of land. It
may or may not coincide with the deed description thereof or the tax
boundaries of the same as shown on the tax assessment map of the
township or a map filed for record or otherwise.
LOT LINE, FRONT or FRONT LOT LINE — Shall mean that boundary
of a lot which is along an existing or dedicated public street, or where
no public streets exist is along a public way. The owner of a corner lot
may select either street lot line as the front lot line.
§ 21-12 GENERAL § 21-12
1:681
LOT LINE, REAR or REAR LOT LINE — Shall mean that boundary of a
lot which is most distant from and is or is most nearly parallel to, the
front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE or SIDE LOT LINE — Shall mean any boundary of a lot
which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT, CORNER — Shall mean a parcel of land two or more boundary
lines of which are coincident with street lines which form an interior
angle with each other.
LOT, DEPTH OF — Shall mean the mean horizontal distance between
the front and rear lot lines.
LOT, FRONTAGE — Shall mean the horizontal distance measured along
the full length of the front lot line.
LOT, LINE — Shall mean a boundary line of a lot.
LOT, THROUGH — Shall mean a lot which runs from one street to
another.
LOT, WIDTH OF or LOT WIDTH — Shall mean the straight line distance
between points on opposite side lot lines where the boundary between
the front yard and the side yards meet the side lot lines.
MOTOR VEHICLE, ABANDONED — See the Property Maintenance
Code.
MUNICIPAL AGENCY — Shall mean either the planning board or board
of adjustment as the case may be as determined by the applicable
powers granted by the Municipal Land Use Act N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.
NONBUILDING USE — Shall mean a use generally a principal use
land, to which the buildings on the lot, if any are accessory, such as
an advertising sign, trailer camp, or an open storage yard for materials
or equipment and on which the buildings, if any, may be used (a) for
processing the materials stored in such yard (b) for storage of the more
valuable equipment and materials than that generally stored in the
open, or (c) as an office or place of shelter for the keeper of the yard.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — Shall mean a structure which
conforms to the use regulations of this chapter but which violates
one or more of the applicable bulk regulations; also a structure which
occupies a lot which does not meet one or more of the requirements
regarding off-street parking or loading, fences, walls or signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — Shall mean any use of land, buildings or
structures which does not comply with all of the regulations of the
chapter governing use for the zoning district in which such use is
located.
NURSERY SCHOOL — See Day Care Center.
NURSING HOME — Shall mean a facility for medical or convalescent
care or for long-term care of chronically ill patients but not to include
§ 21-12 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-12
1:682
treatment for drug addiction, alcoholism, or mental health
disturbances.
OPEN SPACE — Shall mean an open space area within the development
designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of the residents of
the development and including such complimentary structures and
improvements such as recreation facilities or open shelter buildings
as are appropriate for the use or enjoyment of residents of the
development.
PARKING SPACE — Shall mean an off-street space accessible and
available for the parking of one motor vehicle and having dimensions of
at least nine feet by 20 feet; in computing the number of spaces in any
given parking area a total of 300 square feet inclusive of passageways
and aisles shall be used.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD — Shall mean a criterion established to
control noise, order, smoke, toxin or noxious matter, vibration, fire and
explosive hazards and glare or heat generated by or inherent in uses of
land or buildings.
PERMANENT COSMETICS — Shall mean the implanting of inert
pigments, colors and/or dyes intradermally which results in a
permanent alteration of tissue to gain a cosmetic effect. Permanent
cosmetics is also known as "micro-pigmentation" or "dermal
pigmentation."
PORCH — Shall mean a roofed open area which may be screened,
attached or part of and with direct access to or from a building. It
ceases to be a porch and becomes a room when the space is enclosed
and heated or air conditioned, and when the percentage of window area
to wall area is less than 50%.
PREMISES — Shall mean the lot, and any structures thereon, on, or in
which the subject use is situated.
PROFESSION — Shall mean and include the following: architect, artist,
accountant, dentist, surgeon or physician, engineer, land surveyor,
lawyer, musician, real estate or insurance agent or broker.
RECREATION SPACE — Shall mean an outdoor space specifically
designated for recreation use. This space shall not have any other uses,
such as parking, or refuse storage. The space shall be open with a lawn
surface.
RESTAURANT — Shall mean an establishment preparing and serving
food for consumption within the building in which the food is prepared.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE IN — Shall mean an establishment serving food
to persons outside the building in which the food is prepared and/or
providing tables, benches or automobile parking space where food may
be eaten outside such building.
RESTAURANT, TAKE OUT — Shall mean an establishment preparing
food for retail sale on the premises but for consumption off the
§ 21-12 GENERAL § 21-12
1:683
premises, includes delicatessens, shops preparing ice-cream on the
premises, bakeries, confectioneries, pizza shops and similar shops
where at least 90% of the food prepared is sold at retail and not for
resale.
ROOMER — See Boarder.
SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean a business establishment
conducted to render a personal service including shoe repair shops,
beauty shops, barber shops or conducted to render a household service
including the repair of watches, clocks, furniture, radios, television
sets and other household appliances, but not including the repair of
furnaces and boilers, refrigerators, air conditioners and other articles
of similar bulk and weight, or to render a business service such as
photocopying or photography but excluding printing establishments
except those in which no individual motor exceeds 10 horsepower.
SETBACK — Shall mean the distance from the property line to the
nearest projection of any building. The front, interior, side and rear
setbacks shall be measured from the front, interior side, corner side
and rear lot lines respectively.
SIGN — Shall mean any structure or part thereof or device attached
thereto or painted or represented thereon which shall display or
include any letter, work, model banner, flag, pennant, insignia device or
representation used as, or which is in the nature of an announcement,
direction or advertisement.
The word "sign" includes the word "billboard," but does not include
the flag, pennant or insignia of any nation, state, city or other political
unit, or of any political, educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic,
professional, religious or like campaign, drive, movement or event.
SIGN, ADVERTISING — Shall mean a sign which directs attention to
a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or
offered elsewhere than on the premises and only incidentally on the
premises if at all.
SIGN, AREA — Shall mean the area within the shortest line that can be
drawn around the outside perimeter of a sign including all decorations
but excluding supports, if any, unless the supports are illuminated. In
computing the area of a sign, the area of all faces of such sign shall be
included.
SIGN, BUSINESS — Shall mean a sign which directs attention to a
business or profession conducted on the premises.
SIGN, GROUND — Shall mean a sign fixed to or located on the ground
rather than attached to a building.
STORY — Shall mean that portion of a building included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above, or if there is
no floor above, the space between the floor and the ceiling next above.
STORY ABOVE GRADE PLANE — Shall mean any story having its
finished floor surface entirely above grade plane, except that a
§ 21-12 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-12
1:684
basement shall be considered as a story above grade plane where the
finished surface of the floor above the basement is more than six feet
above the finished ground level for more than 50% of the total building
perimeter.
STORY-HALF — Shall mean that portion of a building situated above
a full story and having at least two opposite exterior walls meeting a
sloping roof at a level not higher above the floor than a distance equal
to one-half the floor to ceiling height of the story below.
STREET — Shall mean an existing state, county or municipal road,
or a street shown upon a plat approved by the planning board of the
township or a street on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the
county clerk prior to the creation of such planning board and the grant
to such planning board of the power to approve plats.
TATTOO or TATTOOING — Shall mean any method of placing ink or
other inert pigment into or under the skin or mucosa by the aid of
needles or any other instrument used to puncture the skin, resulting in
permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa. This includes all forms of
permanent cosmetics.
TOTAL LOT COVERAGE — Shall mean the building coverage and the
ratio of the lot area, which is covered by accessory buildings, patios,
in ground swimming pools, driveways, sidewalks, roofed or enclosed
decks and porches expressed as a percentage. Above ground swimming
pools and unenclosed or unroofed decks shall not be included in the
total lot coverage.[Ord. No. 2914-15]
TRUCK TERMINAL — Shall mean any lot or premises used for a
business, the primary purpose of which is the transfer and shipping of
goods and/or materials.
USE ALLOWED BY RIGHT — Shall mean any use designated as
"allowed by right" in this chapter shall be permitted and all required
certificates and permits shall be issued without any administrative
discretion on the part of any elected or appointed official or duly
constituted board provided the use complies with all requirements of
this chapter.
USE, PRINCIPAL — Shall mean the specific purpose for which land or
a building is designed, arranged, intended, or for which it is or may be
occupied or maintained.
USE, PROHIBITED — Shall mean a use not permitted within a district.
The listing of certain uses as specifically prohibited reiterates the
prohibition regarding those particular uses to avoid doubt and
confusion.
YARD — Shall mean the space on a lot extended along a lot line between
such lot line and a principal building or buildings, or nonbuilding use
occupying such lot.
YARD, FRONT — Shall mean a yard extending the full width of the lot
and situated between the street line and the front line of the building
§ 21-12 GENERAL § 21-12
1:685
§ 21-13. AMENDMENTS.
§ 21-13.1. Changes in Districts. [Ord. No. 2067]
The board of commissioners may, by ordinance, amend, change, and modify
or repeal regulations, limitations, restrictions or boundaries of districts
herein contained on its own motion, upon resolution of the planning board
or on petition, in accordance with the regulations set forth below and in
accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Land Use Law N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.
§ 21-13.2. Petitions. [Ord. No. 2067]
Petitions to amend this chapter shall be made on forms prescribed by the
board of commissioners. Every such petition shall be accompanied by a
map showing the area for which the change is asked and all immediately
abutting property and uses thereof. Such petition shall state the details of
the proposed change in regulations or districts and the reasons advanced
by support thereof. The petition is to be signed by a minimum of 20% of the
property owners whose land is the subject of the petition.
§ 21-13.3. Time Allowed for Board of Commissioners Action. [Ord.
No. 2067]
When such amendment is requested either by petition or by resolution
of the planning board, the board of commissioners shall either deny such
request or introduce the necessary amending ordinance within 60 days
after the filing of such resolution or petition with the township clerk.
§ 21-13.4. Public Hearing. [Ord. No. 2067]
A public hearing after notice, as required by law, shall be held on all
proposals to amend this chapter. All parties in interest and all citizens shall
be given an opportunity to be heard.
projected to side lines of the lot. The depth of the front yard shall be
measured between the front line of the building and the street line.
Covered porches whether enclosed or unenclosed, shall be considered
as part of the main building and shall not project into a required front
yard.
YARD, REAR — Shall mean a yard extending the full width of the lot and
situated between the rear line of the building and the rear line of the
lot.
YARD, SIDE — Shall mean a yard situated between the building on the
side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard.
§ 21-12 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-13.5
1:686
§ 21-13.5. Referral to Planning Board Prior to Hearing. [Ord. No.
2067]
Prior to such hearing the proposed amendment shall be referred to the
planning board which shall report thereon within 30 days after receiving
such request. The report shall be read at the public hearing. If the planning
board requests such amendment by resolution, the board may subject this
report to the board of commissioners simultaneously with its resolution
requesting such amendment.
§ 21-13.6. Planning Board Considerations. [Ord. No. 2067]
In its report the planning board shall give due consideration to the
following:
§ 21-13.7. Changes Within 200 Feet of Municipal Boundary. [Ord.
No. 2067]
Should any proposed amendment consist of or include:
§ 21-13.8. When Notice Is Required to the County Planning Board.
[Ord. No. 2067]
Should any proposed amendment consist of or include the following.
a. Whether the proposed amendment is consistent with the aims of the
master plan.
b. If it is not consistent with the master plan, the effect of change upon the
pattern of land use population distribution as set forth in the plan.
c. If the proposed change will affect land adjacent to the township
boundaries, the effect of such change upon the adjoining municipality.
a. Any change in the boundaries of any district, which change would occur
within a distance of 200 feet of the boundary of any other municipality;
or
b. Any change in the regulations prescribed for any district any portion of
which is located within 500 feet of such boundaries, then the township
clerk shall transmit to the municipal clerk of such other municipality a
copy of the official notice of the public hearing thereon not later than
the day after such notice appears in the official newspaper of the
township. Failure of the township clerk to give such notice to another
municipality shall invalidate the procedure only if the proposed
amendment is adopted.
a. Lands adjoining county roads or other county lands;
b. Lands lying within 200 feet of a municipal boundary;
c. Lands lying within 200 feet of proposed facilities or public lands shown
on the county master plan or official county map, then the township
§ 21-13.5 GENERAL § 21-13.8
1:687
§ 21-13.9. Rejection or Passage of Amendments. [Ord. No. 2067]
If the planning board unfavorably reports on such change or if the owners of
20% or more either of the area of the lots or land included in such proposed
change, or of the lots or land within 100 feet of the rear thereof, or of
the lots or land within 100 feet on either side or directly across the street
therefrom within 100 feet, exclusive of street space, protest in writing such
amendment shall not become effective except by favorable vote of twothirds
of all members of the board of commissioners.
§ 21-13.10. Review by Others. [Ord. No. 2067]
All applications must be reviewed by the fire official, police department,
township planner, township engineer, and, if applicable, the hazardous
chemical control board prior to final consideration by any municipal agency.
§ 21-14. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. No. 2067]
For each and every violation of any provision of this chapter the owner,
contractor or other person interested as general agent, architect, building
contractor, owner, tenant, or any other persons who commit, take part,
or assist in any violation of this chapter or who maintain any building or
premises of uses of any land in violation of this chapter shall for each and
every violation be liable to the penalty stated in Chapter 3, § 3-1. There will
be five days' written notice, $200 fine, or 90 days imprisonment, or both for
each violation.
§ 21-15. MOST RESTRICTIVE PROVISION TO PREVAIL. [Ord. No.
2067]
Where the provisions of this chapter are less restrictive than the regulations
as laid down in the Sanitary Code, Building Code, or other ordinances of
the township the more restrictive provisions of such code or ordinance shall
remain in effect.
§ 21-16. INTERIM ZONING. [Ord. No. 2067]
Ordinance No. 1564 entitled "An Ordinance Establishing a Comprehensive
Zoning Plan and Map for the Township of Lyndhurst, County of Bergen,
State of New Jersey Through and by the Division of Territory Thereof
into Various Districts and Prescribing Certain Regulations and Restrictions
Concerning the Use of Lands and the Locations and Use of Buildings,
Trades and Industries for Each of Said Districts" as amended and
supplemented and contained in the Revised General Ordinances of the
Township of Lyndhurst as Chapter 21, in accordance with Chapter 291,
Laws of New Jersey 1975, and to serve as an interim ordinance as required
clerk shall give notice to the county planning board at least 10 days
prior to the public hearing thereon by personal delivery or certified mail
of the official notice of the public hearing together with a copy of the
proposed ordinance.
§ 21-13.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-16
1:688
by law to be reviewed, revised and codified in substantial conformance
with the master plan of the township within one year from the date hereof,
as amended and supplemented is hereby saved from repeal and adopted,
established and confirmed as an ordinance of the township to serve as an
interim ordinance as required by law to be reviewed, revised and codified
in substantial conformance with the master plan of the township within one
year from the date hereof.
§ 21-17. SPECIAL REGULATIONS FOR SATELLITE EARTH
STATIONS.
§ 21-17.1. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2067]
The following term shall have the meanings indicated:
SATELLITE EARTH STATION — Shall mean any apparatus, building or
structure which is designed for the purpose of receiving and/or transmitting
television, radio, microwave, satellite or similar signals in connection with
what are commonly referred to as "dish-type antennas."
§ 21-17.2. Administration. [Ord. No. 2067]
The provisions of this section shall be administered by the construction
official of the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 21-17.3. Submission of Plan Required; Review and Decision. [Ord.
No. 2067]
§ 21-17.4. Contents of Plan. [Ord. No. 2067]
The plan shall be drawn on a map to a scale no smaller than one inch equals
40 feet and not larger than one inch equals 10 feet and shall include and
show the following information:
a. Any property owner or person or entity in possession of property shall
submit to the construction official, prior to the placement of a satellite
earth station, a plan showing the size of the satellite earth station, the
proposed location of the same on the subject premises and such other
information as may be required herein.
b. The construction official shall review the plan and render a decision
within 20 days of the submission of plan or within such further time as
may be consented to by the property owner or person in possession of
property.
a. The name and address of the applicant and the owner and the name,
address and the title of the person or entity preparing the plan and
accompanying data, the date of preparation and the dates of each
revision, where applicable.
b. An appropriate place for the signature of the construction official.
§ 21-16 GENERAL § 21-17.4
1:689
§ 21-17.5. Design Standards. [Ord. No. 2067]
c. The lot(s) and block number of the lot(s) from the township tax map and
the length and bearings of the lot lines of the proposed project.
d. The location, names and pavement and right-of-way width of all existing
and proposed streets abutting the lot or lots in question, the property
lines of all abutting properties together with the names and addresses
as disclosed on the township tax map and the tax rolls as of the date of
the application, and the location of existing buildings within 200 feet of
the site in question.
e. All existing buildings and structures and all accessory buildings and
structures on the lot, if any, with dimensions showing present and
finished grade elevations at all corners.
f. All existing and proposed setback dimensions and landscape areas.
g. Existing and proposed plantings to provide screening as required by
this section.
h. Any and all other information necessary to meet any of the
requirements of this section not listed above.
a. The diameter of satellite earth station antennas (parabolic dishes) shall
not be greater than six feet, 1 1/2 inches.
b. The maximum height of antennas and mounting structures, measured
vertically from the highest point of the antennas when positioned for
operation, shall not be greater than 14 feet above the ground.
c. In R-A, R-B and R-C Zoning Districts, satellite earth stations shall only
be installed on ground level.
d. No ground level satellite earth station shall be closer at any point than
13 feet to any side property line and no closer at any point than 20 feet
to any rear property line.
e. Ground level satellite earth stations shall be located in the rear yard
only.
f. Satellite earth stations that are installed other than in R-A, R-B and R-C
Zoning Districts, shall be so installed as to not exceed the district height
limitation, and any such installation shall be completed with
appropriate architectural screening.
g. Every satellite earth station shall be effectively screened by a special
planting screen or fence, as approved by the construction official, which
shall be maintained in good condition so that said satellite earth station
shall not be readily visible from ground level of any adjacent property or
public street.
§ 21-17.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-17.5
1:690
§ 21-17.6. Application Fee; Deposit. [Ord. No. 2067]
The application fee for a permit to install a satellite earth station shall be
in accordance with the township ordinance. In addition, the construction
official may, in his discretion, require the deposit of a sum not to exceed
$750 to cover the cost of review sources deemed necessary by the
construction official, such as the township engineer, township attorney or
other township personnel. The treasurer shall place the deposit in a trust
account and shall charge all disbursements for said review services. Any
unused portion of the deposit shall be returned to the applicant. If the cost
of review services exceeds the amount of the deposit, sufficient additional
funds shall be deposited before any permit shall be issued.
§ 21-17.7. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2067]
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, for each and
every violation thereof and for each and every day that the violation
continues to be in existence, be subject to a fine of not more than $200 per
violation at the discretion of the Municipal Court Judge of the Township of
Lyndhurst.
§ 21-17.8. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2067]
The construction official of the Township of Lyndhurst is hereby designated
as the public officer charged with the enforcement of the terms of this
section. All complaints for alleged violation of any of the terms of this
section shall be submitted, in writing, to said construction official.
§ 21-18. REGULATION OF PROPANE GAS.
§ 21-18.1. Storage and Handling. [Ord. #2143, § I]
The storage, handling or use of propane gas in aboveground or
underground tanks, cylinders, containers or in vessels having an individual
capacity greater than 35 pounds or 10 gallons is prohibited in all Township
of Lyndhurst zones, except as set forth in this section hereinafter.
§ 21-18.2. Permits. [Ord. No. 2143, § II]
h. Power control and signal cables from or to the satellite earth station
shall be underground and installed in accordance with the appropriate
building code, if any.
a. It is the expressed intention of this section that propane gas utilized by
servicemen, contractors, or households (barbecues or recreational use)
is permissible in all zones, without the necessity of obtaining a permit,
as long as the individual propane gas capacity is less than 35 pounds or
less than 10 gallons. However, service-men, contractors or households
who utilize propane gas by tank, cylinders, containers, vessels or
equipment having individual capacity greater than 35 pounds or 10
gallons as part of their day to day servicing or household needs must
§ 21-17.5 GENERAL § 21-18.2
1:691
§ 21-18.3. Severability. [Ord. No. 2143, § III]
Should any article, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
section be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
such judgment shall not affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof,
but shall be confined in its operation to the article, subsection, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase thereof directly involved in the controversy in
which said judgment shall have been rendered.
§ 21-18.4. Repealer. [Ord. No. 2143, § IV]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances presently in effect in the Township
of Lyndhurst except those mentioned in subsection 21-18.3 (Ordinance No.
2033 and Ordinance No. 187447) which are inconsistent with or in conflict
with this section are hereby repealed to the extent of any inconsistency and/
or conflict.
§ 21-18.5. Effective Date. [Ord. No. 2143, § V]
This section shall take effect immediately upon the final passage and
publication according to the Municipal Land Use Act.
§ 21-18.6. Violation and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2143, § VI]
Any violation of this section shall be subject to a fine and penalties as
set forth in the Lyndhurst Zoning Code subsection 21-17.7. This section
does not limit possible fine or penalties under the Bureau of Fire Safety
Regulations which are separate and distinct from the above mentioned
zoning fines and/or penalties.
§ 21-19. WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND ANTENNAS.
§ 21-19.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2546, § 1]
apply to the fire official for a permit for the use of the propane gas in
question. The permit requirements must require, but are not limited to,
that the propane gas in question be kept a safe distance from the home
or structure being repaired, that the propane tank is securely fastened,
and that all other reasonable safety requirements of the fire official are
met.
b. It is the expressed intention of this section that it supplements and does
not contradict Lyndhurst Ordinance No. 20331 and Lyndhurst
Ordinance No. 1874.46
46.Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 2033 is codified in subsection 11-1.4 and Ordinance No.
1874 is codified in Section 25-11 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of
Lyndhurst.
47.Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 2033 is codified in subsection 11-1.4 and Ordinance No.
1874 is codified in Section 25-11 of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of
Lyndhurst.
§ 21-18.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-19.1
1:692
§ 21-19.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2546, § 1]
As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
below:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Shall mean man-made trees, clock
towers, bell steeples, light poles, and similar alternative-design mounting
structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
ANTENNA — Shall mean any exterior transmitting or receiving device
mounted on a tower, building, or structure and used in communications that
radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals,
radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications
signals, or other communication signals.
a. The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the
siting of wireless communications towers and antennas. The goals of
this section are to:
1. Protect residential areas and land uses from potential adverse
impacts of towers and antennas;
2. Require the location of towers in nonresidential zones;
3. Minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
4. Require the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a primary
option rather than construction of additional single-use towers;
5. Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the
extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the
community is minimal;
6. Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way
that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and
antennas through careful design, siting, landscape screening and
innovative camouflaging techniques;
7. Enable the ability of the providers of telecommunications services
to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and
efficiently;
8. Consider the public health and safety of communication towers, as
appropriate; and
9. Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from tower failure
through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
b. In furtherance of these goals, the Township of Lyndhurst shall give due
consideration to the Township's Master Plan, Zoning Map, existing land
uses and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the
location of towers and antennas.
§ 21-19.1 GENERAL § 21-19.2
1:693
BACKHAUL NETWORK — Shall mean the lines that connect a provider's
towers/cell sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices and/or
long distance providers, or the public switched telephone network.
FAA — Shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — Shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.
HEIGHT — Shall mean, when referring to a tower or other structure, the
distance measured from the lowest finished grade of the parcel to the
highest point on the tower or other structure, including the base pad and
any antenna.
PREEXISTING TOWERS and PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Shall mean any
tower or antenna for which a building permit or conditional use permit has
been properly issued prior to the effective date of this section,48 including
permitted towers or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as
such approval is current and not expired.
TOWER — Shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed
primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone,
television, radio, and similar communication purposes, including selfsupporting
lattice towers, guyed towers, or monopole towers. The term
includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers,
common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower
structures, and the like. The term includes the structure and any support
thereto.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS — Shall mean any personal wireless
services as defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1966 which
includes FCC licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services,
including cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized
mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (ESMR), paging,
and similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be
developed. It does not include any amateur radio facility that is owned
and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station operator or
is exclusively for receive-only antennas, nor does it include noncellular
telephone service.
§ 21-19.3. Applicability. [Ord. No. 2546, § 1; Ord. No. 2588, § 1]
a. New Towers and Antennas. All new towers or antennas in the Township
of Lyndhurst shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in
subsection 21-19.3b through d, inclusive.
b. Amateur Radio Station Operators/Receive Only Antennas. This section
shall not govern any tower or the installation of any antenna that is
under 50 feet in height and is owned and operated or is used exclusively
for receive-only antennas. Applications for towers under this section
shall be received and approved by the planning board.
48.Editor’s Note: Ordinance No. 2546, codified herein, was adopted December 20, 2005.
§ 21-19.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-19.3
1:694
§ 21-19.4. General Requirements. [Ord. No. 2546, § 1; Ord. No.
2588, § 1]
c. Preexisting Towers or Antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section,
other than the requirements of subsection 21-19.4, absent any
enlargement, structural modification, addition of any structures,
addition of any users or addition of any type of uses.
d. AM Array. For purposes of implementing this section, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system
which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered
one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall
be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM
array. Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of the
AM array, subject to the review of the planning board to ensure that the
additional units do not violate any provisions of the Township of
Lyndhurst Zoning Code.
a. Principal or Accessory Use. Antenna and towers may be considered
either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use of an existing
structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an
antenna or tower on such lot.
b. Lot Size. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a
tower or antenna complies with zone development regulations,
including but not limited to setback requirements, the dimensions of
the entire lot shall control even though the antennas or towers may be
located on leased parcels within such lot.
c. Inventory of Existing Sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower
shall provide to the township engineer an inventory of its existing
towers, antennas, or sites approved for the towers or antennas, as well
as all sites where an application is pending, that are either within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Lyndhurst or within five miles of the
border thereof, including specific information about the location,
height, and design of each tower. The township engineer may share
such information with other applicants applying for administrative
approvals or permits under this section or other organizations seeking
to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the Township of Lyndhurst;
provided, however, that the township engineer is not, by sharing such
information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are
available or suitable.
d. Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
1. Towers shall maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any
applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to
reduce the visual obtrusiveness. Monopoles may include a design
commonly referred to as a "monopole tree" to provide
camouflaging.
§ 21-19.3 GENERAL § 21-19.4
1:695
2. At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening, and landscaping that will blend them into the natural
setting and surrounding buildings.
3. If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the
antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must
be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with,
the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and
related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
e. Lighting. Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the
FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternatives and design chosen must cause the least amount of
disturbances to the surrounding views.
f. State or Federal Requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of
the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers
and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the
owners of the towers and antennas governed by this section shall bring
such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards
and regulations within 120 days of the effective date of such standards
and regulations, unless a different compliance schedule is mandated by
the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring towers and
antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations
shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the
owner's expense.
g. Building Codes; Safety Standards. To ensure the structural integrity of
towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in
compliance with standards contained in applicable state, local, and
appropriate industry building codes. If, upon inspection, the Township
of Lyndhurst concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and
standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then, upon
notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have
30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards.
Failure to bring such tower in compliance within said 30 days shall
constitute grounds for removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's
expense.
h. Measurement. For purposes of measurement, tower setbacks and
separation distances shall be calculated and applied to facilities located
in the Township of Lyndhurst irrespective of municipal and county
jurisdictional boundaries.
i. Not Essential Services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this section and shall not be regulated or
permitted as essential services, public utilities or private utilities,
unless mandated by federal or state law.
§ 21-19.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-19.4
1:696
§ 21-19.5. Conditional and Prohibited Uses. [Ord. No. 2546, § 1;
Ord. No. 2588, § 1]
j. Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify
that all franchises required by law for the construction and/or operation
of a wireless communication system in the Township of Lyndhurst have
been obtained and shall file a copy of all required franchises with the
Township of Lyndhurst.
k. Public Notice and Hearing. For purposes of this section, any conditional
use request, variance request or appeal of an administratively approved
use or conditional use shall require public notice to all abutting
property owners and all property owners of properties that are located
within the corresponding separation distance listed in subsection
21-19.6b5(b), Table 2, in addition to any notice otherwise required by
the Zoning Ordinance. A public hearing must be held before the
Lyndhurst Planning Board for all conditional use requests under this
section.
l. Signs. No signs or advertisements shall be allowed on an antenna or
tower.
m. Buildings and Support Equipment. Buildings and support equipment
associated with antennas or towers shall comply with the requirements
of subsection 21-19.7.
n. Multiple Antenna/Tower Plan. The Township of Lyndhurst encourages
the users of towers and antennas to submit a single application for
approval of multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for
approval of multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process.
o. Height. The maximum height of new towers shall be as follows:
1. For single user, up to 90 feet in height.
2. For two users, up to 120 feet in height.
3. For three or more users, up to 150 feet in height.
a. Conditional Uses. The following are specifically permitted as
conditional uses: tower or antennas, including the placement of
additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection
with said tower or antenna in the Light Industrial (M-1), Heavy
Industrial (M-2), and Commercial-General Industrial (C-GI). A tower or
antenna, including the placement of additional buildings or other
supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna, in
the Business (B) District are also permitted as conditional uses.
b. Prohibited Uses. Towers and antennas are prohibited in any residential
district. No towers or antennas shall be permitted on any recreational
facilities, parks, passive parks or areas set aside as green acre areas by
the Township of Lyndhurst. No towers or antennas shall be permitted
§ 21-19.4 GENERAL § 21-19.5
1:697
§ 21-19.6. Conditional Use Standards. [Ord. No. 2546, § 1; Ord. No.
2588, § 1]
on any property in which a public or private school is located or on
which a church is located.
a. General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of
conditional use permits for towers or antennas by the planning board.
1. A conditional use permit shall be required for the construction of a
tower or the placement of an antenna in designated zoning
districts.
2. Applications for conditional use permits under this section shall be
subject to the procedures and requirements of subsection 21-5.1 of
the Township Code, except as modified in this section.
3. In granting a conditional use permit, the planning board may
impose conditions to the extent the planning board concludes such
conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the
proposed tower on adjoining properties.
4. Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical or electrical, shall be certified
by a licensed professional engineer.
5. An applicant for a conditional use permit shall submit the
information described in this subsection and a nonrefundable
application fee and an escrow deposit as required by the Township
Code for conditional use applications.
b. Towers.
1. Information Required. In addition to any information required for
applications for conditional use permits pursuant to subsection
21-5.1 of the Township Code, applicants for a conditional use
permit for a tower shall submit the following information:
(a) A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning,
adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to the
other municipalities), master plan classification of the site and
all properties within the applicable separation distances set
forth in subsection 21-19.6b5, adjacent roadways, proposed
means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation
drawings of the proposed tower and any other structures,
topography, parking, and other information deemed by the
township engineer to be necessary to assess compliance with
this section.
(b) Legal description of the entire tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
§ 21-19.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-19.6
1:698
(c) The setback distance between the proposed tower and the
nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties,
and unplatted residentially zoned properties.
(d) The separation distance from other towers described in the
inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to subsection
21-19.4c shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The
applicant shall also identify the type of construction of the
existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of the existing
tower(s), if known.
(e) A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
(f) Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, and the
method of camouflage and illumination.
(g) A description of compliance with subsection 21-19.4c, d, e, f, g,
j, l and m and 21-19.6b4 and 5, and all applicable federal, state,
or local laws.
(h) A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether
construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of
additional antennas for future users.
(i) Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network
for the tower(s) described in the application and other cellular
sites owned or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
(j) A description of the suitability of the use of existing towers,
other structures, or alternative technology not requiring the
use of towers or structures to furnish the services to be
provided through the use of the proposed new tower.
(k) A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within a two mile radius surrounding the Township of
Lyndhurst based upon existing physical, engineering,
technological, or geographical limitations in the event the
proposed tower is erected.
(l) A visual study depicting where, within a three mile radius, any
portion of the proposed tower could be seen.
(m) A statement of intent on whether excess space will be leased.
2. Factors Considered in Granting Conditional Use Permits for
Towers. In addition to any standards for consideration of
conditional use permit applications pursuant to the Township Code,
the planning board shall consider the following factors in
determining whether to issue a conditional use permit:
(a) Height of the proposed tower;
§ 21-19.6 GENERAL § 21-19.6
1:699
(b) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
(c) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;
(d) Surrounding topography;
(e) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;
(f) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness;
(g) Proposed ingress and egress;
(h) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or
structures, as discussed in subsection 21-19.4b3 of this
section; and
(i) Availability of proposed tower to other potential users.
3. Availability of Suitable Existing Towers, Other Structures or
Alternative Technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the
applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the
planning board that no existing tower, structure of alternative
technology that does not require the use of towers or structures
can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. An applicant
shall submit information requested by the planning board related
to the availability of suitable existing towers, other structures, or
alternative technology. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no
existing tower, structure, or alternative technology can
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of the
following:
(a) No existing towers or structures are located within the
geographic area which meet applicant's engineering
requirements.
(b) Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to
meet applicant's engineering requirements.
(c) Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural
strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related
equipment.
(d) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing
towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or
structures would cause interference with the applicant's
proposed antenna.
§ 21-19.6 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-19.6
1:700
(e) The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the
owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to
adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are
presumed to be unreasonable.
(f) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting
factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
(g) The applicant demonstrates that an alternative technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures, such as cable
micro-cell network using multiple low-powered transmitter/
receivers attached to a wire-line system, is unsuitable. Costs of
alternative technology that exceed new tower or antenna
development shall not be presumed to render the technology
unsuitable.
4. Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all
towers for which a conditional use permit is required:
(a) Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least 50% of the
height of the tower from any adjoining lot line.
(b) All accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
district setback requirements.
(c) No tower shall exist within required buffer areas if adjacent to
residential zones as prescribed under local ordinances.
5. Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply to
all towers and antennas for which a conditional use permit is
required:
(a) Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
(1) Tower separation shall be measured from the array line to
the lot line of the off-site uses and/or designated areas as
specified in Table 1, except as otherwise provided in Table
1.
(2) Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the
minimum standards established in Table 1.
Table 1
Off-site Use/Designated Area Separation Distance
Residential, public parks, schools or house of
worship
200 feet or 300% height of tower, whichever is
greater from lot line
Vacant residentially zoned land 200 feet or 300% height of tower, whichever is
greater from lot line
Nonresidentially zoned lands or nonresidential
uses
None, only zoning code setbacks apply
§ 21-19.6 GENERAL § 21-19.6
1:701
(b) Separation distances between towers. Separation distances
between towers shall be applicable for and measured between
the proposed tower and preexisting towers. The separation
distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight
line between the base of the existing tower and the proposed
base, pursuant to a site plan of the proposed/tower. The
separation distances, listed in linear feet, shall be as shown in
Table 2.
Table 2
Lattice Guyed
Monopole 75
Feet in Height
Monopole Less Than 75
Feet in Height
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Guyed 5,000 1,500 1,500 750
Monopole 75 feet in
height
750 750 750 750
Monopole less than 75
feet
750 750 750 750
6. Security Fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not
less than six feet nor more than eight feet in height, and shall also
be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device.
7. Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers for which a conditional use is
required.
(a) Towers facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screen the view of the tower
compound from property used for residences or planned
residences. The standard buffer shall consist of a doublestaggered
row of evergreens consisting of no less than seven
nor more than ten foot wide buffer to screen views of the
facility.
(b) In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced.
(c) Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some
cases, such as towers sited on large, wood lots, natural growth
around property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
8. Access and Parking. There must be a suitable ingress/egress to/
from the tower facility and a minimum of two parking spaces.
9. Real Estate Values. The tower will not have a material adverse
impact on real estate values of surrounding properties.
§ 21-19.6 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-19.7
1:702
§ 21-19.7. Buildings or Other Equipment Storage. [Ord. No. 2546,
§ 1; Ord. No. 2588, § 1]
a. Antennas Mounted on Structures or Rooftops. The equipment cabinet
or structure used in association with antennas shall comply with the
following:
1. The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 100 square
feet of gross floor area or be more than 10 feet in height. In
addition, for buildings and structures which are less than 40 feet in
height, the related unmanned equipment structure shall be located
on the ground and shall not be located on the roof of the structure.
2. If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the
area of the equipment structure and other equipment and
structures shall not occupy more than 10% of the roof area.
3. Equipment storage buildings or cabinets shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
b. Antennas Mounted on Utility Poles or Light Poles. The equipment
cabinet or structure used in association with antennas shall be located
in accordance with the following:
1. In front or side yards, provided the cabinet or structure is no
greater than six feet in height or 100 square feet of gross floor area
and the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of 75 feet from all
lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen
hedge with an ultimate height of at least 42 inches and a planted
height of at least 36 inches.
2. In a rear yard, provided the cabinet or structure is no greater than
eight feet in height or 120 square feet in gross floor area. The
cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an
ultimate height of eight feet and a planted height of at least 48
inches.
3. In all other instances, structures or cabinets shall be screened from
view of all residential properties which abut or are directly across
the street from the structure or cabinet by a solid fence six feet in
height or an evergreen hedge with an ultimate height of eight feet
and a planted height of 72 inches.
c. Antennas Located on Towers. The related unmanned equipment
structure shall not contain more than 200 square feet of gross floor area
or be more than 10 feet in height and shall be located in accordance
with the minimum yard requirements of the zoning district in which
located.
§ 21-19.7 GENERAL § 21-19.8
1:703
§ 21-19.8. Removal of Abandoned Antennas and Towers. [Ord. No.
2546, § 1; Ord. No. 2588, § 1]
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of six
months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or
tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the
Township of Lyndhurst notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure
to remove an abandoned antenna or tower within 90 days shall be grounds
to remove the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. If there are two or
more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective
until all users cease using the tower. The township may condition the
issuance of any permit to demolish or remove a tower or antenna on the
posting of an appropriate performance bond or other suitable guarantee
in a face amount of not less than 120% of the cost (as determined by the
planning board engineer) of such removal, grading and restoration to a
state required under all applicable township ordinances.
§ 21-19.9. Existing Towers. [Ord. No. 2546, § 1; Ord. No. 2588, § 1]
§ 21-19.10. Technical Consultants. [Ord. No. 2546, § 1; Ord. No.
2588, § 1]
The planning board or zoning board may retain technical consultants as
it deems necessary to provide assistance in the review of the site location
alternatives analysis. The service provider shall bear the reasonable cost
associated with such consultation, which cost shall be deposited in
accordance with the township's escrow policies.
§ 21-19.11. Site Plan Approval Required. [Ord. No. 2546, § 1; Ord.
No. 2588, § 1]
Site plan approval by the planning board is required for the installation of
any wireless communications tower and/or antenna within the municipal
boundaries in all zoned districts. Each application shall include a site plan
showing the specific design, location, size, and construction of the proposed
structure which shall comply in all respects with the standards enumerated
herein.
a. Rebuilding Damaged or Destroyed Nonconforming Towers or Antennas.
Nonconforming towers or antennas that are damaged or destroyed may
not be rebuilt without having to first obtain administrative approval or a
conditional use permit and without having to meet the separation
requirements specified in subsection 21-19.6b4 and 5. The type, height
and location of the tower on site shall be of the same type and intensity
as the original facility approval. Building permits to rebuild the facility
shall comply with the then applicable building codes and shall be
obtained within 180 days from the date the facility is damaged or
destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said permit expires, the tower
or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as specified in subsection
21-19.8.
§ 21-19.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-19.12
1:704
§ 21-19.12. Maintenance. [Ord. No. 2546, § 1; Ord. No. 2588, § 1]
The wireless communications facility shall be maintained in good condition.
Such maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, painting, structural
integrity of the mount and security barrier, and maintenance of the buffer
areas and landscaping.
§ 21-19.13. Terms and Conditions to Be Binding. [Ord. No. 2546,
§ 1; Ord. No. 2588, § 1]
This section and all of its terms and conditions, including annual reporting
and continued maintenance, shall be binding upon the applicant, coapplicant,
any legal successor in interest, and the real party in interest.
§ 21-20. AFFORDABLE HOUSING GROWTH SHARE
REQUIREMENTS.49
§ 21-20.1. Definitions. [Ord. #2678, § 21-20.1]
The following terms, as used in this ordinance, shall have the following
meanings:
AFFORDABLE HOUSING and AFFORDABLE UNIT — Shall mean housing
properly reserved for occupancy, by deed restriction or other legal
mechanism, for COAH income qualified moderate-, low-, and very-lowincome
families. All units must comply with those standards and guidelines
set forth by COAH.
COAH or the COUNCIL — Shall mean the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing established under the Act which has primary jurisdiction for the
administration of housing obligations in accordance with sound regional
planning consideration in the state.
DEVELOPER — Shall mean the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot
or of any land proposed to be included in a proposed development, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, or other person having an
enforceable proprietary interest in such land.
DEVELOPMENT FEE — Shall mean money paid by a developer for the
improvement of property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE — Shall mean the assessed value of a
property divided by the current average ratio of assessed to true value
for the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L. 1973, c. 123 (C. 54:1-35a
through C. 54:1-35c).
LOW INCOME — Shall mean 50% or less of the median gross household
income for households of the same size within the housing region in which
the household is located, based upon the U.S. Department of Housing and
49.Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 2541.
§ 21-19.12 GENERAL § 21-20.1
1:705
Urban Development's (HUD) Section 8 Income Limits (uncapped) averaged
across counties for the housing region.
MODERATE INCOME — Shall mean more than 50% but less than 80%
of the median gross household income for households of the same size
within the housing region in which the household is located, based upon the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development's (HUD's) Section 8
Income Limits (uncapped) averaged across counties for the housing region.
VERY LOW INCOME — Shall mean 30% or less of the median gross
household income for households of the same size within the housing region
in which the household is located, based upon the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development's (HUD) Section 8 Income Limits
(uncapped) averaged across counties for the housing region.
§ 21-20.2. Affordable Housing. [Ord. #2678, § 21-20.2]
The affordable housing requirements contained in this section shall be
applied to all construction within the Township of Lyndhurst. Responsibility
for constructing an affordable housing unit shall be as provided for under
this section. Furthermore, this section shall apply regardless of whether a
minor subdivision, major subdivision or site plan is involved in the creation
of the lot under construction or if the construction is on a preexisting lot.
The obligation for affordable housing construction shall apply regardless of
whether or not the property owner or developer has obtained preliminary
or final approval for the construction. For buildings currently under
construction, the property owner is responsible for complying with the
affordable housing requirements in this section if a certificate of occupancy
for the construction has not been issued prior to the adoption of this section.
For all other construction, the triggering mechanism for the affordable
housing responsibility shall be the issuance of a building permit for new
construction.
§ 21-20.3. Affordable Units Required for Residential Developments.
[Ord. #2678, § 21-20.3]
a. Inclusionary Development.
1. Mandatory Set-Aside.
(a) Within all district(s), any applicant for a residential
development in the Township of Lyndhurst that includes four
or more residential lots and/or dwelling units shall be required
to provide the number of affordable housing units equivalent to
20% of the total number of market rate units which will result
from the proposed development, with any decimal amount
rounded to the next highest whole number. All residential lots
and/or dwelling units created from sub portions of an original
tract of land during the time period between January 1, (2008)
and December 31, (2018) shall be added together for the
purposes of this section provision, even if an individual
§ 21-20.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-20.3
1:706
subdivision and/or site plan created less than eight residential
lots and/or dwelling units.
(b) In the case where the Planning Board of the Township of
Lyndhurst has determined, due to site conditions or other
factors which the planning board finds compelling, that the
affordable housing obligation of a proposed development is
incapable of being rounded to the next highest whole number,
the secretary of the planning board shall serve notice of all
relevant facts upon the clerk of the Township of Lyndhurst,
with copies to all parties to the application for development.
The developer shall be subject to subsection 21-20.7 ("Cash
Contribution") below.
2. Requirements for Inclusionary Development.
(a) Developers shall fully integrate very-low-, low- and moderateincome
units with the market units.
(b) Developers shall ensure that affordable units have access to all
community amenities available to market-rate units that are
subsidized in whole by association fees and utilize the same
heating source as market units.
(c) Developers of new townhouse dwelling units shall ensure
compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.14.
3. Compensatory Benefits to Developers. The Township of Lyndhurst
shall permit a developer of an inclusionary development, for which
affordable housing units are created on-site, one or more of the
following incentives:
(a) Permissibility of alternate structure types (for example,
duplex);
(b) Reduction in parking standards;
(c) Increases in permitted density;
(d) Waiver of sidewalk and/or tree requirements;
(e) Relief from regulatory requirements, if such relief will yield a
cost reduction to the developer;
(f) Relief from single family zoning (duplex or triplex)
(g) Waiver or reduction of filing and other fees; tax abatements;
(h) Financial aid, loans or grants to subsidize affordable housing
production; and
(i) Reduced requirements for setbacks, and/or height and/or
stories, and/or lot widths and/or lot sizes, if necessary to
accommodate affordable housing production.
§ 21-20.3 GENERAL § 21-20.4
1:707
§ 21-20.4. Affordable Units Required for Nonresidential
Developments. [Ord. #2678, § 4]
a. Imposed Fees.
1. Within all zoning districts, nonresidential developers, except for
developers of the types of development specifically exempted, shall
pay a fee equal to 2 1/2% of the equalized assessed value of the
land and improvements, for all new nonresidential construction on
an unimproved lot or lots.
2. Nonresidential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to
2 1/2% of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting from
any additions to existing structures to be used for nonresidential
purposes.
3. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure is demolished and replaced. The development fee of 2 1/
2% shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized
assessed value of the preexisting land and improvement and the
equalized assessed value of the newly improved structure, i.e. land
and improvement, at the time final certificate of occupancy is
issued. If the calculation required under this section results in a
negative number, the nonresidential development fee shall be zero.
b. Eligible Exactions, Ineligible Exactions and Exemptions for
Nonresidential Development.
1. The nonresidential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market
rate development shall be subject to the 2 1/2% development fee,
unless otherwise exempted below.
2. The 2 1/2% fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within existing
footprint, reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
3. Nonresidential developments shall be exempt from the payment of
nonresidential development fees in accordance with the
exemptions required pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46, as specified in the
Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Nonresidential Development
Certification/Exemption" Form. Any exemption claimed by a
developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
4. A developer of a nonresidential development exempted from the
nonresidential development fee pursuant to P.L. 2008, c. 46 shall be
subject to it at such time the basis for the exemption no longer
applies, and shall make the payment of the nonresidential
development fee, in that event, within three years after that event
or after the issuance of the final certificate of occupancy of the
nonresidential development, whichever is later.
§ 21-20.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-20.4
1:708
§ 21-20.5. "Very Low," "Low" and "Moderate" Income Split. [Ord.
#2678, § 21-20.5]
Fifty percent of the affordable housing units required to be produced in
accordance with subsections 21-20.2 and 21-20.3 hereinabove shall be
available to "low" income households and 50% shall be available to
"moderate" income households, provided that any single remaining unit
shall be available to a "low" income household.
Thirteen percent of the affordable housing units required to be produced
in accordance with subsections 21-20.2 and 21-20.3 hereinabove shall be
available to "very low" income households. Affordable housing that is
available to "very low" income households also qualifies as both "low" and
"moderate" income housing.
§ 21-20.6. Compliance with COAH's Rules. [Ord. #2678, § 21-20.6]
All affordable housing units shall fully comply with all applicable
"Substantive Rules" and policies of the New Jersey Council on Affordable
Housing (COAH) including, unless modified above, but not limited to,
bedroom distribution, controls on affordability, household income
qualification and eligibility, range of affordability, affirmative marketing and
the construction phasing of the market versus the affordable housing units.
§ 21-20.7. Cash Contribution. [Ord. #2678, § 7]
5. If a property which was exempted from the collection of a
nonresidential development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt
from property taxation, the owner of the property shall remit the
fees required pursuant to this section within 45 days of the
termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid nonresidential
development fees under these circumstances may be enforceable in
Lyndhurst Township as a lien against the real property of the
owner.
c. Compensatory Benefits to Developers. The Township of Lyndhurst shall
permit a developer of nonresidential development one or more of the
following incentives:
1. Increased zoning in permitted floor area with proportional
increases in allowable height and/or impervious coverage to offset
the cost of any affordable housing requirements;
2. Other incentives and/or compensatory benefits required by dulyenacted
and promulgated regulation and legislation.
a. For residential development which proposes less than four residential
units the developer shall be required to provide a cash contribution for
each new housing unit, but in no event would a cash contribution for
residential construction be less than $45,067 which for the purposes of
§ 21-20.4 GENERAL § 21-20.7
1:709
§ 21-20.8. Methods of Compliance. [Ord. #2678, § 21-20.8]
The applicant may satisfy its affordable housing obligation calculated in
accordance with subsections 21-20.2 and 21-20.3 in accordance with one
this section is determined to be one-fourth of the cost of constructing
an affordable housing unit, pursuant to N.J.A.C. § 97-6.4.
b. When, pursuant to subsection 21-20.3 above, the Planning Board of the
Township of Lyndhurst has determined, due to site conditions or other
factors which the planning board finds compelling, that the affordable
housing obligation of a proposed development is incapable of being
rounded to the next highest whole number, the developer shall be
required to provide a cash contribution for each new housing unit, but
in no event would a cash contribution for residential construction be
less than $45,067, which for the purposes of this section is determined
to be one-fourth of the cost of constructing an affordable housing unit,
pursuant to N.J.A.C. § 97-6.4.
c. For those developments proposing more than four residential units, the
developer shall be required to provide on-site production of affordable
housing and shall pay the pro rata contribution as stated above for any
fractional obligation remaining after the production of the mandated
affordable housing units.
d. For purposes of this section, the cash contribution shall be $180,267 for
one affordable unit, in accordance with N.J.A.C. § 97-6.4. The cash
contribution for residential development is presumptively the cost of an
affordable unit either in a single-family subdivision setting including
land, or one unit in a multi-family setting including land. The planning
board may adjust from time to time the presumptive amount based
upon modifications by COAH to the presumptive subsidy required for
the creation of one affordable housing unit in COAH Region 1.
e. When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70d(5) (known as a "d" variance) has been permitted,
developers may be required to pay a development fee of 6% of the
equalized assessed value for each additional unit that may be realized.
However, if the zoning on a site has changed during the two-year period
preceding the filing of such a variance application, the base density for
the purposes of calculating the bonus development fee shall be the
highest density permitted by right during the two-year period
preceding the filing of the variance application.
Example: If an approval allows four units to be constructed on a site
that was zoned for two units, the fees could equal 1 1/2% of the
equalized assessed value on the first two units; and the specified higher
percentage up to 6% of the equalized assessed value for the two
additional units, provided zoning on the site has not changed during the
two-year period preceding the filing of such a variance application.
§ 21-20.7 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-20.8
1:710
or more of the following alternatives as permitted by COAH's "Substantive
Rules" as set forth below:
§ 21-20.9. Permission from Board of Commissioners Required.
[Ord. #2678, § 21-20.9]
Applicant shall obtain written permission from the township board of
commissioners endorsing the applicant's plan for satisfying the affordable
housing obligation created by the proposed development which shall be
submitted to the planning board at the time the application for development
is submitted for review and approval and shall be considered a condition for
the application being determined "complete."
§ 21-20.10. Other Design Considerations. [Ord. #2678, § 21-20.10]
a. On-site production of affordable housing units.
b. The purchase of an existing market rate dwelling unit within the
municipality and its conversion to an affordably priced unit. The
satisfaction of an affordable housing obligation through this method
shall subject the developer to an additional obligation equal to an
additional one-half affordable unit for every affordable unit otherwise
required. Example: If a development generates an on-site affordable
housing obligation of two units, the affordable housing obligation will
be increased to three affordable housing units if the units are provided
by the purchase of an existing market rate dwelling unit within the
municipality for conversion to an affordably priced unit.
c. The purchase of an existing market rate dwelling unit within the
municipality and its conversion to an "alternative living arrangement"
facility (i.e., group home). The satisfaction of an affordable housing
obligation through this method shall subject the developer to an
additional obligation equal to an additional one-half affordable unit for
every affordable unit otherwise required. Example: If a development
generates an on-site affordable housing obligation of two units, the
affordable housing obligation will be increased to three affordable
housing units if the units are provided by the purchase of an existing
market rate dwelling unit within the municipality for conversion to an
"alternative living arrangement" facility.
d. Participation in gut rehabilitation and/or buy down/write down or buydown/
rent down programs. The satisfaction of an affordable housing
obligation through this method shall subject the developer to an
additional obligation equal to an additional one-half affordable unit for
every affordable unit otherwise required. Example: If a development
generates an on-site affordable housing obligation of two units, the
affordable housing obligation will be increased to three affordable
housing units if the units are provided by gut rehabilitation and/or buy
down/write down or buy-down/rent down.
§ 21-20.8 GENERAL § 21-20.10
1:711
§ 21-20.11. Construction of Affordable Units. [Ord. #2678,
§ 21-20.11]
The residential units shall be constructed on a schedule in accordance with
the COAH regulations at N.J.A.C. § 5:97-6.4:
Percentage of Market Rate Units
Completed
Minimum Percentage of Low and
Moderate Income Units
Completed
25 0
25 plus 1 unit 10
50 50
75 75
90 100
§ 21-20.12. Affordable Housing as Permitted on Conditional Use.
[Ord. #2678, § 21-20.12]
Affordable housing is a permitted use in every residential zone and a
conditionally permitted use in every nonresidential zoning district to the
extent that production of affordable housing units is mandated by this
section. Mandatory on-site production of affordable units shall not increase
the density permitted in any residential district. The applicant must satisfy
the affordable housing requirements within the existing density. In
nonresidential zones, the residential density shall be the minimum required
by COAH to satisfy the COAH obligation.
§ 21-20.13. Collection Procedures. [Ord. #2678, § 21-20.13]
a. Permitted Housing Types for Affordable Units. More than one
affordable unit may be on a building lot. Single-family, duplex and
triplex structures, which are affordable housing units, are permitted in
the Township of Lyndhurst.
b. The affordable housing structures shall be consistent in size and
architectural features with the neighborhood or as approved by the
planning board.
a. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval,
for a development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its
staff to notify the construction official responsible for the issuance of a
building permit.
b. For nonresidential developments only, the developer shall also be
provided with a copy of Form N-RDF "State of New Jersey Non-
Residential Development Certification/Exemption" to be completed as
per the instructions provided. The developer of a nonresidential
development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the instructions
provided. The construction official shall verify the information
§ 21-20.10 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-20.13
1:712
submitted by the nonresidential developer as per the instructions
provided in the Form N-RDF. The tax assessor shall verify exemptions
and prepare estimated and final assessments as per the instructions
provided in Form N-RDF.
c. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building
permit shall notify the local tax assessor of the issuance of the first
building permit for a development which is subject to a development
fee.
d. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the municipal tax assessor,
based on the plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized
assessed value of the development.
e. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final
certificate of occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all
requests for the scheduling of a final inspection on property which is
subject to a development fee.
f. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final
inspection, the municipal assessor shall confirm or modify the
previously estimated equalized assessed value of the improvements of
the development; calculate the development fee; and thereafter notify
the developer of the amount of the fee.
g. Should the Township of Lyndhurst fail to determine or notify the
developer of the amount of the development fee within 10 business days
of the request for final inspection, the developer may estimate the
amount due and pay that estimated amount consistent with the dispute
process set forth in subsection b of section 37 of P.L. 2008, c. 46 (C.
40:55D-8.6). The payment of monies by a developer pursuant to this
section shall have no effect on the developer's obligation to provide
affordable housing where no development fee is due.
h. The developer shall pay 100% of the calculated development fee
amount prior to the municipal issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy for the subject property.
i. Appeal of Development Fees.
1. A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed
by filing a challenge with the county board of taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the board, collected fees shall be
placed in an interest bearing escrow account by the Township of
Lyndhurst. Appeals from a determination of the board may be made
to the tax court in accordance with the provisions of the State Tax
Uniform Procedure Law, R.S. 54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after
the date of such determination. Interest earned on amounts
escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
2. A developer may challenge nonresidential development fees
imposed by filing a challenge with the director of the division of
§ 21-20.13 GENERAL § 21-20.13
1:713
§ 21-20.14. Monitoring and Ongoing Collection of Fees. [Ord.
#2678, § 21-20.14]
§ 21-20A. MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON.
taxation. Pending a review and determination by the director,
which shall be made within 45 days of receipt of the challenge,
collected fees shall be placed in an interest bearing escrow account
by the Township of Lyndhurst. Appeals from a determination of
the director may be made to the tax court in accordance with the
provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S. 54:48-1 et
seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination. Interest
earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing
party.
a. Monitoring. The Township of Lyndhurst shall complete and return to
COAH all monitoring forms included in monitoring requirements
related to the collection of development fees from residential and
nonresidential developers, payments in lieu of constructing affordable
units on site, funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls,
barrier free escrow funds, rental income, repayments from affordable
housing program loans, and any other funds collected in connection
with the Township of Lyndhurst's housing program, as well as to the
expenditure of revenues and implementation of the plan certified by
COAH. All monitoring reports shall be completed on forms designed by
COAH.
b. Ongoing Collection of Fees. The ability for the Township of Lyndhurst to
impose, collect and expend development fees shall expire with its
substantive certification unless the Township of Lyndhurst has filed an
adopted Housing Element and Fair Share Plan with COAH, has
petitioned for substantive certification, and has received COAH's
approval of its development fee ordinance. If the Township of Lyndhurst
fails to renew its ability to impose and collect development fees prior to
the expiration of substantive certification, it may be subject to
forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its municipal trust fund.
Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the "New Jersey
Affordable Housing Trust Fund" established pursuant to section 20 of
P.L. 1985, c. 222 (C. 52:27D-320). The Township of Lyndhurst shall not
impose a residential development fee on a development that receives
preliminary or final site plan approval after the expiration of its
substantive certification or judgment of compliance, nor shall the
Township of Lyndhurst retroactively impose a development fee on such
a development. The Township of Lyndhurst shall not expend
development fees after the expiration of its substantive certification or
judgment of compliance.
§ 21-20.13 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-20A.1
1:714
§ 21-20A.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2683, § 1]
The purpose of this section is to create the administrative mechanisms
needed for the execution of Township of Lyndhurst's responsibility to assist
in the provision of affordable housing pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of
1985.
§ 21-20A.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2683, § 2]
As used in this section, the following term shall have the meaning indicated:
MUNICIPAL HOUSING LIAISON and AFFORDABLE HOUSING
ADMINISTRATOR — Shall mean the employee charged by the governing
body with the responsibility for oversight and administration of the
affordable housing program for the Township of Lyndhurst and shall be
responsible for administering the affordability controls of some or all units
in the affordable housing program for the Township of Lyndhurst to ensure
that the restricted units under administration are affirmatively marketed
and sold or rented, as applicable, only to low- and moderate-income
households.
§ 21-20A.3. Establishment of Municipal Housing Liaison Position
and Compensation; Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 2683, § 3]
a. Establishment of Position of Municipal Housing Liaison and Affordable
Housing Administrator. There is hereby established the position of
municipal housing liaison and affordable housing administrator for the
Township of Lyndhurst.
b. Subject to the approval of the Council on Affordable Housing (COAH),
the municipal housing liaison shall be appointed by the governing body
and may be a full or part time employee.
c. The municipal housing liaison and affordable housing administrator
shall be responsible for oversight and administration of the affordable
housing program of the Township of Lyndhurst, including the following
responsibilities which may not be contracted out, exclusive of
paragraph c6 which may be contracted out:
1. Serving as Township of Lyndhurst's primary point of contact for all
inquiries from the state, affordable housing providers,
administrative agents, and interested households;
2. Monitoring the status of all restricted units in the Township of
Lyndhurst's Fair Share Plan;
3. Compiling, verifying, and submitting annual reports as required by
COAH;
4. Coordinating meetings with affordable housing providers and
administrative agents, as applicable;
§ 21-20A.1 GENERAL § 21-20A.3
1:715
5. Attending continuing education opportunities on affordability
controls, compliance monitoring, and affirmative marketing as
offered or approved by COAH;
6. If applicable, serving as the administrative agent for some or all of
the restricted units in the Township of Lyndhurst as described in
paragraph f below.
d. Subject to approval by COAH, Township of Lyndhurst may contract with
or authorize a consultant, authority, government or any agency charged
by the governing body, which entity shall have the responsibility of
administering the affordable housing program of the Township of
Lyndhurst, except for those responsibilities which may not be
contracted out pursuant to paragraph c above. If the Township of
Lyndhurst contracts with another entity to administer all or any part of
the affordable housing program, including the affordability controls and
Affirmative Marketing Plan, the municipal housing liaison shall
supervise the contracting administrative agent.
e. Compensation shall be fixed by the governing body at the time of the
appointment of the Municipal Housing Liaison.
f. Administrative Powers and Duties.
1. Affirmative Marketing.
(a) Conducting an outreach process to insure affirmative
marketing of affordable housing units in accordance with the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Township of Lyndhurst and
the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15; and
(b) Providing counseling or contracting to provide counseling
services to low and moderate income applicants on subjects
such as budgeting, credit issues, mortgage qualification, rental
lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
2. Household Certification.
(a) Soliciting, scheduling, conducting and following up on
interviews with interested households;
(b) Conducting interviews and obtaining sufficient documentation
of gross income and assets upon which to base a determination
of income eligibility for a low- or moderate-income unit;
(c) Providing written notification to each applicant as to the
determination of eligibility or noneligibility;
(d) Requiring that all certified applicants for restricted units
execute a certificate substantially in the form, as applicable, of
either the ownership or rental certificates set forth in
Appendices J and K of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq.;
§ 21-20A.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-20A.3
1:716
(e) Creating and maintaining a referral list of eligible applicant
households living in the housing region and eligible applicant
households with members working in the housing region
where the units are located; and
(f) Employing the random selection process as provided in the
Affirmative Marketing Plan of the Township of Lyndhurst when
referring households for certification to affordable units.
3. Affordability Controls
(a) Furnishing to attorneys or closing agents forms of deed
restrictions and mortgages for recording at the time of
conveyance of title of each restricted unit;
(b) Creating and maintaining a file on each restricted unit for its
control period, including the recorded deed with restrictions,
recorded mortgage and note, as appropriate;
(c) Ensuring that the removal of the deed restrictions and
cancellation of the mortgage note are effectuated and properly
filed with the appropriate county's register of deeds or county
clerk's office after the termination of the affordability controls
for each restricted unit;
(d) Communicating with lenders regarding foreclosures; and
(e) Ensuring the issuance of continuing certificates of occupancy
or certifications pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10.
4. Resale and Rental.
(a) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information between owners and the
administrative agent regarding the availability of restricted
units for resale or rental; and
(b) Instituting and maintaining an effective means of
communicating information to low- and moderate-income
households regarding the availability of restricted units for
resale or rerental.
5. Processing Request from Unit Owners.
(a) Reviewing and approving requests from owners of restricted
units who wish to take out home equity loans or refinance
during the term of their ownership;
(b) Reviewing and approving requests to increase sales prices
from owners of restricted units who wish to make capital
improvements to the units that would affect the selling price,
such authorizations to be limited to those improvements
§ 21-20A.3 GENERAL § 21-20A.3
1:717
§ 21-21. ILLEGAL DWELLING UNITS.
§ 21-21.1. Purpose. [Ord. No. 2621, § 1; Ord. No. 2762, § 2]
The purpose of this section is to establish regulations of illegal dwelling
units and the relocation of displaced persons resulting from the vacation by
a tenant from an illegal dwelling unit within the Township of Lyndhurst (the
"township").
resulting in additional bedrooms or bathrooms and the cost of
central air conditioning systems; and
(c) Processing requests and making determinations on requests
by owners of restricted units for hardship waivers.
6. Enforcement.
(a) Securing annually lists of all affordable housing units for which
tax bills are mailed to absentee owners and notifying all such
owners that they must either move back to their unit or sell it;
(b) Securing from all developers and sponsors of restricted units,
at the earliest point of contact in the processing of the project
or development, written acknowledgement of the requirement
that no restricted unit can be offered, or in any other way
committed, to any person, other than a household duly
certified to the unit by the administrative agent;
(c) The posting annually in all rental properties, including twofamily
homes, of a notice as to the maximum permitted rent
together with the telephone number of the administrative
agent where complaints of excess rent can be made;
(d) Sending annual mailings to all owners of affordable dwelling
units, reminding them of the notices and requirements outlined
in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.18(d)4;
(e) Establishing a program for diverting unlawful rent payments to
the municipality's affordable housing trust fund or other
appropriate municipal fund approved by the DCA;
(f) Creating and publishing a written operating manual, as
approved by COAH, setting forth procedures for administering
such affordability controls, and
(g) Providing annual reports to COAH as required.
7. The administrative agent shall have authority to take all actions
necessary and appropriate to carry out its responsibilities
hereunder.
§ 21-20A.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-21.2
1:718
§ 21-21.2. Definitions. [Ord. No. 2621, § 1; Ord. No. 2762, § 2]
As used in this Section, the following definitions shall apply:
§ 21-21.3. Relocation Assistance Committee. [Ord. No. 2621, § 1;
Ord. No. 2762, § 2; Ord. #2799-11]
a. Illegal apartment or dwelling unit. Any one of the following shall
constitute an "illegal apartment or dwelling unit:"
1. An apartment or unit for which no certificate of occupancy or
certificate of continuing occupancy has been issued.
2. An apartment or unit which would exceed the number of units
permitted under the Zoning Ordinance or any approvals granted by
a land use agency of the Township.
3. An apartment or unit which fails to meet the requirements of any
regulation affecting the health, safety and welfare of the general
public.
4. An apartment or unit which fails to satisfy the requirements of the
Multiple Dwelling Law or any other statute, or ordinance or
regulation governing multiple dwellings.
5. An apartment or unit which the owner has permitted occupancy
thereof without obtaining required plumbing, electrical and
building permits.
6. Any other apartment or unit deemed by the Construction Code
Official or a program of law enforcement or any governmental
agency or by judicial decree to be in violation of any state, county
or Township regulations.
b. Owner-Landlord.
Owner or Landlord shall mean the holder or holders of the title to
the premises in fee simple or having charge, care or control of the
premises, as owner or agent of the owner or as executor, administrator,
trustee, receiver or guardian of the estate or mortgagee in possession,
regardless of how such possession was obtained.
c. Tenant.
Tenant or Displacee shall mean any person residing with the consent or
constructive knowledge of the owner in an illegal apartment or dwelling
unit.
d. Displacement, Relocate/Relocation.
Displace/Displacement and Vacate/Vacation shall all refer to the
cessation of a tenancy, either voluntarily or compulsorily, due to
housing, zoning, construction, or building code violations, a program of
law enforcement, or for related reasons.
§ 21-21.2 GENERAL § 21-21.3
1:719
a. Establishment and Purpose. There is hereby established in the
Township of Lyndhurst a Relocation Assistance Committee (hereinafter,
"the Committee") to advise and assist the Commissioner of the
Department of Public Affairs (hereinafter "Commissioner") with the
administration and enforcement of this section, and with the provisions
of the Relocation Assistance Law of 1967, N.J.S.A. 52:31B-1 et seq.
(hereinafter "the Law"), the Relocation Assistance Act, N.J.S.A. 20:4-1 et
seq. (hereinafter "the Act"), the Anti-Eviction Law, N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1
et seq., and the regulations promulgated thereunder, N.J.A.C. 5:11-1.1
et seq. (hereinafter "the Regulations"), in order to ensure the uniform,
fair and equitable treatment of displaced persons. The Committee shall
be responsible for creating a relocation assistance advisory program to
assist tenant displacees, performing all record keeping required under
N.J.A.C. 5:11-1.1 et seq., assuring owner-landlords' timely submission of
the Workable Relocation Assistance Plan to the Department of
Community Affairs, and approval of same, and assuring the payment of
relocation expenses and collection thereof from owners-landlords.
b. Membership. The Committee shall consist of five members. The
members shall be nominated by the Commissioner, and appointed by a
majority of the full membership of the board of commissioners. The
membership of the Committee shall consist of the following:
1. All members shall be officers and/or employees of the Township,
including the following: the Construction Code Official and the
Township's Building Inspector. These members shall be
compensated pursuant to Township ordinance, funding for which
shall result from surplus fees received under the Uniform
Construction Code.
c. Officers. The Chairperson of the Committee shall be the Construction
Code Official of the Township. A Secretary shall be appointed from the
membership of the Committee at its annual reorganization meeting,
which shall be in January of each year.
d. Term. The term of office for members shall be one year, which shall
commence in January of each year.
e. Annual Report. The Committee shall prepare and file a report in or
about January of each year with the Commissioner. The report shall
include a summary of actions, cases handled, and decisions or
recommendations made during the prior year.
f. Bylaws. The Committee shall adopt bylaws governing the
administration and operation of the Committee at its annual
reorganization meeting.
g. Where practicable, the committee shall adopt resolutions
commemorating the findings of its deliberation.
§ 21-21.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-21.4
1:720
§ 21-21.4. Rental of Illegal Dwelling Unit or Apartment Prohibited.
[Ord. No. 2621, § 1; Ord. No. 2762, § 2]
No owner of real property shall rent an illegal dwelling unit or apartment in
the Township or permit same to be occupied by any tenant(s) or any other
person(s).
§ 21-21.5. Workable Relocation Assistance Plan. [Ord. No. 2621, § 1;
Ord. No. 2162, § 2]
Any owner of real property who, in violation of law or ordinance, rents an
apartment or unit or permits same to be occupied, shall be required to
prepare a Workable Relocation Assistance Plan in accordance with N.J.A.C.
5:11-6.1, and make timely submission and assure timely approval of same
prior to the displacement of any tenant.
§ 21-21.6. Interest Accruing on Unpaid Relocation Costs. [Ord. No.
2621, § 1; Ord. No. 2762, § 2]
In the event that the relocation costs to be paid to the Township with regard
to any parcel of real property shall not be paid within 10 days after the
due date, interest shall accrue and be due to the Township on the unpaid
balance at the rate of 18% per annum until the costs, and the interest
thereon, shall be fully paid to the Township.
§ 21-21.7. Lien for Unpaid Relocation Costs. [Ord. No. 2621, § 1;
Ord. No. 2762, § 2]
In the event that the relocations costs to be paid to the Township with
regard to any parcel of real property shall not be paid within 10 days
after the date due, the Township may pursue all remedies available at law,
including imposition of liens.
§ 21-21.8. Payment of Relocation Costs. [Ord. No. 2621, § 1; Ord.
#2762, § 2; Ord. No. 2823-11]
a. In the case of displacement of any person(s) by enforcement of this
section or other applicable laws or regulations, any owner of real
property who, in violation of law or ordinance, rents an apartment or
unit or permits same to be occupied, shall pay to the Township all
relocation costs incurred pursuant to applicable statutes, ordinances,
and regulation. Relocations costs shall be paid per apartment and
apportioned among the inhabitants therein. Individual tenants of a
single-dwelling unit shall not each be entitled to individual payments of
the entire relocation costs attributable to the entire delinquent unit.
Prior to payment of the relocation costs, the payee shall certify, upon
such form provided by or acceptable to the Township, the monthly
rental amount of the dwelling unit, and shall further certify that to the
best of the payee's knowledge, relocation benefits attributable to that
dwelling unit have not been previously paid by the owner or its agent.
§ 21-21.4 GENERAL § 21-21.8
1:721
b. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1g, any tenant evicted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.2 because of zoning or code enforcement activity shall
be considered a displaced person and shall be entitled to relocation
assistance in an amount equal to six times the monthly rental, with the
owner-landlord liable for the payment. Such relocation assistance shall
be paid by the Township to the tenant immediately upon presentation to
the Township of a true and correct copy of the Judgment for Possession,
Warrant of Removal, or other proof eviction, and thereafter reimbursed
by the owner-landlord to the Township.
c. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 20:4-4.1, any tenant displaced by police, the
Township Fire Official, Construction Code Official, Code Enforcement
Official, Health Officer and/or other applicable municipal officer for
reasons of housing or construction code enforcement shall be
considered a displaced person and shall be entitled to relocation
assistance in an amount equal to six times the monthly rental. Such
relocation assistance shall be paid by the Township to the tenant
subsequent to displacement from the illegal apartment or dwelling unit
and upon the owner's entry of a guilty plea to all charges relative to the
tenant's displacement, and/or 20 days after the owner's conviction. The
owner-landlord shall be liable for the repayment and reimbursement of
all relocations costs paid by the Township to the tenant. This provision
shall not bar the tenant from collecting a greater total relocation
assistance payment if the tenant demonstrates that the amount
necessary to enable the tenant to lease or rent a decent, safe, and
sanitary dwelling of adequate accommodation standards in an area not
generally less desirable in regard to public utilities and public and
commercial facilities, and reasonably accessible to his place of
employment, for a period not to exceed four years, plus moving
expenses and actual direct losses of tangible personal property, exceeds
the total amount paid under this Section.
d. In accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:11-2.1, any tenant displaced by police, the
Township Fire Official, Construction Code Official, Code Enforcement
Official, Health Officer and/or other applicable municipal officer for
reasons of building, housing, health, or construction code enforcement
shall be considered a displaced person and shall be entitled to
relocation assistance in an amount equal to six times the monthly
rental, with the owner-landlord liable for the payment. Such relocation
assistance shall be paid by the Township to the tenant subsequent to
displacement from the illegal apartment or dwelling unit and upon the
owner's entry of a guilty plea to all charges relative to the tenant's
displacement, and/or 20 days after the owner's conviction, and upon the
payee's execution of a certification pursuant to paragraph a above. The
owner-landlord shall be liable for the repayment and reimbursement of
all relocation costs paid by the Township to the tenant. This provision
shall not bar the tenant from collecting a total relocation assistance
payment in excess of an amount equal to six times the monthly rental if
the tenant demonstrates that such amount is less than it would be
entitled to under N.J.A.C. 5:11-1.1 et seq. in the absence of this Section.
§ 21-21.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 21-21.8
1:722
§ 21-21.9. Reimbursement to Displaced Tenant or Person. [Ord. No.
2621, § 1]
In addition to paying costs and damages as provided in this Section, the
owner of the real property shall also return to the displaced tenant or
person any security deposit, together with interest thereon, plus any rental
payment required to be apportioned upon notification by the enforcement
official that the illegal apartment or dwelling unit must be vacated.
§ 21-21.10. Violation and Penalties. [Ord. No. 2621, § 1; Ord. No.
2762, § 2; Ord. No. 2823-11]
e. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:31B-4, any tenant displaced by police,
the Township Fire Official, Construction Code Official, Code
Enforcement Official, Health Officer and/or other applicable municipal
officer by a program of law enforcement shall be considered a displaced
person and shall be entitled to relocation assistance in an amount equal
to six times the monthly rental. Such relocation assistance shall be paid
by the Township to the tenant subsequent to displacement from the
illegal apartment or dwelling unit and upon the owner's entry of a guilty
plea to all charges relative to the tenant's displacement, and/or 20 days
after the owner's conviction. The owner-landlord shall be liable for the
repayment and reimbursement of all relocations costs paid by the
Township to the tenant. This provision shall not bar the tenant from
collecting a greater total relocation assistance payment if the tenant
demonstrates that a fair and reasonable relocation assistance payment
exceeds the total amounts paid under this Section.
f. This section shall be construed in conjunction with all other applicable
statutes, ordinances, and regulations.
a. Any person who violates this Section shall be subject to a fine of not less
than $500 nor more than $1,000 or a confinement of not more than 90
days in jail, or both. For purposes of determining violations of this
Section, each and every day of continued rental or occupancy shall be
deemed to be a separate and distinct violation.
b. In addition to all other provisions set forth herein and applicable
statutes and regulation, the owner-landlord of the structure from which
a displaced tenant is relocated shall be subject to additional fines for
zoning or housing code violation for an illegal occupancy, up to an
amount equal to six times the monthly rental paid by the displaced
person, to be paid to the Township.
c. In addition to all other provisions set forth herein and applicable
statutes and regulation, the owner-landlord of the structure from which
a displaced tenant is relocated shall be subject to a fine equal to the
annual tuition cost of any resident of the illegally occupied unit
attending a public school, which fine shall be recovered in a civil action
by a summary proceeding in the name of the Township pursuant to The
Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999, N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.
§ 21-21.8 GENERAL § 21-21.10
1:723
§ 21-21.11. Subsequent Violations. [Ord. No. 2762, § 2]
For second or subsequent violation for an illegal occupancy, the Township
may impose a fine, in addition to any other fine or penalty within this
Section, equal to the annual tuition cost of any resident of the illegally
occupied unit attending a public school, which fine shall be recovered in
a civil action by a summary proceeding in the name of the municipality
pursuant to "The Penalty Enforcement Law of 1999," N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et
seq. The Municipal Court and the Superior Court shall have jurisdiction,
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A18-61.1g(3.c).
§ 21-21.12. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 2621, § 1; Ord. No. 2762, § 2]
The provisions of this Section may be enforced by all members of the
Township Police Department, the Fire Official, the Construction Code
Official, and the Code Enforcement Official and/or the Health Officer of the
Township of Lyndhurst.
Chapter 22
HEALTH
§ 22-1. GENERAL HEALTH CODE.
§ 22-1.1. Short Title. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
This section shall be known and may be cited as the "Lyndhurst Health
Code."
§ 22-1.2. Definitions. [Ord. #1424, § 10; Ord. #2598, § 1; Ord.
#2608, § 1; Ord. #2838-12]
As used in this section:
ADMINISTRATIVE AUTHORITY — Shall mean the department, branch or
agency of this municipality designated in subsection 22-1.11.
HEALTH AUTHORITY — Shall mean the health coordinator, who shall also
serve as nurse and alternate registrar of the department of health.
d. In addition to all other provisions set forth herein and applicable status
and regulations, the owner-landlord of a dwelling adjudicated as an
illegal dwelling shall be subject to additional penalties and costs,
including but not limited to: increased tax assessments reflecting the
observed use of property, and penalties, fines, and increases in taxation
from the Internal Revenue Service and the State Department of the
Treasury. The Township reserves the right to notify insurers,
mortgagees, and other parties in interest of any fact or allegation of
which the Township becomes aware.
§ 21-21.10 LYNDHURST CODE § 22-1.2
1:724
HEALTH COUNCIL — Shall mean the administrative body to advise and
assist the Health Authority with the administration and enforcement of the
Health Department and Health Code.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, partnership, firm or corporation.
§ 22-1.3. Public Health Nuisance Prohibited. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
§ 22-1.4. Health Council. [Ord. #2608, § 1; Ord. #2710, § 1; Ord.
#2828-12]
a. The following matters, things, conditions or acts and each of them are
hereby declared to be a nuisance and injurious to the health of the
inhabitants of this township.
1. Any matter, thing, condition or act which is or may become
detrimental or a menace to the health of the inhabitants of this
township.
2. Any matter, thing, condition or act which is or may become an
annoyance, or interfere with the comfort or general well-being of
the inhabitants of this township.
3. Pollution, or existence of a condition or conditions which cause or
threaten pollution, of any waters in this township in such manner as
to cause or threaten injury to any of the inhabitants of this township
either in their health, comfort or property.
4. The existence or presence of any water or other liquid in which
mosquito larvae breed or exist.
5. The existence or presence of any accumulation of garbage, refuse,
manure, or animal or vegetable matter which may attract flies and
to which flies may have access, or in which fly larvae or pupae
breed or exist.
6. Depositing, accumulating, or maintaining any matter or thing
which serves as food for insects or rodents and to which they may
have access or which serves or constitutes a breeding place of
harborage for insects or rodents in or on any land, premises,
building or other place.
7. The existence, presence or accumulation of droppings and/or fecal
matter. [Added 11-13-2017 by Ord. No. 2980-17]
b. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to commit, maintain or
allow any nuisances, as declared and described in this subsection.
a. Establishment and Purpose. There is hereby established in the
Township of Lyndhurst Health Council to advise and assist the health
authority with the administration and enforcement of the health
department and Health Code for the protection of citizens and for the
§ 22-1.2 GENERAL § 22-1.4
1:725
§ 22-1.5. (Reserved)50
§ 22-1.6. (Reserved)51
§ 22-1.7. Proper Heating of Apartments. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
It shall be unlawful for the owner or owners who have agreed to supply heat
to any building designed to be occupied or occupied as a residence by more
than two families to fail to supply heat from October 1 in each year to May 1
promotion of health screening, licensure requirements, and health
education, and to improve the quality of life for township residents.
b. Membership. The health council shall consist of five members. The
members shall be nominated by the commissioner of public affairs, and
appointed by a majority of the full membership of the board of
commissioners. The membership of the council shall consist of the
following: the commissioner of public affairs; the health authority; a
physician; a health nurse, and one member of the general public
interested in health programs and education. There shall also be two
alternates who shall be members of the general public interested in
health programs and education.
c. Officers. The chairperson of the council shall be the health authority of
the township. A secretary shall be appointed from the membership of
the council at its annual reorganization meeting, which shall be in
September of each year. Service by the members of the council shall be
voluntary, and no members shall receive compensation for their
services as members or officers.
d. Term. The term of office for members shall be one-year, which shall
commence in September of each year.
e. Annual Report. The health authority, on behalf of the council, shall
prepare and file a report in or about January of each year with the
commissioner of public affairs. The report shall include a summary of
actions or decisions made by the health department and the council
during the prior year, and any recommendations for Health Code
amendments or revisions, or recommendations for new programs to be
administered by the health department.
f. Meetings. Meetings of the council shall be held quarterly. The
chairperson or a majority of the full membership of the council may call
a special meeting upon two days' notice. Four members of the council
shall constitute a quorum.
g. Bylaws. The council shall adopt bylaws governing the administration
and operation of the council at its annual reorganization meeting.
50.Editor’s Note: Repealed by Ordinance No. 2042.
51.Editor’s Note: Repealed by Ordinance No. 2042.
§ 22-1.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 22-1.7
1:726
of the succeeding year in such manner that the temperature of the building
where one or more persons reside shall always be kept at 68° F. or above
between the hours of six ante meridian and 10 post meridian.
§ 22-1.8. Prohibited Lease or Rental of Certain Buildings. [Ord.
#1424, § 10]
It shall be unlawful for any person to rent, lease or otherwise permit the
occupancy of any building as a residence, or for any person to reside in any
building as its owner which:
§ 22-1.9. Inspection of Premises. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
§ 22-1.10. Abatement of Nuisances. [Ord. #1424, § 10; Ord. #1788,
§ 1]
a. Is not adequately and properly ventilated.
b. Fails to provide potable water at sufficient pressure and quantity for
each family unit from a public supply approved by the State Department
of Health or a private supply approved by the administrative authority.
c. Does not have plumbing fixtures consisting of a kitchen sink, bathtub or
shower, lavatory and flush toilet, connected to the potable water supply.
d. Does not have facilities for the discharge of all household liquid wastes
into a public sewerage system approved by the State Department of
Health, or into a private sewerage system approved by the
administrative authority.
e. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units or
lodging units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and
sanitary condition the common areas of the dwellings and premises
thereof.
a. All places and premises in this township shall be subject to inspection
by the administrative authority, or the health authority, if such authority
has reason to believe that any provision of this code is being violated.
b. It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct, delay, resist or
prevent the administrative authority or the health authority from
having full access to any place or premises upon which a violation of
this code is believed to exist.
a. Whenever a nuisance as declared by subsection 22-1.3 is found on any
plot of land, lot, right-of-way or any other private premises or place,
notice in writing shall be given to the owner thereof to remove or abate
the same within such time as shall be specified therein. If the owner,
tenant or occupant upon being notified shall not comply with such
notice within the time specified therein and fails to remove or abate
such nuisance, the administrative authority shall proceed to abate the
§ 22-1.7 GENERAL § 22-1.10
1:727
nuisance or may cause it to be removed or abated in a summary manner
by means as the authority shall deem proper.
b. Whenever a nuisance as declared in subsection 22-1.3 is found on any
public property or any highway or any other public premises or place,
notice in writing shall be given to the person in charge thereof to
remove or abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein.
If such person fails to comply with such notice within the time specified
therein, the health authority may remove or abate such nuisance in the
manner as hereinafter provided in the case of a like condition existing
on a private premises or place.
c. Procedure When Violation Discovered. Except as provided elsewhere in
this code, where a violation of this code or the regulations hereunder is
found to exist, a written notice from the health authority shall be served
upon the person or persons responsible for the correction thereof.
d. Contents of the Notice. The notice shall specify the violation or
violations committed, a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30
days to correct or abate the violation, the right of the person served to
request a hearing and that the notice shall become an order of the
public officer in five days after service unless the hearing is requested,
pursuant to paragraph f of this subsection.
e. Serving of Notice. Notice may be served personally or by prepaid
telegram or by mail with postage prepaid, addressed to the last known
address of the person to be served. In the case of an occupant, notice
may be posted upon the door of his dwelling unit or rooming unit.
Where it is ascertained that the owner does not reside on the premises,
the "last known address" shall be the address of the owner as shown in
the office of the tax collector. If the last known address cannot be
ascertained, the notice may be posted on the outside front entrance of
the dwelling. The public officer shall file and provide notices to any
owner, operator or occupant of any violation at any address other than
the last known address provided hereunder if such other address is
filed with the public officer personally or by certified mail addressed to
the public officer. Service upon an owner, operator or occupant may
also be attained by service of any notice upon a member of the family of
the owner over the age of 14, operator, or occupant. Date of service of
the notice shall be determined where service is by mail as the day
following the day of mailing for notices to addresses within the
township, and as of the fourth day after the day of mailing the notices to
addresses outside the township. Where the day of service would fall
upon a Sunday or other day when mail is not ordinarily delivered, then
the day of service shall be the next regular delivery day.
f. Notice to Become an Order Unless Hearing Requested. Within five days
of the date of service of a notice, the notice shall constitute a final order
unless any person affected by the notice requests a hearing thereon,
services a written request within a five-day period in person or by mail
on the public officer. Such request for a hearing shall set forth briefly
§ 22-1.10 LYNDHURST CODE § 22-1.10
1:728
§ 22-1.11. Enforcement. [Ord. #1424, § 10; Ord. #1788, § 2]
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the department of public
affairs, under the designations of administrative authority; and the health
authority; and the police department. Any citizen may sign a complaint.
When a citizen signs a complaint the summons shall be signed by the health
authority.
§ 22-1.12. Recovery of Costs by Administrative Authority; Cost of
Abatement To Be a Lien Against Property. [Ord. #1424, § 10; Ord.
#1788, § 3]
Where abatement of a violation or condition is required hereunder, the
administrative authority shall cause to be certified to the owner of the
premises the cost thereof. The owner may request a hearing on the
reasonableness of such cost. The administrative authority, upon receipt of
a request for such hearing, shall within 30 days therefrom and upon five
days' notice to the property owner set the matter down for hearing. After
such hearing, final determination shall be made as to the reasonable cost of
abatement, which determination shall be certified to the tax collector and
shall become a lien on the property and be collected by the same procedure
as real property taxes.
§ 22-1.13. Violations. [Ord. #1424, § 10]
Any person who violates, or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter or code established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto, shall
upon conviction thereof be liable to a penalty as stated in Chapter 3, § 3-1.
the grounds or reasons on which the request for a hearing is based and
the factual matters contained in the notice of violation which are to be
disputed at the hearing. The public officer, upon receipt of the request,
shall within 30 days therefrom and upon five days' notice to the party
aggrieved set the matter down for hearing.
g. Determination at Hearing. At any hearing provided hereunder, the
public officers shall be vested with all the powers provided by law to
compel the attendance of witnesses and parties in interest by issuance
and service of subpoena to require the production of books, records, or
other documents at any such hearing which may be pertinent to matters
to be determined by them and to enforce any such subpoena or secure
any order for the enforcement of any such subpoena as provided by law.
Determination shall be made within 10 days from the completion of the
hearing. The public officers shall issue an order either incorporating
the determination and directions contained in the notice, modifying the
notice, modifying the same or withdrawing the notice.
h. Extensions of Time. The public officers may extend the time for
correction or abatement of the violation for an additional period of time
not to exceed 30 days.
§ 22-1.10 GENERAL § 22-2
1:729
§ 22-2. REFUSE COLLECTION CODE.
§ 22-2.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1562; Ord. #1758, § 1]
For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
GARBAGE — Shall mean putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting
from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — Shall mean garbage, refuse and rubbish as defined herein and
all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited,
tends to create a danger to public health, safety, and welfare.
REFUSE — Shall mean all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes
(except body wastes) including ashes, street cleaning, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles, other abandoned personal property and solid
market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Shall mean nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both
combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as circulars, leaflets,
pamphlets, wrappers, handbills, newspapers, and all and any other printed
or nonprinted paper material, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard
clippings, leaves, wood, glass and other similar materials.
SUFFICIENT — Is defined for the purpose of this section to be at least
one receptacle for each family unit or other occupant of premises, but each
occupant of premises shall provide sufficient receptacles to store all the
waste which may be accumulated between the times when such refuse is
disposed of as hereinafter provided.
SUITABLE — Is defined to be a watertight metal, unbreakable rubber or
plastic receptacle with a tight fitting cover, so constructed as to prevent
spilling or leaking of its contents. Each receptacle for use by a single
residence shall have a capacity of not more than 20 gallons and be equipped
with a pull handle or handles. The use of commercially manufactured plastic
garbage bags is permitted when securely tied.
§ 22-2.2. Collection. [Ord. #1562; Ord. #1785, § 1]
The director of the department of public works shall have charge of the
collection of garbage, rubbish and ashes in the township. Collection shall be
made for all premises at least twice each week, provided that the material
to be collected is properly placed at the curb in front of the premises where
the collection is to be made. The material to be collected shall not be placed
at the curbline prior to 6:00 p.m. on the day before the collection is to be
made from the premises. All containers used to store garbage, refuse and
ashes for collection shall be removed from the curbline by 6:00 p.m. on the
§ 22-2 LYNDHURST CODE § 22-2.2
1:730
day that the collection is made by the refuse contractor designated by the
board of commissioners.
§ 22-2.3. Sufficient and Suitable Receptacles on Premises. [New;
Ord. #1785, § 1]
The owner of each occupied premises shall provide and keep on such
premises sufficient and suitable receptacles for receiving and holding
garbage, refuse and rubbish.
§ 22-2.4. Containers Required for Garbage, Refuse and Rubbish.
[Ord. #1785, § 1]
All garbage, refuse and rubbish with the exception of newspapers and
cardboard shall be put out for collection in suitable containers.
§ 22-2.5. Receptacles from Multi-Dwelling Units. [Ord. #1785, § 1]
If multi-dwelling units are using receptacles having a greater capacity than
described in subsection 22-2.1 under the definition of "suitable," they must
meet the qualifications established by the board of health and be equipped
for handling by motorized equipment, cleaned and sanitized as needed after
emptying and be replaced by the same type of receptacle if removed for
emptying.
§ 22-2.6. Unsuitable Receptacles. [Ord. #1785, § 1]
Receptacles that are badly broken or otherwise fail to meet the
requirements of this section may be classed as refuse and collected and
disposed of as such by the person or agency responsible for the collection
of refuse, provided that such receptacle shall not be collected if it appears
to have been suitable, under the definition of this section, at some previous
time, then, in that event, there shall be given a written notice to the owner
of the fact that the receptacle is not deemed suitable, at least five days
before the receptacle is collected.
§ 22-2.7. Receptacle Location, Maintenance and Screening on
Premises. [Ord. #1785, § 1; Ord. No. 2657-08 § 2]
Receptacles shall be conveniently located on premises for the storage of
garbage, refuse, or rubbish and maintained in such a manner, with a cover
in place, as to prevent creation of a nuisance or menace to public health.
No receptacles or containers for the storage of garbage, refuse or rubbish
shall be visible from the public street or right-of-way. If the location or area
for the storage of such receptacles or containers is visible from the public
street or right-of-way, it shall be completely concealed by suitable natural
or artificial screening.
§ 22-2.8. Newspapers and Cardboard. [Ord. #1785, § 1]
Newspapers and cardboard shall be bundled and tied securely.
§ 22-2.2 GENERAL § 22-2.9
1:731
§ 22-2.9. Adequate Storage Facilities Required. [Ord. #1785, § 1]
Storage facilities shall be adequate for the proper storage of all garbage,
refuse and rubbish.
§ 22-2.10. Storage Area Cleanliness. [Ord. #1785, § 1]
Storage areas shall be kept clean so as not to create a health nuisance.
§ 22-2.11. Enforcement of Provisions. [Ord. #1785, § 1]
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the department of health
under the designation of the health authority and the police department.
Any citizen may sign a complaint. When a citizen signs a complaint the
summons shall be signed by the health authority.
§ 22-3. LICENSING OF FOOD HANDLING ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 22-3.1. License Required. [Ord. #1705, § 1; Ord. #2464, § I; Ord.
#2597, § 2; Ord. No. 2665; Ord. #2780]
a. It shall be unlawful for any person or any business entity to conduct a
retail food establishment as defined in and governed by Sanitation in
Retail Food Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending Machines,
N.J.A.C. 8:24-1 et seq. (hereinafter "Chapter 24"), including mobile and
itinerant restaurants as defined and governed by Section 3-12 of the
Township's Revised General Ordinances, without first having obtained a
license from the Lyndhurst Department of Health and without
complying with any or all of the provisions concerning operation and
maintenance of the same as contained in the said Chapter 24 and
Section 3-12 of the Township's Revised Ordinances.
b. No retail food establishment including restaurants, diners and any
other establishments selling or serving food to the public in the
Township of Lyndhurst shall be granted a retail food establishment
license unless the "person in charge" as defined in said Chapter 24,
which shall include the owner, manager or employee in charge of other
employees serving food on each particular shift has successfully
completed a food safety manager's certification course (hereinafter
"manager's course") prescribed and approved by the Lyndhurst
Department of Health pertaining to health, education, sanitation,
personal hygiene, food borne illness, dishwashing and sanitizing
procedures, micro-organisms, insects and rodents, and other health
related matter.
c. Commencing on 2011, the health inspector shall assign the risk type of
retail food establishments in the township to be designated as Risk
Type 1, 2, 3, and 4 as provided and defined in said Chapter 24. Each
person in charge on each particular shift shall complete the first
available food manager's and/or food handler's course, as provided in
paragraph h below, prior to the Department of Health issuing an annual
§ 22-2.9 LYNDHURST CODE § 22-3.1
1:732
license to the retail food establishment. In addition, before a license
shall be issued the retail food establishment shall pay the appropriate
fee in accordance with this section.
d. Approved courses which provide the "food protection manager
certificate" include the following: Servsafe, subject to the provisions of
this paragraph below; the 18-hour food manager's certification courses
administered by the County of Bergen Department of Health Services;
and the National Registry of Food Safety Professionals' course. Online
courses and/or test-only certificates shall not satisfy the requirements
of this section. The health administrator or health inspector shall have
the authority to proclaim additional courses acceptable when they
become available if they are approved by the Conference for Food
Protection and/or the State of New Jersey.
e. Approved courses which provide the "food handler's certificate" include
a three hour course approved by the health department as follows:
Servsafe or the National Registry of Food Safety Professionals.
f. The certificate of satisfactory completion for the food managers' course
shall be considered effective for three years from the date of its
issuance, unless the certificate states an earlier expiration date. The
food handler's certificate shall be considered effective for two years
from the date of its issuance, unless the certificate states an earlier
expiration date.
g. No new food establishment may receive a food establishment license
until the appropriate courses have been completed and the certificates
received. No licenses will be issued unless at least one person holds a
current food manager's certificate from an approved course according
to the Health Code. The health inspector shall have the authority and
responsibility to review such documents and approve the issuance of
the license.
h. The following certificates are required for the operation of a food
handling establishment in the township:
1. Risk Type 1: The person in charge must have a food manager's or
food handler's certificate, and one person associated with the food
establishment must have a food manager's certificate.
2. Risk Type 2: The person in charge must have a food manager's
certificate.
3. Risk Type 3 and 4: The person in charge must have a food
manager's certificate and one additional person must have a food
handler's or food manager's certificate.
i. Commencing January 1, 2012, and each year thereafter, if the person in
charge of each particular shift has not completed the food managers'
course and/or food handlers' course as described according to risk type,
the health department shall issue a temporary retail food license which
§ 22-3.1 GENERAL § 22-3.1
1:733
shall expire on March 31 of that year. For the issuance of such a
temporary retail food license, the retail food establishment shall pay
the normal fee charged for the annual license in the amount of $50. No
part of the surcharge shall be returned. The surcharge shall be used
for the sole purpose of administering this section on those retail food
establishments whose person in charge has not successfully completed
the appropriate food managers' and/or handlers' course.
j. If there is no person in charge on each particular shift who has
satisfactorily completed the food manager's certification course or food
handler's course in accordance with this subsection, then the retail food
establishment shall be issued a summons to appear before the
magistrate to answer the violation.
k. 1. Any retail food establishment which receives an "Unsatisfactory"
rating from the appropriate official inspecting the premises shall
immediately cease from serving any food or similar products until
the licensee has paid a reinspection fee of $200 prior to
reinspection and received a "Satisfactory" rating on reinspection
from the health inspector. The reinspection fee shall be paid at the
main office in the Lyndhurst Health Department. The owner, person
in charge, or manager must take and satisfactorily complete the
next available eighteen-hour food manager's certification course
offered at the Bergen County Department of Health Services.
2. "Conditional Satisfactory:" Any food establishment which received
a "Conditional Satisfactory" rating shall be subject to a
reinspection fee of $200. In addition, if violations are found on spot
checks or in response to complaints, a notice of reinspection shall
be issued to the food establishment, and it shall also be subject to
the $200 reinspection fee. This fee shall be required each time a
food establishment receives this rating or notice. The time period
for the reinspection shall be determined by the health inspector but
in no event shall exceed two weeks after the initial inspection. The
reinspection fee shall be paid at the main office in the Lyndhurst
Health Department prior to the reinspection. In the event that the
fee is not paid within two weeks after the original inspection, a
summons shall be issued for a fine in an amount not less than $500
nor more than $1,000.
3. Any retail food establishment which receives two "Conditional
Satisfactory" ratings within any twelve-month period shall have the
conditional satisfactory rating posted on the premises for such time
as the inspector determines it is necessary for the preservation of
the public health and safety. In addition, its owner or manager must
take and satisfactorily complete the next available eighteen-hour
food Manager's certification course. Failure of the establishment to
adhere to this rule by licensing time of the subsequent year, will
result in a surcharge of $500 on the new license.
§ 22-3.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 22-3.1
1:734
§ 22-3.2. License Fees. [Ord. #1705, § 2; Ord. #2248, § II; Ord.
#2516, § II; Ord. #2571, § 1; Ord. #2665; Ord. #2739, § 1; Ord.
#2861-12, § 2]
The annual fees for licenses of retail food establishments are hereby fixed
as follows:
4. In addition to the remedies stated above, the health inspector
conducting the inspection shall cause appropriate summonses to be
issued for the violation of said Chapter 24, the Ordinance of the
Township of Lyndhurst and applicable statutes of the State of New
Jersey.
l. Term of License.
1. The licenses issued under this section shall be effective for the
calendar year, expiring on December 31st of the year of issue, and
may be renewable for succeeding calendar years thereafter. The
application for renewal fee for license renewal shall be due and
payable on or before February 1 in the year of renewal. Retail food
establishments in operation at the time of enactment of this section
shall be required to procure licensing immediately as specified
herein
a. Restaurants, Luncheonettes, Pizzerias, Etc.
Seating Capacity
1 — 50 $200
51 — 100 $400
101 — 200 $500
Over 200 $600
b. Miscellaneous.
Taverns, no food service $75
Delicatessens $150
Supermarkets
Up to 3,000 square feet $750
Over 3,000 square feet $1,500
Catering Units Mobile $95
Milk $60
Bakery $300
Sushi $150
Prepackaged goods $85
Ice Cream Mobile $250
§ 22-3.1 GENERAL § 22-3.2
1:735
§ 22-3.3. Suspension or Revocation of License; Hearing on Charges.
[Ord. #1705, § 3; Ord. #2780]
Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this section may
be suspended or revoked by the department of health for the violation
by the licensee of any provision of this section, or said Chapter 24, or
whenever it shall appear that the business, trade, calling, profession or
occupation of the person, firm or corporation to whom such license was
Nonprofit organization $65
Temporary food establishment over 10
days
$35
Food Handling Permits-Temporary;
Maximum 10 days for carnivals,
fairs, feasts, etc.
$65
Food establishment not otherwise
listed
$100
c. Flea Markets. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section,
vendors or operators of retail food establishments associated with flea
markets shall have the option of obtaining a license for each event for a
fee of $35 or for all events associated with the flea market in the
calendar year for an annual fee of $200. If the vendor or operator elects
to pay such annual fee, the vendor or operator shall be required to
submit written notice to the township's health department at the time
that the license is obtained of all events during the calendar year to
which the license applies and is restricted. If the vendor or operator
desires to add events during the calendar year to those of which the
health department was notified at the time the license was obtained,
written notice to the health department of at least two weeks prior to
the event shall be required.
d. Term of License.
1. The licenses issued under this section shall be effective for the
calendar year, expiring on December 31 of the year of issue, and
may be renewable for succeeding calendar years thereafter. The
fee for license renewal shall be due and payable on or before
February 1 in the year of renewal.
2. Retail food establishments in operation at the time of enactment of
this section shall be required to procure licensing immediately as
specified herein, and the fees for these licenses shall be due and
payable forthwith in the amounts provided in this section, for the
calendar year 2006. Such licenses shall expire on December 31,
2006 and be subject to renewal for succeeding years.
3. The annual fees for retail food establishment licenses after 2012
shall be the same amount for 2012 or 2013.
§ 22-3.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 22-3.3
1:736
issued is conducted in a disorderly or improper manner, or in violation of
any law of the United States, the State of New Jersey, or any ordinance
of this township, or that the person or persons conducting the retail food
establishment is of an unfit character to conduct same or that the purpose
for which the license has been issued is being abused to the detriment of the
public, or is being used for a purpose foreign to that for which the license
was issued.
A license issued under the terms and provisions of this section shall not be
revoked, cancelled or suspended until a hearing thereon shall have been
held before the health council. Written notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be served upon the licensee at least three days prior to the
date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief statement
of the grounds to be relied upon for revoking, cancelling or suspending
such license. Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the
person to be notified or be deposited in the United States Post Office in a
sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at
the business address appearing upon the license. At the hearing before the
health council, the person aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer
and may thereafter be heard, and upon due consideration and deliberation
by the health council, the complaint may be dismissed, or if the governing
body concludes that the charges have been sustained and substantiated, it
may revoke, cancel or suspend the license held by the licensee.
If any such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof
nor any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to
another license to carry on the same business within the township, unless
the application for such license shall be approved by the department of
health.
§ 22-3.4. Interpretation. [Ord. #1705, § 4]
No provision of this section shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 22-3.5. Penalty. [Ord. #1705, § 5; Ord. #2780]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this section shall, upon conviction, be liable to the penalty in Chapter 3,
§ 3-1 et seq.
§ 22-3.6. Statutory Authority. [Ord. #1705, § 7; Ord. #2464, § I]
This section is being enacted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:52-1 and N.J.S.A.
26:3-69.1 to 3-69.6.
§ 22-3.7. Administration. [Ord. #1705, § 8; Ord. #2780]
The department of health of the township shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this section.
§ 22-3.3 GENERAL § 22-4
1:737
§ 22-4. PESTICIDE CONTROL.
§ 22-4.1. Short Title. [Ord. #1584]
This section shall be known as the "Pesticide Control Ordinance."
§ 22-4.2. Definitions. [Ord. #1584]
As used in this section:
APPLICATION — Shall mean the using, applying, spraying, dusting,
vaporizing, or spreading of pesticides, in any manner, by contract or
otherwise, by any person.
CERTIFICATE — Shall mean a written certificate, issued by the director,
authorizing the performance of services as custom applicator, pest control
operator, pest control consultant, or equipment operator, or authorizing the
use of specific equipment for the application of pesticides.
CUSTOM APPLICATOR — Shall mean any person who, by contract, applies
pesticides to any land, structures, premises, plants, or waters by aerial,
ground, or hand equipment.
DEALER — Shall mean any person who sells, wholesales, offers or exposes
for sale, exchanges, barters, or gives away within this township any
pesticides in containers of a net capacity of more than three pounds.
DEPARTMENT — Shall mean the department of health of the Township of
Lyndhurst.
DEVICE — Shall mean any instrument contrivance, or procedure intended
to trap, lure, destroy, control, repel or mitigate pests, or to destroy, control,
repel, or mitigate fungi, nematodes, or such other pests as may be
designated by the director.
DIRECTOR — Shall mean the health officer of the department of health of
the township.
PERSON — Shall mean a natural person, individual, firm, partnership,
corporation, company, society, joint stock company, association, or any
organized group of persons whether incorporated or not and every officer,
agent, employee or servant thereof.
PEST — Shall mean, but is not limited to, any insect, rodent, nematode,
predatory animal, snail, slug, bacterium, weed and any other form of plant
or animal life, fungus, or virus, detrimental to persons, vegetation, crops,
animals, structures, households, or being present in the environment, or
which the department may declare to be a pest, except those fungi or
viruses on or in living man or other animals.
PESTICIDE — Shall mean, but is not limited to, any agent, substance,
or mixture or substances intended (1) to prevent, destroy, control, repel,
or mitigate any pest; (2) to be used as a plant regulator, defoliant, or
desiccant; (3) any adjuvant, such as a wetting agent, solvent, spreading
agent, deposit builder, adhesive emulsifying agent, deflocculating agent,
§ 22-4 LYNDHURST CODE § 22-4.2
1:738
water modifier, or similar agent with or without toxic properties of its own,
used or intended to be used with any other pesticide as an aid to the
application or effect thereof, and sold in a package or container separate
from that of the pesticide with which it is to be used, and (4) any other
similar substance so designated by the department, including, but not
limited to, herbicides, insecticides, fungicides, nematocides, molluscacides,
rodenticides, lamprecides, plant regulators, gametocides, postharvest
decay preventatives, and antioxidants.
WEED — Shall mean any plant life that grows where not wanted.
§ 22-4.3. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. #1584]
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
§ 22-4.4. Exceptions. [Ord. #1584]
The certification provisions of this section shall not apply to persons using
or applying pesticides to their own premises or to those of which they are in
possession.
§ 22-4.5. Certification. [Ord. #1584]
The director may classify custom applicators according to the type of pest
control activities to be undertaken and issue certificates according to these
classes. No person may engage in a type of pest control not authorized in
his certificate.
a. Engage in the business of custom application of pesticides in the
township without first obtaining a certificate from the department; or
b. Use or apply any pesticide in any manner, or for any purpose, other than
in accordance with directions on the label; or
c. Use a prohibited pesticide; or
d. If a person other than a certified custom applicator, uses a restricted
pesticide.
a. Application. Application for a certificate to engage in the business of
custom application of pesticides in the township shall be made on a
form provided by the director and shall include the applicant's name,
address, education, experience, kind of pest control activity, and such
other information as the director deems necessary to determine
qualifications.
b. Qualifications. Applicants shall possess adequate knowledge
concerning the proper use, application, storage, transportation, and
disposal of pesticides.
c. Fees. The fee for issuance of the certificate shall be $5 and shall be
renewable annually on a calendar year basis.
§ 22-4.2 GENERAL § 22-4.5
1:739
§ 22-4.6. Revocation Upon Violation. [Ord. #1584]
Violation of any provisions of this section or of any regulations adopted
pursuant thereto, when so determined by a court of competent jurisdiction,
d. Financial Responsibility. The director shall not issue a certificate to a
custom applicator until the applicant has furnished evidence to the
satisfaction of the director that the applicant has liability insurance
insuring both persons and property in connection with the application
of pesticides, in a minimum amount of $10,000.
Such an insurance policy shall not serve as a limitation on any civil or
penal liability incurred by the negligent or unlawful use of pesticides.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to relieve any person from
liability for any damage to the person or property of another caused
by the use of pesticides even though such conforms to the rules and
regulations of the department.
e. The department may suspend or revoke the certification of any custom
applicator who has:
1. Made false or fraudulent claims through any media,
misrepresenting the effect of materials or methods to be utilized;
2. Applied worthless or improper materials;
3. Operated in a faulty, careless, or negligent manner;
4. Through his operations, has injured the person or property of
another or vegetation, crops, or wildlife in violation of this section;
5. Operated faulty or unsafe equipment;
6. Refused or neglected to comply with the provisions of this section,
the rules and regulations adopted hereunder, or of any lawful order
of the director or of any state or federal agency having authority in
pesticides;
7. Made false or fraudulent records or reports;
8. Refused or neglected to keep and maintain the records required by
this section or to make reports when and as required;
9. Operated equipment for the application of a pesticide without a
certificate;
10. Used fraud or misrepresentation in making an application for
certification or renewal of a certificate or permit;
11. Failed to maintain adequate insurance under subsection 22-4.5d;
12. Refused or neglected to comply with any limitations or restrictions
on or in a duly issued certificate or permit.
§ 22-4.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 22-4.6
1:740
shall be sufficient cause to revoke the certificate of persons found to be in
violation.
§ 22-4.7. Records and Reports. [Ord. #1584]
Those certified shall keep such records and furnish such reports as the
director, by regulation, may prescribe.
§ 22-4.8. Regulations. [Ord. #1584]
The department shall issue regulations to carry out the provisions of this
section and shall establish rules for the safe sale, transportation, storage,
use, application, and disposal of pesticides.
§ 22-4.9. Authority; Restricted or Prohibited Pesticides. [Ord.
#1584]
The director may recommend, and the board may, by regulation, restrict or
prohibit the sale or use of pesticides found to be hazardous to the health
or welfare of the citizens, or which might cause harmful contamination or
pollution of the environment. "Restricted" pesticides may be sold to and
used by certified custom applicators only. The director may, by regulations,
prescribe the time when, places where, and conditions under which
pesticides may be used.
§ 22-4.10. Notice. [Ord. #1584]
The custom applicator shall give at least 72 hours' notice prior to the
application of the pesticide by personal notice to all owners of property
within or without the township as shown by the most recent tax lists of the
municipality or municipalities, whose properties abut the property on which
the pesticide is to be applied, and to the department.
The notice shall be given by sending written notice thereof by registered
or certified mail to the last known address of the property owner(s); or
by handling a copy thereof to the property owners; or by leaving a copy
thereof at their usual place of abode. The notice shall contain the name of
the custom applicator, and location, and the identification of the pesticide
and method of application.
When the owner is a partnership, service upon any partner as above
provided shall be sufficient; and where the owners are corporations, service
upon any officer, as set forth above, shall be sufficient.
§ 22-4.11. Dealers. [Ord. #1584]
Any person who sells pesticides in amounts over three pounds shall first
obtain a certificate from the township to engage in such business and shall
be subject to such rules and regulations concerning recording and reporting
of sales, as may be prescribed by the director. The certificate shall be in
§ 22-4.6 GENERAL § 22-4.11
1:741
a form prescribed by the director. The certificate shall be valid for the
calendar year in which issued; the annual license fee shall be $5.
§ 22-4.12. Penalties. [New]
Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be liable to a penalty as stated in Chapter 3, § 3-1.
§ 22-4.13. Payment. [Ord. #1584]
All fees, penalties, and monies collected under any provision of this section
shall be paid to the Township of Lyndhurst, New Jersey.
§ 22-5. LICENSING OF FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING
MACHINES.
§ 22-5.1. License Required. [Ord. #1706, § 1; Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
It shall be unlawful for any person or any body corporate to maintain a coin
operated vending machine in the township for the sale of food or beverages,
within the township without having first procured an annual license from
the local board of health so to do and without complying with any and all
of the provisions concerning the operation and maintenance of the same
as contained in regulations, promulgated by the board of health of the
township.
§ 22-5.2. License Fees. [Ord. #1706, § 2; Ord. #1902, § I; Ord.
#2571, § 2; Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
The annual fees for licenses for food and beverage vending machines for the
purpose of funding the costs of inspection and regulation at each location
where such machines are installed and operated shall be as follows:
First machine $75
Each additional
machine
$25
§ 22-5.3. Sticker Attached to Each Machine. [Ord. #1706, § 3]
Each vending machine shall have attached to it a sticker with the following
legend:
"This vending machine is licensed by the Lyndhurst Health Department,
License No. _____, effective from _______________, to December 31, 19_____."
§ 22-5.4. Term of License. [Ord. #1706, § 4]
The license fees shall be levied commencing January 1, 1979 and shall be
issued for a calendar year. A license issued for a part of a calendar year
shall carry the full annual license fee.
§ 22-4.11 LYNDHURST CODE § 22-6
1:742
§ 22-6. SWIMMING POOLS.
§ 22-6.1. Adoption of Code. [Ord. #1849, § I]
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6 the township adopts by
reference, in full, and without alteration the "Swimming Pool Code of New
Jersey - 1970" as approved by the State Department of Health along with
any changes, additions, or modifications as may be adopted from time to
time by the State Department of Health.
§ 22-7. REGULATING THE PRACTICE OF MASSAGE THERAPY.52
§ 22-7.1. License Required. [Ord. #2455, § I; Ord. #2255; Ord.
#2208, § 1]
No person shall be engaged or employed in the township as a massage
therapist or practitioner for which any form of compensation is charged
or accepted, without first having obtained certifications by the massage,
bodywork, and somatic therapy examining committee under the New Jersey
Board of Nursing (hereinafter "the committee"), and a license from the chief
of police. The license, when issued, is personal and shall not be construed
to grant a certificate of occupancy for the use of any premises or location.
§ 22-7.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2455, § I; Ord. #2608, § 1]
EMPLOYEE — Shall mean any person other than a massage practitioner
who renders any service in connection with the operation of a massage
business and receives compensation from the operator of the business or
patrons.
HEALTH OFFICER — Shall mean person(s) who provides municipal
sanitarian/health services.
LICENSEE — Shall mean the operator of a massage establishment.
MASSAGE — Shall mean any method of pressure on or friction against or
stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of
the external soft parts of the body with the hands, feet or with the aid of
any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oil, powder,
creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in
this practice.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean any establishment having a
fixed place of business wherein any person, firm, association or corporation
engages in, carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the
activities mentioned in the definition of massage.
MASSAGE THERAPIST OR PRACTITIONER — Shall mean an individual who
has taken courses in massage therapy at, and has received a diploma or
certificate of completion in the area of massage therapy from an educational
52.Editor’s Note: Prior ordinance history includes portions of Ordinance No. 2313 and 2339.
§ 22-6 GENERAL § 22-7.2
1:743
institution offering degrees and/or certifications in massage therapy and
approved or accredited by the state department of education within this
state, or an equivalent governing body within this state. The massage
therapist or practitioner shall also be an individual who has satisfied the
requirements for certification as a massage, bodywork and somatic
therapist, by the Committee, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 13:37-16.1 et seq.
PATRON — Shall mean any person who receives a massage under such
circumstance that it is reasonably expected that he or she will pay money
or give other consideration therefor.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, copartnership, firm, association,
joint stock company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever
form or character.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA — Shall mean genitals, anus or perineum of
any person, or the breasts or vulva of a female.
§ 22-7.3. Requirements for Licensure. [Ord. #2455, § I; Ord. #2598,
§ 2; Ord. #2608, § 1; Ord. #2872-12, § 5]
a. Massage Establishment. No such license shall be issued to any massage
establishment which employs a massage therapist or practitioner
(hereinafter "person" or "applicant"):
1. Under 18 years of age;
2. Convicted of a crime of moral turpitude or any sex related offenses;
3. Unless documentary proof is submitted to the department of health
establishing the applicant's satisfactory completion of a minimum
of 500 hours study of massage, anatomy or physiology;
4. Unless the applicant provides the board with an affidavit from a
duly licensed physician of the State of New Jersey establishing that
the applicant is free from contagious and communicable diseases;
within 30 days of date of application;
5. Unless the person has been licensed or certified by the New Jersey
Board of Nursing, Massage, Bodywork, and Somatic Therapy
Examining Committee.
6. Unless the applicant accurately and correctly completes and files
an application for certification to the committee and a
comprehensive written application, in a form to be provided by the
police department, which application, among other things, requires
a detailed description of the applicant, to include photographing
and fingerprinting by the Lyndhurst Police Department, and prior
residence and employment of the last 10 years, to include
addresses and points of contact;
7. Unless a license fee of $250 is received, and made payable to the
Township of Lyndhurst. An additional fee will be charged for state
§ 22-7.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 22-7.3
1:744
police fingerprinting fee made payable to the New Jersey State
Bureau of Investigation;
8. Unless that person is a member of a nationally recognized massage
therapy association;
9. Unless that person has disclosed the funding source for opening
the establishment and all parties who hold an interest in the
establishment of 10% or greater;
10. Unless documentary proof of liability insurance is submitted;
11. Unless all building, zoning, health and fire codes are complied with
and satisfactory inspection certificates are granted.
b. Massage Therapist or Practitioner. No such license shall be issued to
any massage therapist or practitioner (hereinafter "person" or
"applicant"):
1. Under 18 years of age;
2. Convicted of a crime of moral turpitude or any sex related offenses;
3. Unless documentary proof is submitted establishing the applicant's
satisfactory completion of a course of massage therapy, minimum
of 500 hours by a department of education recognized school;
4. Unless the person has been licensed or certified by the New Jersey
Board of Nursing, Massage, Bodywork, and Somatic Therapy
Examining Committee.
5. Unless that person is a member of a nationally recognized massage
therapy association;
6. Unless documentary proof of liability insurance is submitted;
7. Unless the applicant provides an affidavit from a duly licensed
physician of the State of New Jersey establishing that the applicant
is free from contagious and communicable diseases: within 30 days
of the date of application;
8. Unless the applicant accurately and correctly completes and files
an application for certification to the committee and a
comprehensive written application in a form to be provided by the
police department, which application, among other things, requires
a detailed description of the applicant, to include photographing
and fingerprinting as required by the Lyndhurst Police Department
at least once every two years, and prior residence and employment
of the last 10 years, to include addresses and points of contact;
9. Unless a license fee of $100 is received, and made payable to the
Township of Lyndhurst. An additional fee will be charged for state
police fingerprinting fee made payable to the New Jersey State
Bureau of Investigation.
§ 22-7.3 GENERAL § 22-7.4
1:745
§ 22-7.4. Display of License. [Ord. #2455, § I]
Every license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the massage
establishment so that same may be readily seen by persons entering the
premises.
§ 22-7.5. Term of License. [Ord. #2455, § I; Ord. #2608, § 1]
§ 22-7.6. Operating Requirements. [Ord. #2455, § I]
a. Massage Establishment. Every massage establishment license issued
pursuant to this section shall expire at the end of the calendar year or
unless sooner suspended or revoked and may be renewed upon
compliance with the licensure requirements above, except that the
renewal fee shall be $100 annually.
b. Massage Therapist or Practitioner. Every massage therapist or
practitioner license shall expire at the end of the calendar year or
unless sooner suspended or revoked, and may be renewed upon
compliance with the licensure requirements above, except that the
renewal fee shall be $100 annually.
a. Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and
apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.
b. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception
area and in each massage room in a location available to all prospective
customers. Such posting shall include a statement as follows:
Pursuant to the ordinances of the Township of Lyndhurst: THE
GENITAL AREAS OF ALL CUSTOMERS SHALL BE COVERED AT ALL
TIMES WHEN IN THE PRESENCE OF AN EMPLOYEE. NO EMPLOYEE
OR PATRON SHALL TOUCH OR FONDLE IN ANY MANNER THE
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA OF ANY PERSON. ANY PERSON OR
CUSTOMER VIOLATING THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BE SUBJECT TO
PROSECUTION UNDER THIS AND APPLICABLE STATE LAW.
c. All employees, including massage practitioners, shall be clean and wear
clean, nontransparent outer garments, covering the sexual and genital
areas.
d. All massage establishments shall provide clean, laundered sheets,
towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use
thereof and stored in a sanitary manner.
e. The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels or
cloths and undergarments when in the presence of an employee or
massage therapist.
f. It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly, in a massage
establishment, to place his or her hand upon, to touch with any part of
§ 22-7.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 22-7.6
1:746
§ 22-7.7. Revocation of License. [Ord. #2455, § I]
The conviction of any applicant or licensee or any criminal offense, quasicriminal
offense or sanitary code violation related to the licensee's business,
or any sex related offense shall constitute a forfeiture of their license and
said license shall be deemed revoked.
§ 22-7.8. Violations. [Ord. #2455, § I]
Any violation by the licensee of any of the provisions of this section shall
be grounds for the immediate revocation of a license. However, the license
shall not be revoked until a hearing therein shall have been had before
the health authority. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing
shall be served upon the licensee at least 72 hours prior to the date set
for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief statement of the
grounds to be relied upon for revoking the license. Notice may be given
either by personal delivery or by regular mail to the address listed on
the license. At the hearing before the health authority, the licensee shall
have an opportunity to answer and may thereafter be heard, and upon due
consideration and deliberation by the health authority, the license may be
revoked or the complaint may be dismissed. The decision of the health
authority shall constitute final administrative action of the municipality.
§ 22-7.9. Unannounced Department of Health Visits. [Ord. #2455,
§ I]
The business operation is subject to unannounced department of health and
police department visits to insure the protection of the citizens.
§ 22-7.10. Severability. [Ord. #2455, § I]
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision of this section
shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to that section,
paragraph, subdivision, clause or provision so adjudged, and the remainder
of this section shall be deemed to be valid and effective.
his or her body, to fondle in any manner a sexual or genital area of any
other person.
g. No massage therapist, employee or operator shall perform, offer or
agree to perform, any act which would require the touching of the
patron's genital area.
h. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all
other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor
rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in
operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned each day.
§ 22-7.6 GENERAL § 22-7.11
1:747
§ 22-7.11. Applicability. [Ord. #2455, § I; Ord. #2608, § 1]
This section shall take effect within 20 days after adoption and publication
according to law. The massage establishments and massage therapists or
practitioners currently engaged in massage therapy pursuant to a license
issued by the township shall comply with the requirements for licensure
within two years after their next renewal of their licenses.
§ 22-8. LICENSING OF PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS.
§ 22-8.1. License Required. [Ord. #2571, § 3; Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
It shall be unlawful for any person or business entity to maintain a personal
service establishment within the township without having first procured
an annual license from the local board of health so to do, and without
complying with any and all of the provisions concerning the operation and
maintenance of the same as contained in regulations promulgated by the
board of health of the township.
§ 22-8.2. Definitions. [Ord. #2571, § 3; Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean any establishment
having a fixed place of business wherein any person or business entity
engages in, carries on, or permits to be engaged services of a personal
nature, not otherwise provided for in this chapter, relating to enhancement,
improvement, or maintenance of an individual's person or personal
property, including but not limited to, laundry, pet store and pet grooming
establishments, dry cleaning establishments, tanning salons, and
commercial swimming pools and whirlpools.
§ 22-8.3. License Fees. [Ord. #2571, § 3; Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
The annual fees for licenses for personal service establishments are hereby
fixed as follows:
§ 22-8.4. Term of License. [Ord. #2571, § 3; Ord. #2861-12, § 2]
The license fees established in this section shall be effective for the calendar
year, expiring on December 31st of the year of issue, and may be renewable
a. Laundromats/Launderettes.
Each coin operated washing or drying machine: $25.
Each coin operated machine in multiple dwelling laundry area: $10.
b. Dry cleaning establishments: $200.
c. Pet Stores and Pet Grooming Establishments: $85.
d. Tanning Salons: $250.
e. Commercial Swimming Pools/Whirlpools: $250.
§ 22-7.11 LYNDHURST CODE § 22-8.4
1:748
for succeeding calendar years thereafter. The fee for license renewal shall
be due and payable on or before February 1st in the year of renewal.
§ 22-9. REGULATING THE PRACTICES OF BODY ART.
§ 22-9.1. Purpose. [Ord. #2618, § 2; Ord. #2861-12, § 2; Ord.
#2872-12, § 5]
The purpose of this section is to regulate the practices of body art, including
permanent cosmetics, tattooing, and body piercing, as defined in this
section within the Township of Lyndhurst so as to ensure the public safety
and health against illness and injury.
§ 22-9.2. License Required. [Ord. #2618, § 2; Ord. #2861-12, § 2;
Ord. #2872-12, § 5]
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating
an establishment where body art is performed without first obtaining a
license from the Lyndhurst Health Department to engage in such business
in accordance with the provisions hereof. The license, when issued, shall
be personal and shall not be construed to grant a certificate of occupancy
or approval for the use of any premises or location. Each practitioner shall
have an individual license obtained from the township health department.
§ 22-9.3. Definitions. [Ord. #2618, § 2; Ord. #2861-12, § 2; Ord.
#2872-12, § 5]
BODY ART — Shall mean the practice of physical body adornment in
permitted establishments by operators utilizing, but not limited to, the
following techniques: (1) body piercing, (2) tattooing, and (3) permanent
cosmetics.
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean any place or premises, whether
public or private, temporary or permanent in nature or location, where the
practices of body art, whether or not for profit, are performed.
BODY PIERCING — Shall mean the puncturing or penetration of the skin
of a person using presterilized, single-use needles and the insertion of
presterilized or disinfected jewelry or other adornment thereto in the
opening.
CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION — Shall mean the written approval
provided by the health department that a body art establishment has been
inspected and meets all applicable requirements.
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION — Shall mean written approval provided
by the Lyndhurst Health Department confirming that the operator of a
body art establishment has registered with the local health department and
meets all applicable requirements.
CRIMINAL OFFENSE — Shall mean in the State of New Jersey a crime of
the first, second, third or fourth degrees; and in other jurisdictions, a crime
§ 22-8.4 GENERAL § 22-9.3
1:749
which is designated as a felony, a high misdemeanor, or any offense which
is higher than misdemeanor or disorderly person.
ESTABLISHMENT — Shall mean the premises wherein body art performed.
OPERATOR — Shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation or
business entity that owns and/or operates an establishment where body art
is performed.
PERMANENT COSMETICS — Shall mean the implanting of inert pigments,
colors and/or dyes intradermally which results in permanent alteration of
tissue to gain a cosmetic effect. Permanent cosmetics is also known as
"micro-pigmentation" or "dermal pigmentation."
PRACTITIONER — Shall mean any individual who, for any consideration
whatsoever, engages in the practice of body art as herein defined including
but not limited to, contractors, subcontractors, employees and temporary
employees.
TATTOO or TATTOOING — Shall mean any method of placing ink or other
inert pigment into or under the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or
any other instrument used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent
coloration of the skin or mucosa. This includes all forms of permanent
cosmetics.
§ 22-9.4. Application for License. [Ord. #2618, § 2; Ord. #2795-11;
Ord. #2861-12, § 2; Ord. #2872-12, § 5]
§ 22-9.5. Display of License. [Ord. #2618, § 2; Ord. #2872-12, § 5]
Every license shall be displayed in a conspicuous place within the body art
establishment so that same may be readily seen by persons entering the
premises.
a. An application for a license for a body art establishment and
practitioner shall be made to the Lyndhurst Health Department, in
writing, upon such printed form as the Lyndhurst Health Department
shall prescribe and prepare, and shall require payment of an annual
filing fee of $500 and renewal fee of $250 for each establishment and
$100 for each practitioner.
b. Any change of ownership shall require a new application and license
with payment of the required fees.
c. All applicants shall submit construction plans and/or floor plans to the
Lyndhurst Health Department and Lyndhurst Construction Department
for review and approval prior to construction and operation.
d. The Lyndhurst Health Department shall have the authority to establish
a payment plan for the required fees upon the request of an
establishment or practitioner, where the health department determines,
in its sole discretion, that the request is reasonable and appropriate.
§ 22-9.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 22-9.6
1:750
§ 22-9.6. Term of License. [Ord. #2618, § 2; Ord. #2872-12, § 5]
Every license for a body art establishment and practitioner issued pursuant
to this section shall expire one year after issuance and may be renewed
upon compliance with the requirements of this section upon payment of the
renewal fee.
§ 22-9.7. Operating Requirements for Establishments and
Practitioners. [Ord. #2618, § 2; Ord. #2872-12, § 5]
a. Compliance with Requirements of State Department of Health.
All establishments and practitioners of body art shall comply with all
requirements enacted by the State Department of Health pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 26:1A-10 et seq., and the regulations promulgated thereunder
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 8:27-1.1, as they pertain to the practice of
permanent cosmetics.
b. Persons Seeking Body Art Services.
1. Age. It shall be a violation of this section for any establishment or
practitioner to provide body art services to an individual under 18
years of age without authorization signed by the parent or legal
guardian of such individual and witnessed by the operator of the
establishment. The operator shall be responsible for maintaining
the original consent form and copies of all consent information, and
copies of the photographic identification of both the individual
receiving the body art services and the parent or legal guardian
authorizing such services, for a period of three years.
2. Application for Services. Each person receiving body art services
must first apply to the operator of the establishment, on a form
approved by the Lyndhurst Health Department. Body art services
may then be applied no sooner than one hour after the time of the
application received by the practitioner. If the applicant is
suspected of being under the influence of alcohol, drugs or any
other behavioral modifying substance, the operator shall refuse to
perform body art services for the applicant.
c. Background Check; Criminal Offenses.
1. Background Check. All establishments, operators of
establishments, and practitioners shall be subject to a satisfactory
background check as required by the Lyndhurst Police Department,
including but not limited to, photographing and fingerprinting at
least once every two years.
2. Criminal Offenses. No establishment, operator of an establishment,
or practitioner shall have been convicted of a criminal offense in
any jurisdiction.
§ 22-9.6 GENERAL § 22-9.7
1:751
§ 22-9.8. Revocation of License. [Ord. #2618, § 2; Ord. #2872-12,
§ 5]
The conviction of any criminal offense by an establishment, operator of an
establishment, or practitioner, or of any violation of the State Department of
Health or sanitary code relating to the practices of body art shall constitute
a forfeiture of the license, and such license shall be deemed revoked.
§ 22-9.9. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. #2618, § 2]
d. Training at Establishment Prohibited. Neither the operator of the
establishment nor a practitioner associated with the establishment,
shall train individuals in the practice of body art at the establishment,
or permit trainees to engage in the practice.
a. Penalty. Any establishment, operator or practitioner who violates any
subsection of this section or fails to comply with any provisions of this
section, or the State Department of Health or sanitary codes, shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $1,000 for each
violation, or imprisonment in the County Jail up to 90 days, or both.
Each day that the violation exists shall be considered to be a separate
offense.
b. Counsel Fees. The reasonable counsel fees incurred by the Lyndhurst
Health Department in the enforcement of this section shall be paid by
the establishment, operator or practitioner in connection with any
proceedings for violation. The amount of such reimbursable fees and
costs shall be determined by the court hearing the matter.
c. Revocation and Suspension. In addition to the penalties provided
herein, any license or certificate of registration issued under this
section may be revoked or suspended for any misstatement in any
application for any violation of this section. A license shall be afforded a
hearing before the Lyndhurst Health Council prior to the revocation or
suspension of a license for such misstatement or violation, other than
for the reasons set forth in subsection 22-9.8. A licensee shall not be
entitled to a hearing for conviction of a criminal offense or violation of
the State Department of Health or sanitary code, as provided in
subsection 22-9.8. Notice of the filing of a complaint which seeks to
suspend or revoke any license or certificate of registration issued under
this subsection shall be served on a licensee personally or on the person
designated to receive service in the application for license of the
establishment, operator of the establishment, or practitioner. Such
notice shall establish a date for a hearing to be held not less than 10
days from the date of such notice, at which time the licensee shall have
the right to be represented by counsel, call witnesses, cross-examine
witnesses produced in support of the complaint, as well as such other
rights necessary in order to ensure due process. Should any license or
certificate of registration be revoked or suspended, no part of the
license or registration fee shall be returned.
§ 22-9.7 LYNDHURST CODE § 22-9.10
1:752
§ 22-9.10. Severability. [Ord. #2618, § 2]
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision or phrase of this
ordinance shall be adjudged invalid, such adjudication shall apply only to
that section, paragraph, sentence, clause, provision or phrase so adjudged,
and the remainder of this ordinance shall be deemed to be valid and remain
in full force and effect.
§ 22-10. PRECAUTIONARY PRINCIPLE POLICY.
§ 22-10.1. Declaration of Policy. [Ord. #2674, § 1]
The following Precautionary Principle shall be established as the policy
of the Township of Lyndhurst: "When an activity raises threats of harm
to human health, or the environment precautionary measures should be
taken even if some cause and effect relationships are not fully established
scientifically." (Wingspread Statement, 1998)
§ 22-10.2. Implementation of Policy. [Ord. #2674, § 1]
The following shall constitute The Township of Lyndhurst's Precautionary
Principle Policy. All officers, employees, boards, commissions, departments,
and agencies of the Township of Lyndhurst shall implement the
Precautionary Principle in conducting the Township's affairs:
a. Utilization of Precautionary Principle. The Township of Lyndhurst will
utilize the Precautionary Principle to develop laws for a healthier
environment. By doing so, the township will create and maintain a
healthy, viable environment for current and future generations, and will
become a model of sustainability. The Precautionary Principle is
intended as a tool and philosophy to promote environmentally healthy
alternatives while removing the negative and often unintended
consequences of new technologies.
b. Decision Making. The Township of Lyndhurst will strive to make
decisions based on the least environmentally harmful alternatives in
order to provide every resident with an equal right to a healthy and safe
environment. This requires that our air, water, soil, and food be of a
sufficiently high standard that we can live healthy lives. The
precautionary approach to decision-making will help Lyndhurst move
beyond fixing environmental ills to preventing the ills before they can
do harm.
c. Analysis of Alternatives.
1. A thorough analysis of a wide range of alternatives will be explored
in order to present the public with different effects of different
options considering short-term versus long-term effects or costs,
and evaluating and comparing the adverse or potentially adverse
effects of each option, noting options with fewer potential hazards.
§ 22-9.10 GENERAL § 22-10.2
1:753
2. Using the best available science, the Precautionary Principle
requires the selection of the alternative that presents the least
potential threat to human health and the township's natural
resources. Fundamental questions to be asked include: "Is this
potentially hazardous activity necessary?"; "What less hazardous
options are available?"; and "How much harm can we avoid?"
d. Protective Action.
1. By using the Precautionary Principle, the burden of proof will be
shifted from the public to the proponent of a technology. Where
threats of serious or irreversible damage to people or nature exist,
lack of full scientific certainty about cause and effect shall not be
viewed as sufficient reason for the township to postpone measures
to prevent the degradation of the environment or protect the health
of its citizens. Any gaps in scientific data will not prevent protective
action being taken by the township. As new scientific data become
available, the township will review its decisions and make
adjustments when warranted.
2. When there are reasonable grounds for concern, the precautionary
approach to decision-making will seek to reduce harm through:
(a) Anticipatory action: A duty to take anticipatory action to
prevent harm. Government, business, and community groups,
as well as the public, share this responsibility.
(b) Right to know: The community has a right to know complete
and accurate information on potential human health and
environmental impacts associated with the selection. The
burden to supply this information lies with the proponent, not
with the general public.
(c) Alternatives assessment: An obligation exists to examine
alternatives and select the alternative with the least potential
impact on human health and the environment, including the
alternative of taking no action.
(d) Full cost accounting: When evaluating potential alternatives,
there is a duty to consider all the costs, including raw
materials, manufacturing, transportation, use, cleanup,
eventual disposal, and health costs even if such costs are not
reflected in the initial price. Short- and long-term time
thresholds will be considered when making decisions.
(e) Transparency: Public participation and an open and
transparent decision making process are critical to finding and
selecting alternatives.
e. Preservation of Environment. The duty to enhance, protect and
preserve the township's environment rests on the shoulders of
government, residents, citizen groups and businesses alike. The
§ 22-10.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 22-10.2
1:754
§ 22-11. ANIMALS: PROHIBITED CONDUCT. [Added 11-13-2017 by
Ord. No. 2980-17]
No person shall feed, in any public park or on any other property owned,
operated or controlled by either the Township of Lyndhurst or any private
owner, any wildlife, as herein defined, excluding confined wildlife (for
example, wildlife confined in zoos, parks or rehabilitation centers, or
unconfined wildlife at environmental education centers).
Township of Lyndhurst will work towards generating power from
renewable sources, recycling waste, and keeping our land and waters
free from toxins and pollutants. The Precautionary Principle provides
a means for the Township to attain these goals as we develop future
laws and policies in such areas as transportation, construction, land
use, planning, water, energy, health care, recreation, purchasing, and
public expenditure.
f. Promotion of General Welfare. All township employees and officials are
encouraged to take the Precautionary Principle into consideration and
evaluate alternatives when taking actions that could impact health and
the environment, especially where those actions could pose threats of
serious harm or irreversible damage. This ordinance does not impose
specific duties upon any township employee or official to take specific
actions. In adopting and undertaking the enforcement of this ordinance,
the township is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general
welfare. It is not assuming, nor is it imposing on its officers and
employees, an obligation for breach of which it is liable in money
damages to any person who claims that such breach proximately
caused injury nor may this ordinance provide any basis for any other
judicial relief including, but not limited to, a restraining order or
injunction.
a. The feeding of wildlife is prohibited.
1. No person shall purposely or knowingly feed, bait or in any manner
provide access to food to any wildlife in the Township on lands
either publicly or privately owned.
2. No person shall purposely or knowingly leave or store any refuse,
garbage, food product, pet food, forage product or supplement,
slat, seed or birdseed, fruit or grain in any manner that would
constitute an attractant to any wildlife.
3. No person shall fail to take remedial action to avoid contact or
conflict with wild animals, which may include the securing or
removal of outdoor trash, cooking grills, pet food, bird feeders or
any other similar food source or attractant after being advised by
the Township to undertake such remedial action. Further, after an
initial contact or conflict with wild life, no person shall continue to
provide, or otherwise fail to secure or remove, any likely food
§ 22-10.2 GENERAL § 22-11
1:755
sources or attractants, including, but not limited to, outdoor trash,
grills, pet food or bird feeders.
b. The feeding of songbirds and other backyard birds is permitted.
Feeding of songbirds and other backyard birds shall be permitted
outdoors under the following conditions, and the violation of any of the
conditions set forth below shall be a per se public health nuisance:
1. No birdseed or any form of bird feed shall be thrown or scattered
on the ground of any property or placed on any fence.
2. Birdseed and other forms of bird food must be dispensed from birdfeeding
receptacles that are enclosed and suspended or elevated
no less than five feet from the ground.
3. No more than three bird-feeding receptacles shall be located on
any one property at any given time.
4. Bird-feeding receptacles shall be placed in the front yard and rear
yard of the property only and not less than 10 feet from the
property line or any fence. The areas comprising a front yard or
rear yard shall be in accordance with Chapter 21, entitled "Zoning
Ordinance," of the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of
Lyndhurst. The placing of bird-feeding receptacles in any side yard,
as defined in Chapter 21, entitled "Zoning Ordinance," of the
Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Lyndhurst, is be
prohibited.
5. Bird-feeding receptacles shall be filled with no more than three
pounds of bird feed or bird food at any time.
6. Bird-feeding receptacles shall not create an unreasonable
disturbance that affects the rights of surrounding property owners
or renders other persons insecure in the use of their property.
7. Bird-feeding receptacles shall not become an attraction for rodents
or other wildlife and shall not create an accumulation of droppings
and/or fecal matter on the property or surrounding properties.
c. Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions will
apply:
BIRD-FEEDING RECEPTACLE — Any device which is created,
designed, or used for or otherwise holds birdseed and/or bird food.
FEED — To give, place, expose, deposit, distribute or scatter any edible
material with the intention of feeding, attracting, or enticing wildlife.
Feeding does not include baiting in the legal taking of fish and/or game.
NUISANCE — Any matters, things, conditions or acts as set forth and
defined in Subsection 22-1.3 of the General Ordinances of the Township
of Lyndhurst.
§ 22-11 LYNDHURST CODE § 22-11
1:756
Chapter 23
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION MEASURES
§ 23-1. STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT,
PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES. [7-9-2019 by Ord. No. 3029-1953]
§ 23-1.1. Statutory Authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et
seq., delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt
regulations designed to promote public health, safety and general welfare
of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Commissioners of the Township of
Lyndhurst, New Jersey, do ordain as follows.
§ 23-1.2. Findings of Fact.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, partnership, firm,
association, or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal
jurisdiction.
WILDLIFE — All animals that are neither human nor domesticated. It
includes any animal which is not normally domesticated in this state,
including, but not limited to, bears, coyotes, deer, foxes, rodents,
groundhogs, opossums, raccoons, skunks, waterfowl, migrant
waterfowl such as Canadian geese, and the like.
d. Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the Property
Maintenance Officer(s), Police Department, Board of Health and Animal
Control Officers.
e. Violations and penalties.
1. Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be ordered
to cease the feeding immediately. Any person found to be in
violation of this section shall be provided with 24 hours to correct
the violation. Any person who is provided with such notice and fails
to correct a violation within 24 hours shall be subject to the
penalties under Subsection e of this Section.
2. Any person who is found in violation of the provisions of this section
shall be subject to a fine of $500 for a first offense and $1,000 for a
second offense. Any person who is found in violation of the
provisions of this section for a third or subsequent offense shall be
subject to a fine of $500 per day until the violation is abated.
a. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Lyndhurst are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
53.Editor’s Note: This ordinance superseded former Ch. 23, Flood damage Prevention
Measures, adopted by Ord. No. 2260, as amended.
§ 22-11 GENERAL § 23-1.2
1:757
§ 23-1.3. Statement of Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
§ 23-1.4. Methods of Reducing Flood Losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety and general welfare.
b. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities
and, when inadequately anchored, cause damage in other areas. Uses
that are inadequately anchored damage uses in other areas. Uses that
are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected from
flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
a. To protect human life and health;
b. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood-control
projects;
c. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
d. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
e. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges,
located in areas of special flood hazard;
f. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
g. To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in an
area of special flood hazard; and
h. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions.
a. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
b. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
§ 23-1.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 23-1.4
1:758
§ 23-2. DEFINITIONS. [7-9-2019 by Ord. No. 3029-19]
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meanings they have in common
usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually areas of ponding), where average depths are between one
and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from detailed hydraulic
analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by 1% annual chance shallow
flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain), where average depths are
between one and three feet.
APPEAL — A request for a review of the construction code official's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO, AH, or VO Zone on
a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), with a 1% or greater
annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet, where
a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — The land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or
AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded
in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS), including the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM). For Zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30, the elevation represents
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a 1% or greater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BEST AVAILABLE FLOOD HAZARD DATA — The most-recent available flood
risk guidance FEMA has provided. The best available flood hazard data may
c. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
d. Controlling filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage;
e. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
§ 23-1.4 GENERAL § 23-2
1:759
be depicted on, but not limited to, advisory flood hazard area maps, work
maps or preliminary FIS and FIRM.
BEST AVAILABLE FLOOD HAZARD DATA ELEVATION — The most-recent
available flood elevation FEMA has provided. The best available flood
hazard data elevation may be depicted on an advisory flood hazard area
map, work map or preliminary FIS and FIRM.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is part of the structural support of the
building and is intended, through its design and construction, to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
CUMULATIVE SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure that equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure at the time of the
improvement or repair when counted cumulatively for 10 years.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or
storage of equipment or materials located within the area of special flood
hazard.
ELEVATED BUILDING —
EROSION — The process of gradual wearing away of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
A nonbasement building:
Built, in the case of a building in an area of special flood hazard,
to have the top of the elevated floor or, in the case of a building
in a coastal high-hazard area, to have the bottom of the lowest
horizontal structural member of the elevated floor elevated above
the base flood elevation plus freeboard by means of piling, columns
(posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of water; and
1.
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of
the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood.
2.
a.
In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes a
building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls
with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of
floodwaters.
b.
§ 23-2 LYNDHURST CODE § 23-2
1:760
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided in which
the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well
as flood boundary/floodway mapping and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special-purpose
ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion
control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term
describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which
provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and
reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than 0.2
foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety, usually expressed in feet above a flood
level, for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed or existing walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
b.
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
a.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
b.
§ 23-2 GENERAL § 23-2
1:761
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for the
parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so to render the structure in violation of other
applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two
or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation adopted
by a community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the municipality.
PRELIMINARY FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (PRE-FIRM) — The draft
version of the FIRM released for public comment before finalization and
adoption.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
c.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
1.
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
2.
d.
a. Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
b.
§ 23-2 LYNDHURST CODE § 23-2
1:762
START OF CONSTRUCTION —
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home or a
gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred. Substantial damage also means flood-related damages
sustained by a structure on two or more separate occasions during a tenyear
period for which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood
event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market valve of the
structure before the damages occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure during a ten-year period, the
cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure
before the "start of construction" of the improvement. "Substantial
improvement" also means "cumulative substantial improvement." This term
includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless
of the actual repair work performed, or "repetitive loss." The term does not,
however, include either:
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck; and
c.
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
d.
[For other than new construction or substantial improvements under
the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. No. 97-348)], includes
substantial improvements and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvements was within
180 days of the permit date. The "actual start" means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation of pilings, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation,
or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
a.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as
clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of
streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings or piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor
does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part
of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the "actual start
of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
b.
§ 23-2 GENERAL § 23-2
1:763
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which
permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this
chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved structure or
other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or
other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10),
(e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
§ 23-3. GENERAL PROVISIONS. [7-9-2019 by Ord. No. 3029-19]
§ 23-3.1. Land to Which This Chapter Applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 23-3.2. Basis for Establishing Areas of Special Flood Hazard.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement officer and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
a.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
b.
a. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Lyndhurst,
Community No. 340048, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
1. A scientific and engineering report, "Flood Insurance Study,
Bergen County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)," dated August 28,
2019.
2. "Flood Insurance Rate Map for Bergen County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions)," as shown on Index and Panels 34003C0235H,
34003C0245H, 34003C0253H, and 34003C0261H, whose effective
date is August 28, 2019.
3. Best available flood hazard data. These documents shall take
precedence over effective panels and FIS in construction and
development regulations only. Where the effective mapping or base
flood elevation conflict or overlap with the best available flood
hazard data, whichever imposes the more-stringent requirement
shall prevail.
b. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study, maps and advisory documents
§ 23-2 LYNDHURST CODE § 23-3.2
1:764
§ 23-3.3. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved in
the case. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of Lyndhurst
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation.
§ 23-3.4. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more-stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 23-3.5. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 23-3.6. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability.
§ 23-4. ADMINISTRATION. [7-9-2019 by Ord. No. 3029-19]
are on file at the office of the Town Clerk, 253 Stuyvesant Avenue,
Lyndhurst, New Jersey.
a. Considered as minimum requirements;
b. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
c. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
a. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of
special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free
from flooding or flood damages.
b. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Lyndhurst, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decisions lawfully made thereunder.
§ 23-3.2 GENERAL § 23-4.1
1:765
§ 23-4.1. Establishment of Development Permit.
§ 23-4.2. Designation of Construction Code Official.
The Construction Code Official is hereby appointed to administer and
implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit
applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 23-4.3. Duties and Responsibilities of Construction Code Official.
Duties of the construction code official shall include, but not be limited to:
a. A development permit shall be obtained before construction or
development begins, including the placement of manufactured homes,
within any area of special flood hazard established in Subsection 23-3.2.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished
by the construction code official and may include, but not be limited to,
plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed
structures; fill; storage of materials; drainage facilities; and the location
of the foregoing.
b. Specifically, the following information is required:
1. The elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all structures;
2. The elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any structure
has been floodproofed;
3. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that
the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet
the floodproofing criteria in Subsection 23-5.2b; and
4. A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development.
a. Permit review:
1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
2. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
3. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway and assure that the
encroachment provisions of Subsection 23-5.3a. are met.
b. Use of other base flood and floodway data. When base flood elevation
and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with Subsection
23-3.2, Basis for Establishing Areas of Special Flood Hazard, the
§ 23-4.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 23-4.3
1:766
construction code official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize
any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal,
state or other source in order to administer Subsection 23-5.2a,
Specific Standards, Residential construction, and Subsection 23-5.2b,
Specific Standards, Nonresidential construction.
c. Information to be obtained and maintained:
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
2. For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
Subsection 23-4.1b3.
3. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
d. Alteration of watercourses:
1. Notify adjacent communities and the the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control, and the Land
Use Regulations Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Insurance Administration.
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
e. Substantial damage review:
1. After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
2. Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of substantial damage
determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Flood Control.
3. Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
Subsection 23-3.2, Basis for Establishing Areas of Special Flood
Hazard. The construction code official shall obtain, review, and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data
available from a federal, state or other source in order to
administer Subsection 23-5.2a, Specific Standards, Residential
construction, and Subsection 23-5.2b, Specific Standards,
§ 23-4.3 GENERAL § 23-4.3
1:767
§ 23-4.4. Variance Procedure.
Nonresidential construction, and Subsection 23-5.2c, Specific
Standards, Manufactured homes.
f. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries: Make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between
a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting
the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to
appeal the interpretation as provided in Subsection 23-4.4.
a. Appeal Board.
1. The Planning Board as established by the Township of Lyndhurst
shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
2. The Planning Board shall hear and decide appeals when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the construction code official in the
enforcement or administration of this chapter.
3. Those aggrieved by the decision of the Planning Board and/or
Zoning Board or any taxpayer may appeal such decision to the
Superior Court of New Jersey.
4. In passing upon such applications, the Planning Board shall
consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards
specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
§ 23-4.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 23-4.4
1:768
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to existing and
anticipated development;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
5. Upon consideration of the factors of Subsection 23-4.4a4 and the
purposes of this chapter, the Planning Board or Zoning Board may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems
necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
6. The Construction Code Official shall maintain the records of all
appeal actions, including technical information, and report any
variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
b. Conditions for variances.
1. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, provided that the
items in Subsection a 4(a) through (k) have been fully considered.
As the lot size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical
justification required for issuing the variance increases.
2. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as an historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design
of the structure.
3. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
5. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
§ 23-4.4 GENERAL § 23-4.4
1:769
§ 23-5. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION. [7-9-2019
by Ord. No. 3029-19]
§ 23-5.1. General Standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public as identified in Subsection
23-4.4a4, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
a. Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
b. Construction materials and methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
c. Utilities.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
§ 23-4.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 23-5.1
1:770
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
4. For all new construction and substantial improvements, the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
d. Subdivision proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems, located and constructed to minimize
flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision
proposals and other proposed new development and other
proposed development which contains at least 50 lots or five acres
(whichever is less).
e. Enclosure openings. For all new construction and substantial
improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are
usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement, and which are subject to flooding, shall be
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or must meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior
walls of each enclosed area having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
or other covering or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 23-5.1 GENERAL § 23-5.2
1:771
§ 23-5.2. Specific Standards.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been
provided as set forth in Subsection 23-3.2, Basis for Establishing Areas of
Special Flood Hazard, or Subsection 23-4.3b, Use of Other Base Flood and
Floodway Data, the following standards are required:
a. Residential construction.
1. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE Zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, together with the attendant utilities (including
all electrical, heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other
service equipment) and sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the
more-restrictive: base flood elevation (published FIS/FIRM) plus
one foot, the best available flood hazard data elevation plus one
foot, or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1.
2. Require within any AO or AH Zone on the municipality's DFIRM
that all new construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, together with the attendant utilities and sanitary
facilities, elevated above the depth number specified in feet plus
one foot, above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no
depth number is specified) or at or above the best available flood
hazard data elevation plus one foot, whichever is more restrictive;
and require adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
b. Nonresidential construction. In an area of special flood hazard, all new
construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure located in an A or AE Zone
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, together with the
attendant utilities and sanitary facilities, as well as all electrical,
heating, ventilating, air-conditioning and other service equipment:
1. Either:
(a) Elevated at or above the more restrictive: base flood elevation
(published FIS/FIRM) plus one foot, the best available flood
hazard data elevation plus one foot, or as required by ASCE/
SEI 24-14, Table 2-1; and
(b) Require within any AO or AH Zone on the Township's FIRM to
elevate above the depth number specified in feet plus one foot,
above the highest adjacent grade (at least three feet if no
depth number is specified), or at or above the best available
flood hazard data elevation plus one foot, whichever is more
restrictive; and require adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away
from proposed structures;
§ 23-5.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 23-5.2
1:772
§ 23-5.3. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Subsection
23-3.2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an
extremely hazardous area due to velocity of floodwaters which carry debris,
potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
2. Or:
(a) Be floodproofed so that, below the more restrictive: base flood
elevation (published FIS/FIRM) plus one foot, the best
available flood hazard data elevation plus one foot, or as
required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 6-1, the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water;
(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic
and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with accepted standards of practice for meeting the applicable
provisions of this subsection. Such certification shall be
provided to the official as set forth in Subsection 23-4.3c2.
c. Manufactured homes.
1. Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
Subsection 23-5.1a2.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
(b) Be constructed to minimize flood damage.
(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage.
(d) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the more restrictive: base flood
elevation (published FIS/FIRM) plus one foot, the best
available flood hazard data elevation plus one foot, or as
required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1.
3. The manufactured home chassis shall be supported by reinforced
piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength
that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to
resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
§ 23-5.2 GENERAL § 23-5.3
1:773
§ 23-6. SEVERABILITY. [7-9-2019 by Ord. No. 3029-19]
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 23-7. ENACTMENT. [7-9-2019 by Ord. No. 3029-19]
This chapter is effective 20 days after adoption and publication according to
law.
Chapter 24
NOISE CONTROL CODE
§ 24-1. SHORT TITLE. [Ord. #1738]
This chapter may be cited as the "Lyndhurst Noise Control Code."
§ 24-2. DECLARATION OF FINDINGS AND POLICY: SCOPE.
§ 24-2.1. Declaration of Findings and Policy. [Ord. #1738]
Excessive sound and vibration are a serious hazard to the public health
and welfare, safety, and the quality of life. A substantial body of science
and technology exists by which excessive sound and vibration may be
substantially abated. The people have a right to and should be ensured an
environment free from excessive sound and vibration that may jeopardize
their health or welfare or safety or degrade the quality of life. It is the policy
of the Township of Lyndhurst to prevent excessive sound and vibration
which may jeopardize the health, welfare or safety of its citizens or degrade
the quality of life.
a. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other development, unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
b. If Subsection 23-5.3a is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements must comply with flood hazard reduction provisions of
§ 23-5, Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction.
c. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 foot at any
point.
§ 23-5.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 24-2.2
1:774
§ 24-2.2. Scope. [Ord. #1738]
This chapter shall apply to the control of all sound and vibration originating
within the limits of the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 24-3. DEFINITIONS.
§ 24-3.1. Terminology. [Ord. #1738]
All terminology used in this chapter, not defined below, shall be in
conformance with applicable publications of the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body.
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — Shall mean the sound pressure level in
decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-Weighting
network. The level so read is designated dB(A) or dBA.
CONSTRUCTION — Shall mean any site preparation, assembly, erection,
substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, but excluding demolition, for
or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property.
DAY-NIGHT AVERAGE SOUND LEVEL (1dn) — Shall mean the twenty-fourhour
energy average of the A-weighted sound pressure levels during the
period 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. the following day increased by 10 dBA before
averaging.
DECIBEL (dB) — Shall mean a unit for measuring the volume of a sound,
equal to 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure
of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals
(20 micronewtons per square meter).
DEMOLITION — Shall mean any dismantling, intentional destruction or
removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or
similar property.
EMERGENCY — Shall mean any occurrence or set of circumstances
involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which
demands immediate action.
EMERGENCY WORK — Shall mean any work performed for the purpose
of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage
threatened or caused by an emergency.
EQUIVALENT A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL (Leq) — Shall mean the
constant sound level that, in a given situation and time period, conveys the
same sound energy as the actual time-varying A-weighted sound. (For the
purposes of this chapter, the time period of 24 hours shall be used, unless
otherwise specified).
GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING (GVWR) — Shall mean the value
specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded
weight of a single motor vehicle. In cases where trailers and tractors
are separable, the gross combination weight rating (GCWR), which is the
value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded
weight of the combination vehicle, shall be used.
§ 24-2.2 GENERAL § 24-3.1
1:775
IMPULSIVE SOUND — Shall mean sound of short duration, usually less
than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources
of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts, and the
discharge of fire arms.
MOTOR BOAT — Shall mean any vessel which operates on water and
which is propelled by a motor, including but not limited to, boats, barges,
amphibious craft, water ski towing devices and hovercraft.
MOTOR CARRIER VEHICLE ENGAGED IN INTERSTATE COMMERCE —
Shall mean any vehicle for which regulations apply pursuant to Section
18 of the Federal Noise Control Act of 1972 (P.L. 92-574), as amended,
pertaining to motor carriers engaged in interstate commerce.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean (as defined in the Motor Vehicle Code of
the State) "any vehicle which is propelled or drawn on land by a motor, such
as, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, truck-trailers, semi-trailers,
campers, go-carts, snowmobiles, amphibious craft on land, dune buggies, or
racing vehicles, but not including motorcycles."
MOTORCYCLE — Shall mean (as defined in the Motor Vehicle Code of the
State) "an unenclosed motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the
operator and two or three wheels in contact with the ground, including, but
not limited to, motor scooters, and minibikes."
MUFFLER or SOUND DISSIPATIVE DEVICE — Shall mean a device for
abating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine.
NOISE — Shall mean any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which
causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on
humans.
NOISE CONTROL OFFICER (NCO) — Shall mean the municipal agency or
department having lead responsibility for this chapter. (If no such agency
is designated, the term shall mean the municipal official having lead
responsibility for this chapter.)
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Shall mean any sound which (a) endangers or
injures the safety or health of humans or animals; or (b) annoys or disturbs
a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or (c) endangers or injures
personal or real property.
NOISE SENSITIVE ZONE — Shall mean any area designated pursuant to
paragraph j of subsection 24-4.2 of this chapter for the purpose of ensuring
exceptional quiet.
PERSON — Shall mean any individual, association, partnership, or
corporation, and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or
instrumentality of a state or any political subdivision of a state or federal
agency not associated with national defense.
POWERED MODEL VEHICLE — Shall mean any self-propelled airborne,
waterborne, or landborne plane, vessel, or vehicle which is not designated
to carry persons, including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car,
or rocket.
§ 24-3.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 24-3.1
1:776
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard,
highway, sidewalk or alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by
a governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Shall mean any real property or structures thereon which
are owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY — Shall mean any imaginary line along the
ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real
property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not
including intra-building real property divisions.
RMS SOUND PRESSURE — Shall mean the square root of the time
averaged square of the sound pressure, denoted Prms.
SOUND — Shall mean an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement,
particle velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal
forces that causes compression and rarefaction of that medium. The
description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound,
including duration, intensity and frequency.
SOUND LEVEL — Shall mean the weighted sound pressure level obtained
by the use of a sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such
as A, B, or C as specified in American National Standards Institute
specifications for sound level matters (ANSI S1.4-1071, or the latest
approved revision thereof.) If the frequency weighting employed is not
indicated, the A-weighting shall apply.
SOUND LEVEL METER — Shall mean an instrument which includes a
microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time average, output
meter, and weighting networks used to measure sound pressure levels and
meets ANSI S-1-4.
SOUND PRESSURE — Shall mean the instantaneous difference between the
actual pressure and the average or barometric pressure at a given point in
space, as produced by sound energy.
SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL — Shall mean 20 times the logarithm to the
base 10 of the ratio of the RMS sound pressure to the reference pressure of
20 micropascals (20 x 10-6 N/m2). The sound pressure level is denoted Lp or
SPL and is expressed in decibels.
VIBRATION — Shall mean an oscillatory motion of solid bodies of
deterministic or random nature described by displacement, velocity, or
acceleration with respect to a given reference point.
WEEKDAY — Shall mean any day Monday through Friday which is not a
legal holiday.
§ 24-4. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE NOISE CONTROL OFFICER.
§ 24-4.1. Enforcement Agency. [Ord. #1738]
The noise control program established by this chapter shall be administered
by the department of health.
§ 24-3.1 GENERAL § 24-4.2
1:777
§ 24-4.2. Powers of the Noise Control Officer - NCO. [Ord. #1738]
In order to implement and enforce this chapter and for the general purpose
of sound and vibration abatement and control, the noise control officer shall
have, in addition to any other authority vested in it, the power to:
a. Studies. Conduct, or cause to be conducted, research, monitoring, and
other studies related to sound and vibration.
b. Education.
1. Conduct programs of public education regarding:
(a) The causes, effects and general methods of abatement and
control of noise and vibration.
(b) The actions prohibited by this chapter and the procedures for
reporting violations;
2. Encourage the participation of public interest groups in related
public information efforts.
c. Coordination and Cooperation.
1. Coordinate the noise and vibration control activities of all
municipal departments;
2. Cooperate to the extent practicable with all appropriate state and
federal agencies;
3. Cooperate or combine to the extent practicable with appropriate
county and municipal agencies;
4. Enter into contracts (with the approval of the township) for the
provisions of technical and enforcement services.
d. Review of Actions of Other Departments. Request any other department
or agency responsible for any proposed or final standard, regulation or
similar action to consult on the advisability of revising the action, if
there is reason to believe that the action is not consistent with this
chapter.
e. Review of Public and Private Projects. Review public and private
projects, subject to mandatory review or approval by other
departments, for compliance with this chapter, if such projects are
likely to cause sound or vibration in violation of this chapter.
f. Inspections.
1. Upon presentation of proper credentials, enter and inspect any
private property or place, and inspect any report or records at any
reasonable time when granted permission by the owner, or by some
other person with apparent authority to act for the owner. When
permission is refused or cannot be obtained a search warrant may
§ 24-4.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 24-4.2
1:778
§ 24-4.3. Duties of Noise Control Officer. [Ord. #1738]
In order to implement and enforce this chapter effectively, the noise control
officer shall, within a reasonable time after the effective date of the chapter:
be obtained from a court of competent jurisdiction upon showing of
probable cause to believe that a violation of this chapter may exist.
Such inspection may include administration of any necessary tests.
2. Stop any motor vehicle, motorcycle, or motorboat operated on a
public right-of-way, public space, or public waterway reasonably
suspected of violating any provision of this chapter, and issue a
notice of violation or abatement order which may require the motor
vehicle, motorcycle or motorboat to be inspected or tested as the
noise control officer may reasonably require.
g. Records. After a clear violation of the noise ordinance has been
determined by the noise control officer; to require the owner or
operator of any commercial or industrial activity to establish and
maintain records and make such reports as the noise control officer
may reasonably prescribe.
h. Measurements by the Owner or Operator. After a clear violation of the
noise ordinance has been determined by the noise control officer; to
require the owner or operator of any commercial or industrial activity
to measure the sound level of or the vibration from any source in
accordance with the methods and procedures and at such locations and
times as the noise control officer may reasonably prescribe and to
furnish reports of the results of such measurements to the noise control
officer. The noise control officer may require the measurements to be
conducted in the presence of its enforcement officials.
i. Product Performance Standard Recommendations.
1. Develop and recommend for promulgation provisions regulating
the use and operation of any product, including the specification of
maximum allowable sound emission levels of such product.
2. Develop and recommend for promulgation provisions prohibiting
the sale of products which do not meet specified sound emission
levels, where the sound level of the product is not regulated by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency under Section 6 of
the Noise Control Act of 1972.
j. Noise Sensitive Zone Recommendations. Prepare recommendations, to
be approved by the township for the designation of noise sensitive
zones which contain noise sensitive activities.
a. Standards, Testing Methods, and Procedures. Develop and promulgate
standards, testing methods and procedures.
§ 24-4.2 GENERAL § 24-4.3
1:779
§ 24-5. PROHIBITED ACTS.
§ 24-5.1. Noise Disturbance Prohibited. [Ord. #1738]
No person shall unreasonably make, continue, or cause to be made or
continued, any noise disturbance. Noncommercial public speaking and
public assembly activities, conducted on any public space or public right-ofway
shall be exempt from the operation of this section.
§ 24-5.2. Specific Prohibitions. [Ord. #1738; Ord. #2160, § I; Ord.
#2211, § I; Ord. #2416, § I]
The following acts, and the causing thereof, are declared to be in violation
of this chapter:
b. Investigate and Pursue Violations. In consonance with subsection
24-4.2f. Section 24-10, and other provisions of this chapter, investigate
and pursue possible violations of this chapter.
c. Delegation of Authority. Delegate functions, including enforcement,
where appropriate under this chapter, to personnel within the
department of health and the police department.
a. Radios, Television Sets, Musical Instruments and Similar Devices.
Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any radio,
television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier, or
similar device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound so as to
create a noise disturbance across a real property line.
b. Loudspeakers/Public Address Systems. Using or operating for any
noncommercial purpose any loudspeaker, public address system, or
similar device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following day, such that the sound therefrom creates a noise
disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a
noise sensitive zone.
c. Street Sales. Offering for sale, or selling anything by shouting or outcry
within any residential or commercial area of the township except
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
d. Animals and Birds. Owning, possessing or harboring any animal or bird
which frequently or for continued duration, howls, barks, meows,
squawks, or makes other sounds which create a noise disturbance
across a residential real property boundary or within a noise sensitive
zone.
e. Loading and Unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other
handling of boxes, crates, containers, building material, garbage cans,
or similar objects between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the
following day in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a
residential real property boundary or within a noise sensitive zone. (For
§ 24-4.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 24-5.2
1:780
the purpose of this subsection apartments in a business zone are to be
considered residential.)
f. Construction and Maintenance. Operating or permitting the operation
of any tools, or equipment used in construction or maintenance,
drilling, commercial street cleaning or commercial lot sweeping, or
demolition work:
1. From June through the end of September between the hours of 7:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day on weekdays or at any time on
Sundays or holidays.
2. From October through the end of May between the hours of 7:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day or weekdays or at any time on
Sundays or holidays.
3. During the hours and days not prohibited by paragraphs f1 and 2
above the prohibition shall be such that the sound therefrom
creates a noise disturbance across a residential real property
boundary or within a noise sensitive zone, except for emergency
work of public service utilities or by special variance issued
pursuant to subsection 24-6.2.
4. This section shall not apply to the use of domestic power tools
subject to subsection 24-5.2m.
g. Vehicle or Motorboat Repairs and Testing. Repairing, rebuilding,
modifying, or testing any motor vehicle, motorcycle, or motorboat in
such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real
property boundary or within a noise sensitive zone. (For the purpose of
this subsection apartments in a business zone are to be considered
residential.)
h. Places of Public Entertainment. Operating, playing, or permitting the
operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum,
musical instrument, sound amplifier, or similar device which produces,
reproduces, or amplifies sound in any place of public entertainment at a
sound level greater than 90 dBA as read by the slow response on a
sound level meter at any point that is normally occupied by a customer,
unless a conspicuous and legible sign is located outside such place,
near each public entrance, stating "WARNING: SOUND LEVELS
WITHIN MAY CAUSE PERMANENT HEARING IMPAIRMENT."
i. Explosives, Firearms, and Similar Devices. The use or firing of
explosives, firearms, or similar devices which create impulsive sound so
as to cause a noise disturbance across a real property boundary or on a
public space or right-of-way, without first obtaining a special variance
issued pursuant to subsection 24-6.2. Nothing in this section shall apply
to game hunting activities conducted in accordance with New Jersey
Fish and Game Laws.
§ 24-5.2 GENERAL § 24-5.2
1:781
j. Powered Model Vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of
powered model vehicles so as to create a noise disturbance across a
residential real property boundary, in a public space or within a noise
sensitive zone between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the
following day. Maximum sound levels for residential property and noise
sensitive zones, during the permitted period of operation, shall be
governed by subsection 24-7.1 and subsection 24-5.21 respectively.
k. Vibration. Operating or permitting the operation of any device that
creates vibration which is above the vibration perception threshold of
an individual at or beyond the property boundary of the source if on
private property, or at 15 meters from the source if on a public space or
public right-of-way. For the purposes of this section, "vibration
perception threshold" means the minimum ground-or structure-borne
vibrational motion necessary to cause a municipal investigator to be
aware of the vibration by such direct means as, but not limited to,
sensation by touch or visual observation of moving objects.
l. Noise Sensitive Zones.
1. Creating or causing the creation of any sound within any noise
sensitive zone designated pursuant to paragraph j of subsection
24-4.2, so as to disrupt the activities normally conducted within the
zone, provided that conspicuous signs are displayed indicating the
presence of the zone; or
2. Creating or causing the creation of any sound within any noise
sensitive zone, designated pursuant to paragraph j of subsection
24-4.2, containing a hospital, nursing home, or similar activity, so
as to interfere with the functions of such activity or disturb or
annoy the patients in the activity, provided that conspicuous signs
are displayed indicating the presence of the zone.
m. Domestic Power Tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any
mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool,
snowblower, or similar device used outdoors in residential areas
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day so as to
cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary.
n. Tampering. The following acts or causing thereof are prohibited: the
removal or rendering inoperative by any person other than for purposes
of maintenance, repair, or replacement, of any noise control device or
element of design or noise label of any product. The noise control
officer may, by regulation, list those acts which constitute violation of
this provision.
o. Noise from Automobile Radios and/or Sound Systems.
1. Operating, playing or permitting the operation or playing of any
radio, phonograph, portable stereo device, tape recorder, sound
amplifier, or similar device which produces, reproduces, or
amplifies sound in such a manner as to create unnecessary noise or
§ 24-5.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 24-5.2
1:782
§ 24-6. EXCEPTIONS AND VARIANCES.
§ 24-6.1. Emergency Exception. [Ord. #1738]
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to (a) the emission of sound
for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, or (b)
the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work.
§ 24-6.2. Special Variances. [Ord. #1738]
a noise disturbance for any person outside of the vehicle other than
the operator of the device.
2. Any person who is convicted of violation of paragraph l1 of this
subsection shall be fined $150 for a first offense, $300 for a second
offense and $500 for the third and subsequent offenses.
a. The noise control officer shall have the authority, consistent with this
section, to grant special variances which may be requested pursuant to
subsection 24-5.2f, Construction, and subsection 24-5.2i, Explosives,
Firearms, and Similar Devices.
b. Any person seeking a special variance pursuant to this section shall file
an application with the noise control officer. The application shall
contain information which demonstrates that bringing the source of
sound or activity for which the special variance is sought into
compliance with this chapter would constitute an unreasonable
hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on other persons.
Notice of an application for a special variance shall be published at
least once in the official newspaper of the township. Any individual who
claims to be adversely affected by allowance of the special variance may
file a statement with the noise control officer containing information to
support his claim. If the noise control officer finds that a sufficient
controversy exists regarding an application, a public hearing may be
held.
c. In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the noise
control officer shall balance the hardship to the applicant, community,
and other persons of not granting the special variance against the
adverse impact on the health, safety, and welfare of persons affected,
and the adverse impact on property affected, and any other adverse
impacts of granting the special variance. Applicants for special
variances and persons contesting special variances may be required to
submit any information the noise control officer may reasonably
require. In granting or denying an application the noise control officer
shall place on public file a copy of the decision and the reasons for
denying or granting the special variance.
d. Special variances shall be granted by notice to the applicant containing
all necessary conditions, including a time limit on the permitted activity.
The special variance shall not become effective until all conditions are
§ 24-5.2 GENERAL § 24-6.2
1:783
§ 24-6.3. Variances for Time to Comply. [Ord. #1738]
agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any condition of the
special variance shall terminate it and subject the person holding it
to those provisions of this chapter regulating the source of sound or
activity for which the special variance was granted.
e. Application for extension of time limits specified in special variances or
for modification of other substantial conditions shall be treated like
applications for initial special variances under paragraph b of this
subsection.
f. The noise control officer may issue guidelines defining the procedures
to be followed in applying for a special variance and the criteria to be
considered in deciding whether to grant a special variance.
a. Within 30 days following the effective date of this chapter, the owner of
any commercial or industrial source of sound may apply to the noise
control officer for a variance in time to comply with subsection 24-5.2k,
Vibration, or Section 24-7. The noise control officer shall have the
authority, consistent with this section, to grant a variance, not to exceed
120 days from the effective date of this chapter.
b. Any person seeking a variance in time to comply shall file an application
with the noise control officer. The application shall contain information
which demonstrates that bringing the source of sound or activity for
which the variance is sought into compliance with this chapter prior to
the date requested in the application would constitute an unreasonable
hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on other persons.
Notice of an application for a variance in time to comply shall be
published at least once in the official newspaper of the township. Any
individual who claims to be adversely affected by allowance of the
variance in time to comply may file a statement with the noise control
officer containing any information to support his claim. If the noise
control officer finds that a sufficient controversy exists regarding an
application, a public hearing may be held.
c. In determining whether to grant or deny the application, the noise
control officer shall balance the hardship to the applicant, the
community, and other persons of not granting the variance in time to
comply against the adverse impact on health, safety, and welfare of
persons affected, the adverse impact on property affected, and any
other adverse impacts of granting the variance. Applications for
variances in time to comply and persons contesting variances may be
required to submit any information the noise control officer may
reasonably require. In granting or denying an application, the noise
control officer shall place on public file a copy of the decision and the
reasons for denying or granting the variance in time to comply.
d. Variances in time to comply shall be granted to the applicant containing
all necessary conditions, including a schedule for achieving compliance.
§ 24-6.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 24-6.3
1:784
§ 24-6.4. Appeals. [Ord. #1738]
Appeals of an adverse decision of the noise control officer shall be made to
the appropriate court of law. Review of the court shall be de novo.
§ 24-7. SOUND LEVELS BY RECEIVING LAND USE.
§ 24-7.1. Maximum Permissible Sound Levels by Receiving Land
Use. [Ord. #1738]
In addition to other prohibitions contained in this chapter no person shall
operate or cause to be operated on private property any source of sound in
such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth
for the receiving land use category in Table 1 when measured at or within
the property boundary of the receiving land use.
Table 1. Sound Levels by Receiving Land Use
Receiving Land-Use
Category Time
Sound Level Limit,
dBA
1. R-A, R-B, R-C, Public
Space
7:00 a.m. - 10:00
p.m.
65
2. B-1 At all times 65
3. M-1, M-2, C-GI At all times 75
§ 24-7.2. Exemptions. [Ord. #1738]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
The variance in time to comply shall not become effective until all
conditions are agreed to by the applicant. Noncompliance with any
condition of the variance shall terminate the variance and subject the
person holding it to those provisions of this chapter for which the
variances was granted.
e. Application for extension of time limits specified in variances in time to
comply or for modification or other substantial conditions shall be
treated like applications for initial variances under paragraph b of this
subsection, except that the noise control officer must find that the need
for the extension or modification clearly outweighs any adverse impacts
of granting the extension or modification.
f. The noise control officer may issue guidelines defining the procedures
to be followed in applying for a variance in time to comply and the
criteria to be considered in deciding whether to grant a variance.
a. Activities covered by the following: subsection 24-5.2f, Construction;
subsection 24-5.2i, Explosives, Firearms, and Similar Devices;
subsection 24-5.2m, Domestic Power Tools; subsection 24-8.4, Standing
Motor Vehicles; and subsection 24-8.5, Recreational Motorized Vehicles
Operating Off Public Rights-of-Way;
§ 24-6.3 GENERAL § 24-7.2
1:785
§ 24-8. MOTOR VEHICLE MAXIMUM SOUND LEVELS.
§ 24-8.1. Motor Vehicles and Motorcycles on Public Rights-of-Way.
[Ord. #1738]
No person shall operate or cause to be operated a public or private motor
vehicle or motorcycle on a public right-of-way at any time in such a manner
that the sound level emitted by the motor vehicle or motorcycle exceeds the
level set forth in Table 2.
Table 2. Motor Vehicle and Motorcycles Sound Limits
(Measured at 50 feet or 15 meters)
Sound Level in dBA
Vehicles Class
Speed Limit
35 MPH or
Less
Speed Limit
Over 35
MPH
Stationary
Run-Up
Motor carrier vehicle
engaged in interstate
commerce of GVWR or
GCWR of 10,000 lbs. or
more.
86 90 88
All other motor vehicles of
GVWR or GCWR of 10,000
lbs. or more.
86 90 —
Any motorcycle. 82 86 —
Any other motor vehicle or
any combination of vehicles
towed by any motor vehicle.
76 82 —
§ 24-8.2. Adequate Mufflers or Sound Dissipative Devices. [Ord.
#1738]
b. The unamplified human voice;
c. Interstate railway locomotives and cars; and
d. All agricultural activities.
a. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle or
motorcycle not equipped with a muffler or other sound dissipative
device in good working order and in constant operation;
b. No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be removed
or rendered inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance,
repair, or replacement, any muffler or sound dissipative device on a
motor vehicle or motorcycle.
§ 24-7.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 24-8.3
1:786
§ 24-8.3. Motor Vehicle Horns and Signaling Devices. [Ord. #1738]
The following acts and the causing thereof are declared to be in violation of
this chapter:
§ 24-8.4. Standing Motor Vehicles. [Ord. #1738]
No persons shall operate or permit the operation of any motor vehicle with
a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) in excess of 10,000 pounds, or any
auxiliary equipment attached to such a vehicle, for a period longer than
ten minutes in any hour while the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other
than traffic congestion, on a public right-of-way or public space within 150
feet (46 meters) of a residential area or designated noise sensitive zone,
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day.
§ 24-8.5. Recreational Motorized Vehicles Operating Off Public
Rights-of-Way. [Ord. #1738]
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any recreational motorized
vehicle off a public right-of-way in such a manner that the sound level
emitted therefrom exceeds the limits set forth in Table 3 at a distance of
50 feet (15 meters) or more from the path of the vehicle when operated
on private property. This section shall apply to all recreational motorized
vehicles, whether or not duly licensed and registered, including, but not
limited to, commercial or noncommercial racing vehicles, motorcycles, gocarts,
snowmobiles, amphibious craft, campers, and dune buggies, but not
including motorboats.
Table 3. Recreational Motorized Vehicle Sound Limits
(Measured by 50 feet or 15 meters)
Vehicle Type Sound Level, dBA
Snowmobile Unit manufactured before 1975; 82 dBA
Unit manufactured after 1975; 78 dBA
Motorcycle Unit manufactured before 1975; 86 dBA
Unit manufactured after 1975; 84 dBA
Any other vehicle Unit manufactured before 1975; 84 dBA
Unit manufactured after 1975; 80 dBA
§ 24-9. RAIL CARRIER MAXIMUM SOUND LEVELS.
a. The sounding of any horn or other auditory signaling device on or in any
motor vehicle or motorcycle on any public right-of-way or public space,
except as a warning of danger.
§ 24-8.3 GENERAL § 24-9.1
1:787
§ 24-9.1. Applicable Regulations. [Ord. #1738]
The provisions of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Rail Carrier
Regulations, promulgated January 14, 1976, Title 40. Part 201, shall apply.
§ 24-10. ENFORCEMENT.
§ 24-10.1. Penalties. [Ord. #1738]
§ 24-10.2. Abatement Orders. [Ord. #1738]
§ 24-10.3. Notice of Violation. [Ord. #1738]
Except where a person is acting in good faith to comply with an abatement
order issued pursuant to paragraph a of subsection 24-10.2, violation of
any provision of this chapter shall be cause for a summons to be issued by
the noise control officer or police officer. For the purpose of Section 24-5
the noise control officer may issue a summons for a violation based on the
allegations of a lay witness.
§ 24-10.4. Immediate Threats to Health and Welfare. [Ord. #1738]
a. Any person who willfully or knowingly violates any provision of this
chapter shall be fined for each offense a sum of not less than $25 and
not more than $500.
b. Each day of violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense.
a. Except as provided in paragraph b., in lieu of issuing a notice of
violation as provided for in subsection 24-10.3, the noise control officer
or police officer may issue an order requiring abatement of any source
of sound or vibration alleged to be in violation of this chapter within a
reasonable time period.
b. An abatement order shall not be issued: (1) for any violation covered by
paragraph a of subsection 24-10.1; (2) when the noise control officer or
police officer has reason to believe that there will not be compliance
with the abatement order.
a. The noise control officer shall order an immediate halt to any sound
which exposes any person, except those excluded pursuant to
paragraph b, to continuous sound levels in excess of those shown in
Table 4 or to impulsive sound levels in excess of those shown in Table 5.
Within two days following issuance of such an order, the noise control
officer shall apply to the appropriate court for an injunction to replace
the order.
b. No order pursuant to paragraph a shall be issued if the only persons
exposed to sound levels in excess of those listed in Tables 4 and 5 are
exposed as a result of: (1) trespass; (2) invitation upon private property
by the person causing or permitting the sound; or (3) employment by
§ 24-9.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 24-10.4
1:788
the person or a contractor of the person causing or permitting the
sound.
c. Any person subject to an order issued pursuant to paragraph a shall
comply with such order until: (1) the sound is brought into compliance
with the order, as determined by EPO/noise control officer; (2) a judicial
order has superseded the noise control officer order.
d. Any person who violates an order issued pursuant to this section shall,
for each day of violation, be fined not more than $500.
Table 4.
Continuous Sound Levels Which Pose an Immediate Threat to
Health and Welfare
(Measured at 50 feet or 15 meters)*
Sound Level Limit
(dBA) Duration
90 24 hours
93 12 hours
96 6 hours
99 3 hours
102 1.5 hours
105 45 minutes
108 22 minutes
* Use equal energy time-intensity trade-off if level varies; find energy
equivalent over 24 hours
Table 5.
Impulsive Sound Levels Which Pose An Immediate Threat to
Health and Welfare
(Measured at 50 feet or 15 meters)*
Sound Level Limit
(dB)
Number of Repetitions Per 24
Hour Period
145 1
135 10
125 100
* Use equal energy time-intensity trade-off if level varies; find energy
equivalent over 24 hours
§ 24-10.4 GENERAL § 24-11
1:789
§ 24-11. OTHER REMEDIES. [Ord. #1738]
No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common law
or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy therefrom, of any person for
injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or from other
law.
Chapter 25
HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS
§ 25-1. HAZARDOUS CHEMICAL CONTROL BOARD.
§ 25-1.1. Board Established; Membership. [Ord. #1744, § 1; Ord.
#1830, §§ 1, 2; Ord. #2000, § I]
A hazardous chemical control board is hereby established to effectively
control hazardous chemicals. The purpose of this board and of this chapter
is to protect the safety, health and welfare of the residents of the Township
of Lyndhurst from hazardous chemicals.
The board shall consist of:
§ 25-1.2. Duties of Members; Inspections. [Ord. #1744, § 1; Ord.
#2000, § II]
a. A graduate chemical engineer hereinafter referred to as "engineer"
who shall be a graduate from an accredited college or university,
licensed to practice professional engineering under N.J.S.A. 45:8-27,
with additional degrees, certifications and experience in chemical
engineering as the board of commissioners may require. The "engineer"
shall have in addition at least three years of relevant safety experience.
The chemical engineer shall be appointed by the commissioners and
shall be compensated by a fixed annual contract.
b. The following township officials:
1. Plumbing subcode official.
2. Executive health officer.
3. Fire chief, fire prevention bureau chief and fire subcode official.
4. Building subcode official and construction official.
5. Chemical control inspector.
6. Superintendent of sewers.
7. Electrical inspector.
a. The engineer shall inspect, at least four times per year, all facilities
manufacturing, processing, handling, using or storing hazardous
§ 24-11 LYNDHURST CODE § 25-1.2
1:790
§ 25-2. RESPONSIBILITY OF PROPERTY OWNER/LESSEE
MANUFACTURING, STORING, ETC., HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS.
[Ord. #1744, § 2]
Each owner and/or lessee which shall include individuals, partnerships and/
or corporations, who owns or leases property and/or structures wherein and
whereon hazardous chemicals are manufactured, processed, handled, used,
or stored in any manner shall:
chemicals within the township. He shall also make such additional
inspections as are reasonably necessary to obtain compliance with
the provisions of this chapter. In making his inspections the engineer
may be accompanied by one or more members of the board. For the
purposes of this chapter, "hazardous chemicals" are those materials
defined as such in the BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code as adopted by
the Revised General Ordinances of the Township of Lyndhurst, 1979,
Chapter 11, as amended, hereafter referred to as the "Fire Prevention
Code" and including LP gas, explosive dust, flammable and combustible
liquids and organic coatings.
b. The board shall also inspect all other commercial and industrial plants
and warehouses at least once a year to determine whether they require
a permit under Section 25-3 hereof and to determine the contents of the
effluents being discharged into the township sanitary and storm sewer
systems.
c. After each inspection a written report is to be submitted by each
inspector, to the engineer, which report shall include, but not be limited
to, any violations discovered and actions taken concerning same. The
engineer shall submit a monthly written report to the board of
commissioners, which report shall be available to the public.
d. The engineer shall have the power, where there is or appears to be an
imminent hazard affecting life or safety of the public or property
involving hazardous chemicals, to declare an emergency and order
remedy. In such an emergency the board shall have the power to order
the suspension of the hazardous chemical operation. The method of
suspension shall pose no threat to the public and shall be subject to the
approval of the engineer. The suspension period shall be only as long as
the emergency exists.
a. Have a permit as required under Section 25-3 of this chapter and show
it upon request to the engineer or any member of the board.
b. Once a year provide the board with a "safety control chemical data
sheet" as described in Schedule 1 herein.* Submission to the board of a
material safety data sheet in the form provided by the U. S. Department
of Labor (Form LSBOOS-4) shall be an acceptable alternative. In using
either sheet, materials having similar properties may be grouped on
one sheet.
§ 25-1.2 GENERAL § 25-2
1:791
§ 25-3. PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
§ 25-3.1. Permit Required; Fee; Issuance. [Ord. #1744, § 3; Ord.
#1830, § 3; Ord. #2000, § III; Ord. #2107, § I; Ord. #2318, § I]
It is hereby determined that a permit shall be required for the
manufacturing, processing, handling, use or storage of a significant
quantity of hazardous chemicals in the township. The fee for such permit
shall be as set forth in Schedule 355 hereof. A significant quantity shall be
any amount equal to or in excess of those set forth in Schedule 3 hereof.
When the required fee has been paid to the chemical control inspector
and the other sections of the chapter have been complied with, a permit
shall be issued by the engineer. The permit shall list, by type and class,
as defined in the fire prevention code, the hazardous chemicals which may
be stored on the premises covered by the permit. For each type and class
of hazardous chemicals, the permit shall list the area in which storage of
such hazardous chemicals is permitted, the amount permitted in each area,
and the type of storage, such as, (by way of example and not limitation)
underground tank, above ground tank, or 55 gallon drum. The type or
class of significant quantities of hazardous chemicals stored in a given area
shall not be changed to a different type or class without written notice
to the board at least three business days before the proposed change.
"Class" means the classes of flammable or combustible liquids listed in the
Fire Prevention Code. "Type" means the types of hazardous materials and
chemicals listed in the Fire Prevention Code.
§ 25-3.2. Application and Other Forms. [Ord. #1744, § 3; Ord.
#1830, § 4]
All application forms and other necessary forms shall be provided for by
the township and obtainable from the chemical control inspector. When
completed they shall be filed with the chemical control inspector together
with the required fee.
§ 25-3.3. Permit Expiration and Renewal. [Ord. #1744, § 3; Ord.
#2000, § IV]
All permits shall expire on December 31 of the year in which they were
issued. Applications for renewal of permits shall be filed 90 days prior to the
expiration date in order that the application may be properly reviewed by
the board. A permit shall be renewable for no more than the total amount
c. Once a year provide the board with a "plot plan" on its property
indicating the location of hazardous chemical storage areas in the
manner described in Schedule 2 herein,54 and including the location of
all stationary liquid containers, and container storage areas containing
a significant quantity of hazardous chemicals on the premises.
54.Editor’s Note: The schedules are included as attachments to this chapter.
55.Editor’s Note: The schedules are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 25-2 LYNDHURST CODE § 25-3.3
1:792
of hazardous chemicals for which it was previously issued, except that this
chapter shall not prohibit relocation of fuel oil tanks. Changes in types and
classes of hazardous chemicals within the previously allowed total amount
shall not prevent reissuance of a permit as long as the other sections of
this chapter are complied with changes to a more hazardous type and
or class shall not be permitted without prior written notice to the board.
The chemical engineer or the board may require review and/or approval
pursuant to Section 25-8d.
§ 25-3.4. Applicant's Responsibilities. [Ord. #1744, § 3; Ord. #1830,
§ 5]
a. The applicant must provide the board with a fully completed safety
control chemical data sheet as required by paragraph b of Section 25-2
hereof. All items thereon shall be completed. If an answer to an item is
properly "none" or "not applicable", it shall be so stated.
b. The applicant must also provide the board with a fully completed plot as
required by paragraph c of Section 25-2.
c. The applicant shall clearly identify each storage tank, and storage area
by marking it in accordance with National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA) 704-1975 standard. Underground tanks shall be marked on the
fill or vent pipe. Drums and other container storage areas shall be
clearly marked, in accordance with the NFPA system, in such a manner
as to readily identify the hazardous chemicals stored therein.
d. It is the intention of this chapter that no permit applicant or holder may
extend its capacity to store hazardous chemicals beyond that amount
safely stored prior to the date of the introduction of this chapter,
September 17, 1979. The total amount of hazardous chemicals
permitted shall not exceed: (1) The maximum capacity capable of being
stored in fixed tanks as of September 17, 1979; and (2) the maximum
quantity actually stored in non-fixed tank containers during the 12
months period prior to September 17, 1979. The permit holder shall be
permitted to build fixed tanks for the storage of inventory formerly
stored in non-fixed containers.
e. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to prevent the
introduction and use of hazardous chemicals where such use is
incidental, as determined by the hazardous chemical control board, and
reasonably necessary for the operation of an allowed structure or use
and shall not constitute another line of business. The applicant is still
required to meet all of the requirements of this chapter. By way of
example, but not for limitation, the following uses of hazardous
chemicals are deemed incidental:
1. LP gas used for fork lift truck.
2. Fluid and ink for office copying machines.
3. Welding gases.
§ 25-3.3 GENERAL § 25-3.4
1:793
§ 25-4. REQUIREMENTS.
§ 25-4.1. General. [Ord. #1744, § 4]
§ 25-4.2. Specific Compliance. [Ord. #1744, § 4]
Every person engaged in hazardous chemical operations shall:
§ 25-4.3. Qualified Personnel. [Ord. #1744, § 4]
§ 25-4.4. Prohibited Materials. [Ord. #1774, § 4; Ord. #2000, §§ V,
VI]
4. Auxiliary batteries for back-up electrical systems.
a. All persons engaged in hazardous chemical operations shall carry out
such operations in a manner to protect the health, safety, and welfare of
the public from such operations.
b. All person engaged in hazardous chemical operations shall comply with
the requirements and the standards set forth in this chapter. The
engineer or the board may accept equivalent protection where strict
compliance would create a hardship.
a. Comply with the township's Building Code, Fire Prevention Code,
Electrical Code, Plumbing Code, and Sanitary Code and such other
codes and standards which have been or may be adopted by the
Township of Lyndhurst.
b. Comply with nationally recognized standards for their hazardous
chemical operation; such standards shall be listed annually by the
board and made available to permit holders.
c. Comply with state laws and regulations and federal laws and
regulations protecting public safety and health from hazardous
chemicals.
d. Furnish certificate of liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.
a. Every permit holder shall insure that a qualified person shall be in
charge at all times and at each and every place where hazardous
chemical operations are carried out. The qualified person shall remain
on the premises as long as the manufacture, use, processing, or
handling of hazardous chemicals is being carried out and shall return to
the premises when required under emergent circumstances. To be a
qualified person, the individual shall be knowledgeable in the chemical
and physical processes utilized by the permit holder and shall be
selected, trained, and designated by the permit holder.
b. The permit holder shall furnish to the engineer, fire chief and police
chief a list of qualified persons with their addresses and telephone
numbers to be contacted in the event of any emergent circumstance.
§ 25-3.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 25-4.4
1:794
a. Explosive material, as defined in the Fire Prevention Code, is hereby
prohibited within the confines of the Township of Lyndhurst.
b. Unstable (reactive) chemicals as defined in the Fire Prevention Code,
and assigned a reactivity index of 3 or 4 according to NFPA 704-1980
standards are hereby prohibited within the confines of the Township of
Lyndhurst. This section does not pertain to laboratory samples of one
pound or less held by permit holder.
c. Highly toxic materials as defined in the Fire Prevention Code and
assigned a health hazard index of 4 according to NFPA 704-1980
standards are hereby prohibited within the confines of the Township of
Lyndhurst except for quantities used for laboratory testing. This section
does not pertain to such materials when labeled and packaged for
consumer use in accordance with applicable laws, nor does it pertain to
use of such materials by pest control applicators certified by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and in accordance with
applicable laws.
d. Poisonous Gases.
1. Poisonous gases as defined in the Fire Prevention Code and
assigned a health hazard index of 4 according to NFPA 704-1980
are hereby prohibited within the confines of the Township of
Lyndhurst except for quantities used for laboratory testing.
2. Poisonous gases as defined in the Fire Prevention Code and
assigned a health hazard index of 3 according to NFPA 704-1980
are hereby prohibited within the confines of the Township of
Lyndhurst except for quantities used for laboratory testing. This
prohibition shall not apply to a material for which there is a
nationally recognized consensus standard which will protect the
public safety from that material.
3. Poisonous gases shall include liquids boiling at a temperature
below 100° F. if the liquid releases gas that has a health hazard
index of 3 or more. These paragraphs c1, c2 and c3, do not pertain
to such materials when labeled and packaged for consumer use in
accordance with applicable laws nor does it pertain to the use of
such materials by licensed pest control applicators certified by the
New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and in
accordance with applicable law.
e. Any significant change in any process or procedure involving a
hazardous chemical shall be submitted in writing to the engineer for
approval or denial before such change is instituted. A significant
change is one that may adversely affect the public health, safety, or
welfare. In his review, the engineer shall give first consideration to
protecting the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
township. The engineer shall make his determination within a
reasonable period of time. Failure of the engineer to make a decision
shall be deemed as a refusal.
§ 25-4.4 GENERAL § 25-4.5
1:795
§ 25-4.5. Storage and Transfer Areas. [Ord. #1744, § 4]
§ 25-4.6. Loading, Unloading and Transfer. [Ord. #1744, § 4]
a. Wherever hazardous chemicals in liquid form are present in vehicles,
rail cars, or above ground tanks or other containers, adequate drainage
or diking shall be provided. Satisfactory provisions for neutralizing
leakage or spills of corrosive liquids shall be provided.
b. All storage areas for drums, carboys, barrels, bags, cylinders and all
other types of containers shall comply with the appropriate provisions
of the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code, the Fire Prevention
Code, and nationally recognized standards.
c. Each storage tank and storage area shall be clearly marked in
accordance with National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard
704-1975 to readily identify the hazardous chemicals stored therein.
Underground tanks shall be marked on the fill or vent pipe.
d. Whenever underground storage tanks containing hazardous chemicals
have been in use for a period of 20 years or more, they shall be subject
to retesting when reasonably required by the engineer.
e. Tank trucks and/or rail tank cars shall not be utilized for storage of
hazardous chemicals except as further provided by this chapter.
f. Use of Tank Trucks or Rail Tank Cars for Active Storage.
1. The permit holder may, by prior written notice to the board, use a
tank truck or rail tank car for the active storage of hazardous
chemicals during short campaigns for periods of no more than 14
working days.
2. Active storage shall be the transferring of chemicals from the tank
trunk or rail tank car directly into the chemical process used in the
campaign.
3. All active storage areas for tank trunks or rail tank cars containing
hazardous chemicals shall be provided with adequate drainage
complying with Department of Environmental Protection and Fire
Prevention Code regulations, fixed fire protection in accordance
with the Fire Prevention Code and such other requirements as the
board may deem reasonable.
a. All loading, unloading, or transfer of hazardous chemicals shall take
place entirely on the permit holder's premises and under the
supervision of a qualified person.
b. Liquid or bulk solid hazardous chemicals shall be transferred from a
vehicle or rail car to a storage tank and not directly to cylinders, drums,
portable tanks, or similar containers except in an emergency.
§ 25-4.5 LYNDHURST CODE § 25-4.6
1:796
§ 25-4.7. Building and Equipment. [Ord. #1744, § 4]
c. All vehicles and rail cars carrying hazardous chemicals shall stand or be
parked only in a secure area where they are under the care, custody,
and control of a permit holder.
d. All vehicles and rail cars carrying hazardous chemicals shall be moved
expeditiously through the township and in accordance with township,
state, and federal law on such movements. The permit holder shall
provide a qualified person who shall ensure that such movements
comply with this requirement for shipments to or from his premises.
e. All tank trunks and rail tank cars containing flammable or combustible
liquids shall be loaded or unloaded within two working days. All tank
trucks and rail tank cars containing all other hazardous chemicals shall
be loaded or unloaded within seven working days. If the above
requirements cannot be complied with the board shall be notified
immediately by telephone.
f. A person who loads or unloads hazardous chemicals shall comply with
the applicable federal laws and regulations.
a. In every building and structure where hazardous chemical operations
are carried out, there shall be not less than two approved independent
exitways servicing every floor area and leading to less hazardous
locations. Stairways shall be enclosed. All exitways shall meet the
construction requirements of the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code and the maintenance requirements of the township Fire
Prevention Code and Property Maintenance Code.
b. Enclosed areas where hazardous chemical operations are carried out
shall be provided with approved automatic sprinkler, or other
appropriate protection in accordance with the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code under approved supervision.
c. Explosion venting shall be provided where hazardous chemical
operations are carried out as required by the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code.
d. All boilers and pressure vessels associated with hazardous chemical
operations shall be in current compliance with applicable state law or
regulations. Any such boiler or pressure vessel not in current
compliance shall be declared an imminent hazard in accordance with
Section 25-2 and shall be brought to atmospheric pressure and emptied
of its contents forthwith, with due regard for the safety of the public.
e. All existing buildings and structures and their equipment, tanks,
process equipment, and all other facilities used for or associated with
hazardous chemical operations shall be brought into and maintained in
compliance with federal, state and township public safety laws,
regulations or nationally recognized standards within three years from
the effective date of this chapter. Plans for compliance with the
§ 25-4.6 GENERAL § 25-4.7
1:797
§ 25-4.8. Pollution. [Ord. #1774, § 4]
Every permit holder shall conduct hazardous chemical operations so as to
prevent the release of noxious or toxic fumes, mists, dusts, vapors, gasses,
odors, or other emissions into the atmosphere. Any violation of state and
federal air or water pollution or solid waste laws or regulations shall also
constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 25-4.9. Emergency Notification. [Ord. #1744, § 4]
In the event of any fire, explosion, structural failure, or other accident
relating to hazardous chemicals, the permit holder shall immediately notify
the police and fire departments, who will in turn notify the engineer. Such
notification shall be required notwithstanding the permit holder's actual or
anticipated ability to control the accident without affecting public safety.
§ 25-4.10. Training. [Ord. #1744, § 4]
Each person who carries out hazardous chemical operations shall instruct
each of his officers, agents and employees having any responsibility for such
operations as to applicable requirements in this chapter.
§ 25-4.11. Abandonment or Removal of Tanks. [Ord. #1744, § 4]
The abandonment or removal of tanks which contain hazardous chemicals
shall comply with the appropriate sections of the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code, the Fire Prevention Code, or such other equivalent
requirements acceptable to the engineer.
§ 25-4.12. Escrow for Inspections of Hazardous Chemical
Operation. [Ord. #2355, § I]
Any person engaged in hazardous chemical operations subject to
inspections under this chapter shall, upon the request of the construction
code official or his designee, deposit the sum of $750 with the Township
of Lyndhurst to be applied against the anticipated costs of said inspections
to be made by the engineer. Said inspection fee shall be invoiced at a rate
not to exceed $150 per hour. Any escrow monies not used shall be returned
within 30 days from the completion of the inspections. Any deficiency
between the escrow deposited and the invoice for the inspections shall
be paid by the person who is engaged in hazardous chemical operations
prior to any permit or any certificate regarding the subject matter of the
inspection(s) being is issued.
requirements may include an increase in the quantity of hazardous
chemicals permitted to be stored when the engineer has determined
that such an increase shall contribute to significantly reducing the
exposure of the public to hazardous chemicals. All such plans shall be
submitted for approval to the engineer and as required by ordinances.
§ 25-4.7 LYNDHURST CODE § 25-5
1:798
§ 25-5. TRADE SECRETS. [Ord. #1744, § 5]
The board shall use all reasonable means to see that information clearly
designated by an applicant or permit holder as a trade secret is maintained
as such. Such information shall be available within the board only to those
having a need to know in order to perform their duties. Such information
shall not be made available to persons outside the board unless clearly
required by an emergency situation. The board shall follow the procedures
set up by the department of environmental protection when dealing with
trade secrets.
§ 25-6. SEPARATE AND DISTINCT VIOLATION FOR EVERY DAY.
[Ord. #1744, § 6]
Every day after an initial court adjudication of a violation that the provisions
of this chapter are violated by an owner and/or lessee of any building or
location shall be a separate and distinct violation of this chapter.
§ 25-7. SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. [Ord. #1744, § 7]
If any section or part of this chapter shall be declared to be
unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative in whole or in part by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such section or part shall be to the extent that is not
unconstitutional, invalid or inoperative remain in full force and effect and
no such determination shall be deemed to invalidate the remaining sections
or parts of this chapter.
§ 25-8. VIOLATIONS; NOTICE OF; CORRECTION OF; APPEAL;
HEARING. [Ord. #1744, § 8]
a. The engineer shall give written notice of any violation of the provisions
of this chapter, to any owner and/or lessee who occupies any premises
subject hereto, as follows:
1. Ten days' written notice to abate or correct any violation other than
that requiring structural or mechanical changes in the building,
structure or operation used in the manufacture or storage of
hazardous chemicals.
2. Thirty days' written notice to abate or correct any violation
requiring structural or mechanical changes in the building,
structure or operation used in the manufacture or storage of
hazardous chemicals.
b. No complaint shall be filed upon proof by the owner and/or lessee
occupying such premises to the engineer that the abatement or
correction of the violation of the provisions of this chapter has been
commenced in good faith and work relating thereto is continuing.
c. Upon failure of the owner and/or lessee to complete the abatement or
correction of the violation of the provisions of this chapter or for any
misstatement of fact, then upon the engineer filing a complaint with the
§ 25-5 GENERAL § 25-8
1:799
§ 25-9. REPEALER CLAUSE. [Ord. #1744, § 9]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent with any
provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed as to the extent of such
inconsistencies.
§ 25-10. EFFECTIVE DATE. [Ord. #1744, § 10]
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law, except that the fees prescribed hereunder shall become
effective on January 1, 1980 and the first of every year thereafter.
§ 25-11. TRANSPORTING, STORING AND DUMPING OF CHEMICAL
WASTES.
municipal court of the Township of Lyndhurst and conviction
thereunder, the owner and/or lessee shall pay a fine not exceeding $500
for each offense or shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a term not
exceeding 90 days or both, at the discretion of the judge.
d. 1. Upon the denial of a permit required by Section 25-3, or where
enforcement of any provision of this chapter would work a
substantial financial hardship, an aggrieved party may appeal to
the board of commissioners. No such appeal shall be granted where
the lives and safety of people or property would be adversely
affected.
2. Any such appeal shall be referred to the chemical control board for
a plenary hearing and recommendation.
3. An appeal shall be decided by the board of commissioners only
upon the record established before the chemical control board. The
appellant shall arrange for six copies of the transcript to be
submitted to the board of commissioners.
4. The board of commissioners shall make its decision within 30 days
of the receipt of the transcript.
5. The chemical control board shall conduct a hearing within 30 days
of the filing of the appeal and make its decision within 21 days of
the hearing.
6. Any of the above time limits may be extended upon written
approval of the applicant.
7. Any prosecution in the Lyndhurst Municipal Court dealing with the
subject matter of the appeal shall be stayed pending the outcome of
the appeal.
§ 25-8 LYNDHURST CODE § 25-11.1
1:800
§ 25-11.1. Definitions. [Ord. #1874, § I]
ACTIVE TRANSIT — Shall mean continual, uninterrupted movement
through the township by the most expeditious route without stops for meals,
sleep, or to satisfy any other human needs except by delays caused by traffic
or traffic signals.
CHEMICAL WASTE — Shall mean waste derived from the use of chemicals
which must be discarded and disposed of and not intended for any use.
Chemical waste shall also include any such waste which is intended to be
recycled or reclaimed. No chemical analysis need be made of the substance
so long as the waste is derived from the use of chemicals.
DUMP or TO DUMP — Shall mean to spill accidentally or intentionally any
chemicals or chemical waste in any ground, building, waters, sewer or any
other place in the township. Dump shall also include discarding, abandoning
or otherwise disposing of containers containing such substances.
OWNER — Shall mean a person who either owns or is in control of or is in
possession of real property in this township.
PERSON — Shall mean and include a corporation, firm partnership,
association, organization and any other group acting as a unit as well as
individuals. It shall also include an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver
or other representative appointed according to law. Whenever the word
"person" is used in any section of this code prescribing a penalty or fine,
as to partnerships or associations, the word shall include the partners or
members thereof, and as to corporations, shall include the officer, agents or
members thereof who are responsible for any violation of such section.
REMOVAL FORTHWITH — Shall mean:
STORE, TO STORE, STORAGE — Shall mean to keep, retain or maintain.
§ 25-11.2. Bringing Chemical Wastes Into Township; Prohibited.
[Ord. #1874, § II]
§ 25-11.3. Transporting Chemical Waste; Manifest or Other
Documents Required. [Ord. #1874, § III]
In the case of chemical waste contained in drums or other containers,
removal shall occur within 12 hours.
1.
In the case of dumped or discarded chemical wastes in or upon the
ground, such substances shall be removed within 24 hours. It shall not
be a defense that said dumped or discarded chemical waste cannot be
physically removed within such time.
2.
a. No person shall transport or cause to be transported chemical wastes
into this township unless such substances are in active transit through
the township for a destination outside this township.
a. Any person transporting chemical waste through this township shall
have a proper manifest for such shipment if the nature of the waste is
§ 25-11.1 GENERAL § 25-11.3
1:801
§ 25-11.4. Storage of Chemical Wastes; When Permitted; Removal.
[Ord. #1874, § IV]
§ 25-11.5. Permits to Store Chemical Waste Generated in the
Township; Application; Fees. [Ord. #1874, § V]
such that federal or state laws require such a manifest. In the event the
nature of the waste is such that no such manifest is required then that
person shall have other documentary proof setting forth the following
information:
1. The nature and the quantity of the chemical waste.
2. The name and address of the person from whom the waste was
obtained.
3. The destination to which the waste is being transported.
a. No person shall store any chemical wastes in this township unless all of
the following conditions are met:
1. The wastes are generated in this township as a result of processes
or activity permitted within this township.
2. A permit to store such waste is obtained from the hazardous
chemical control board.
3. That such wastes are not stored beyond a reasonable time to
enable removing same out of the township or for the time needed to
recycle or reclaim same into chemicals to be reused by processes
permitted within the township. Reasonable time to be set by the
hazardous chemical control board.
b. Any person who has possession or is in control of any chemical wastes
in the township and has no permit to store same, shall forthwith remove
such chemical waste from the township.
c. No person who is the owner of property in this township shall allow or
permit, directly or indirectly, or cause to allow or permit, directly or
indirectly, any person to store, keep or retain any chemical waste in or
upon such property without a permit.
d. Any person who is the owner of property in this township, upon which
property there is stored by someone else such chemical waste without a
permit shall forthwith remove or cause to be removed such chemical
waste from this township.
a. Application for permits to store chemical wastes which are generated in
this township shall contain the following information:
1. The name and address of the applicant.
§ 25-11.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 25-11.5
1:802
§ 25-11.6. Chemical Waste; Dumping, Abandoning or Otherwise
Disposing of Same. [Ord. #1874, § VI]
2. The nature and quantity of the waste, also setting forth whether
hazardous or non-hazardous, toxic or non-toxic, flammable or nonflammable.
3. The precise location of the storage place. If the waste is to be
stored in a building the precise location in the building.
4. The type of containers in which the waste is to be stored.
5. What is to be done with the waste; whether it is to be removed from
the township or recycled or reclaimed in this township.
6. If the waste is to be removed from the township, the date on or
before it will be transported out of the township, such date shall not
be beyond a reasonable time to enable removal from the township
by the exercise of due diligence in good faith.
7. If the waste is to be recycled or reclaimed by processes to be
conducted in this township, the date on or before the waste will be
so processed. Such date shall not be beyond a reasonable time to
enable such processes to be conducted by the exercise of due
diligence in good faith.
8. If the generation of the waste is a continual one; then there must be
set forth the quantity that will be accumulated and stored at any
one time before it is removed or reclaimed or recycled. Such
amounts which can be stored at any one period shall not exceed an
amount which is sufficient to be transported or reclaimed or
recycled, as the case may be.
b. No permits shall be issued to store chemical wastes generated in this
township, unless same is stored in containers and in places which
comply with all federal, state and township laws and regulations
pertaining to the particular nature of the waste to be stored.
c. Permits shall be issued for a period of one year and may be renewed
annually.
d. All permits shall set forth the following:
1. The nature of the waste which can be stored.
2. The precise location where the waste can be stored.
3. The quantity of the waste which can be stored at any one time.
4. The length of time which any particular accumulation may be
stored.
5. The type of container which must be used for such wastes.
§ 25-11.5 GENERAL § 25-11.6
1:803
§ 25-11.7. Samples; Prima Facie Evidence. [Ord. #1874, § VII]
a. No person shall dump, abandon or otherwise dispose of any chemical
waste within this township:
1. Provided, however, in the event the waste is of such a nature that
federal, state or local laws and regulations allow such wastes to be
disposed of in the sanitary sewerage system, then such wastes may
be disposed of in this manner.
2. Any such wastes dumped into the sewers shall be limited to the
quantities allowed for such disposition.
3. Any person who intends to dispose of chemical wastes into the
sewers shall first file a copy with the hazardous chemical control
board setting forth the nature of the chemical waste, and the
quantities which will be introduced into the sewers each day. In
addition thereto, there shall be a copy of the laws or regulations
which permit such wastes to be disposed of into the sewers.
b. Any person who shall dump, abandon or otherwise dispose of chemical
waste in this township, shall forthwith remove said chemical waste from
this township.
c. No person who is the owner of property shall allow or permit any
person to dump, abandon or dispose of any chemical waste upon such
property.
d. Any person who is the owner of property, and who shall allow or permit
any person to dump, abandon, or otherwise dispose of chemical wastes
upon such property, shall forthwith remove or cause to be removed,
such chemical waste from this township.
e. The owner of property upon which another has dumped, abandoned or
otherwise disposed of chemical wastes without the permission of the
owner shall cause that person to forthwith remove said chemical waste
from this township. In the event the person who placed said substance
upon the property is unknown or unavailable and the owner cannot
cause him to remove said chemical waste, then the owner shall be
responsible to remove said chemical wastes forthwith at his own cost
and expense.
f. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any motor vehicle which
was used to transport chemical wastes and which motor vehicle has
been stolen or abandoned within this township, or which was
abandoned in this township by the owner or lessee of said vehicle, to
forthwith remove said chemical wastes from this township at the
owners cost and expense.
a. Samples taken from some or part of any shipment or collection of
containers shall constitute prima facie evidence that the entire
shipment or collection contains the same substance or substances.
§ 25-11.6 LYNDHURST CODE § 25-11.7
1:804
§ 25-11.8. Penalties. [Ord. #1874, § VIII]
b. Sampling and analysis to be done at owners expense.
a. Persons violating any of the provisions of this section shall be subject to
a fine not to exceed $500 or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or
both, for each separate and distinct offenses in violation of this section
are as follows:
1. Transporting chemical wastes into this township unless such
substances are in active transit through the township for a
destination outside the township.
2. For failure to have a manifest or other documentary proof in
accordance with subsection 25-11.2.
3. Storing chemical wastes in violation of subsection 25-11.4. Each
day said wastes are stored shall be a separate and distinct violation
and shall be punishable as such as set forth above.
4. Failing to remove chemical wastes illegally brought into this
township. Each day such waste is kept in this township shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation and shall be punishable
as such.
5. For the owner of property who allows or permits any person to
store, keep or retain chemical wastes in this township without a
permit. Each day said owner shall permit said storage shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be punishable
as such, as set forth above.
6. For dumping, abandoning or otherwise disposing of any chemical
wastes within the township in violation of subsection 25-11.1.
7. For failing to remove forthwith, any chemical waste dumped,
abandoned, or otherwise disposed of in this township in violation of
subsection 25-11.4. Each day the person fails to remove such
substance shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall
be punishable as such as set forth herein.
8. For the owner of property to allow or permit any person to dump,
abandon, or otherwise dispose of any chemical waste on said
property.
9. For failure of the owner of property to forthwith remove or cause to
be removed, any chemical wastes which were dumped, abandoned,
or otherwise disposed of upon such property with or without the
owner's permission. Each day that said owner fails to forthwith
remove said chemical waste shall be a separate and distinct offense
and shall be punishable as such, as set forth above.
10. For failure of the owner of a motor vehicle containing chemical
wastes, which motor vehicle has been abandoned, either by the
§ 25-11.7 GENERAL § 25-11.8
1:805
§ 25-11.9. Permits: Fees. [Ord. #1874, § IX]
§ 25-11.10. Transporting and Storage of Chemicals Other Than
Chemical Wastes. [Ord. #1874, § X]
owner or lessee, or a person who has stolen same, to forthwith
remove said chemical wastes from this township. Each day that
said owner shall fail to remove the chemical wastes from the
township shall be punishable as such as set forth above.
11. For failure to remove from this township chemical wastes within
the time allowed by the permit to store same. Each day or failure to
so remove shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall
be punishable as such.
12. For failure to recycle or reclaim chemical wastes stored for such
purpose within the township. Each day of failure to recycle or
reclaim shall constitute a separate and distinct offense and shall be
punishable as such.
b. Where it is set forth herein that each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense, only one summons or
complaint shall be issued. In such case the summons or complaint shall
set forth a charge that each day the offense continues shall constitute
separate and distinct offenses and shall be punishable as such.
a. The fee for any permit required by this section shall be $250.
b. Permits shall be for a period deemed necessary by the hazardous
chemical control board of the township.
a. No person shall transport any chemicals into this township unless such
person shall have the following:
1. A manifest or some other proof of the quantity and nature of the
chemicals being transported into this township.
2. Proof of the destination to which said chemicals are being
transported.
3. All chemicals transported through the township shall use county
and state roads.
b. Where chemicals are of such a nature and quantity that the storage of
same are regulated by federal, state or local laws and regulations then
no person shall store same without first obtaining a permit for such
storage from the hazardous chemical control board.
c. Permits for the storage such chemicals within this township shall be
issued in accordance with the provisions contained in this chapter of
this code and any person storing said chemicals shall comply with
regulations set forth therein.
§ 25-11.8 LYNDHURST CODE § 25-11.10
1:806
§ 25-11.11. Penalties. [Ord. #1874, § XI]
Chapter 26
TREES
§ 26-1. DEFINITIONS. [Ord. #2177, § 1; Ord. #2247, § 1]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS (DPW) — Shall mean the department of
the township government with jurisdiction over shade trees.
PERSON — Shall mean every person, individual, firm, association,
partnership, and corporation, including employees and agents of the before
mentioned.
SHADE TREE — Shall mean shade and ornamental trees and shrubbery now
located or which may hereafter be planted in any public highway, street,
or parks, area between sidewalks and curbs and/or right-of-way of public
street except those located or planted on county or state high-ways.
STREET — Shall mean all streets, roads, roadways, public highways or
parks, public alleys and public places in the town, except county parks and
state highways.
§ 26-2. CUTTING, CLIMBING, SPRAYING, FASTENING DEVICES,
REMOVING GUARDS. [Ord. #2177, § 2; Ord. #2247, § 2]
No person shall do or cause to be done by others to any tree, shrub or
plant on a public street or place, either purposely, carelessly or negligently,
without the permission of the DPW, any of the following acts:
d. No person or persons shall transport chemicals through the township
that do not comply with all state and federal regulations including the
United States Department of Transportation regulations on such
transport.
a. Persons violating any of the provisions of subsection 25-11.10, shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $500, or imprisonment not to exceed 90
days, or both, for each separate and distinct offense. The separate and
distinct offenses in violation of this section are as follows:
1. For failing to have a manifest or other proof setting forth the
quantity and nature of the chemicals being transported.
2. For failing to have proof of the destination of the chemicals being
transported.
3. For storing chemicals without a permit where such permit is
required.
§ 25-11.10 GENERAL § 26-2
1:807
§ 26-3. SIDEWALKS AND STONES BLOCKING AIR AND WATER;
OPEN SPACE AROUND TRUNKS. [Ord. #2177, § 3; Ord. #2247, § 3]
§ 26-4. SALT, OIL, CHEMICALS OR OTHER INJURIOUS
SUBSTANCES. [Ord. #2177, § 4; Ord. #2247, § 4]
No person shall place salt, brine, oil, chemical or other substances injurious
to plant growth in any public street or place in such a manner as to injure
any tree or shrub growing thereon.
§ 26-5. LAYING SIDEWALKS OR OPENING OR CONSTRUCTING
STREETS. [Ord. #2177, § 5; Ord. #2247, § 5]
No person is permitted to lay any sidewalk along or to open, construct, curb
or pave any street or do any like act so as to interfere with or do injury to
any highway shade tree without written consent of the DPW.
§ 26-6. BUILDING CONSTRUCTION; EXCAVATIONS; MACHINES
AND TOOLS; PROTECTING ROOTS. [Ord. #2177, § 6; Ord. #2247,
§ 6]
a. Cut, prune, climb with spikes, break, damage or remove.
b. Cut, disturb or interfere in any way with any root.
c. Spray with any chemical.
d. Fasten any rope, wire, sign or other device.
e. Remove or damage any guard or device placed to protect any tree or
shrub.
a. No person, without the permission of the DPW, may place or maintain or
cause to be placed or maintained upon the ground in any public
highway or place any stone, cement or other sidewalks or any stone,
asphalt, cement or other substance which shall impede the free access
of air and water to the roots of any tree or shrub in any public street or
place.
b. An open space of not less than two feet outside the trunks of trees at
their bases on all sides must be maintained on all trees on public streets
except where limited by curb and/or sidewalks.
a. In the erection, altering or repairing of any building or structure, the
owner or contractor thereof shall place such guards around all nearby
trees in public highways or places as will effectually prevent injury to
such trees.
b. No person shall do any excavating within two feet of any tree or shrub
without the written permission of the DPW.
§ 26-2 LYNDHURST CODE § 26-6
1:808
§ 26-7. REMOVAL OR TRANSPLANTING ON REQUEST. [Ord. #2177,
§ 7; Ord. #2247, § 7]
Any person requesting the removal or transplanting of any shade tree must
obtain written approval from the DPW. If such removal or transplanting,
in the opinion of the DPW, is of no advantage to the general public but
advantageous to only said person requesting the work, then such person
shall pay the cost of such work, said costs to be determined by the DPW.
Said cost of removal or transplanting of shade trees shall be based on the
size and condition of the tree. A deposit sufficient to cover the cost of said
work shall be made before the work is started.
§ 26-8. REMOVAL OF DANGEROUS TREES; NOTICE TO OWNER.
[Ord. #2177, § 8; Ord. #2247, § 8]
The DPW may remove or require the removal of any tree or part thereof
dangerous to public safety, at the expense of the owner of such tree, upon
first serving written notice to the owner of said tree that the same will be
removed unless the owner removes the same within one week from the date
of said notice.
§ 26-9. PLANTING OR REPLACEMENT. [Ord. #2177, § 9; Ord.
#2247, § 9]
No shade or ornamental tree or shrub shall be planted in any of the public
highways of this town except by a representative of the DPW.
c. Shovels and all other implements, machines and tools shall be used or
operated in such a manner as not to damage or destroy any tree, shrub
or plant in any public highway or place.
d. Where in authorized excavations it becomes necessary to expose or cut
roots more than one inch in diameter, it shall be the duty of the
contractor to protect such roots under the supervision of the shade tree
commission.
a. The DPW, in its discretion, will plant a tree for a property owner upon
written request, provided that there is sufficient distance for the future
growth of said tree and budget or availability of funds allows for said
planting.
b. Trees replacing trees heretofore planted by the DPW and removed
because of disease, storm damage, accidents or natural causes will, in
the discretion of the DPW, be replaced by the DPW at no charge to the
property owner, provided that there is a minimum width of 50 feet
between trees on the same side of the street.
c. The type and selection of trees to be planted will be determined by the
DPW.
§ 26-6 GENERAL § 26-10
1:809
§ 26-10. INTERFERENCE WITH AUTHORIZED PERSONS
PERFORMING DUTIES. [Ord. #2177, § 10; Ord. #2247, § 10]
No person shall prevent, delay or in any manner interfere with the DPW or
its authorized agents or representatives in the performance of their lawful
duties.
§ 26-11. ELECTRIC, TELEPHONE OR OTHER WIRES; UTILITY
COMPANIES. [Ord. #2177, § 11; Ord. #2247, § 11]
§ 26-12. VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. [Ord. #2177, § 12; Ord.
#2247, § 12; Ord. #2727, § 3]
The death, destruction, removal or injury of each and every tree or shrub
in violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense. Any person who shall violate or authorize or permit any violation
of any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in Municipal
Court, forfeit and pay a penalty of up to $1,000 for each and every offense.
Complaints shall be signed by the superintendent of the DPW.
§ 26-13. ADVISORY SHADE TREE COMMITTEE.
§ 26-13.1. Establishment. [Ord. #2525, § I]
There shall be established within the department of public works in the
Township of Lyndhurst an advisory shade tree committee.
a. Every utility company having or maintaining any electric, telephone,
telegraph or other wires running through a public highway shall
securely fasten and maintain such wires in such a manner as will
safeguard the trees and shrubs against any damage therefrom and shall
make periodical adjustments whenever necessary to prevent damage to
trees and shrubs growing in any public highway or place.
b. Every utility company having any wire or wires charged with electricity
running through a public highway shall temporarily remove any such
wire or wires or the electricity therefrom, when it shall be necessary in
order to take down or prune any trees growing in a public highway,
within 24 hours after the service upon the owner of said wire or wires,
or upon his agent, of a written notice to remove said wire or wires or
the electricity therefrom, signed by the DPW, or its secretary upon the
order of such DPW.
c. No person shall, without permission of the DPW, attach or fasten any
wire, insulator or other device for holding any wire to any tree or shrub
in any public highway or place.
d. No utility company or its agents may, without prior permission from the
DPW, prune and remove trees for line clearance of utility wires.
§ 26-10 LYNDHURST CODE § 26-13.2
1:810
§ 26-13.2. Purpose. [Ord. #2525, § I]
The purpose of the advisory shade tree committee shall be to make
recommendations to the commissioner of the department of public works as
to the planting, replacement and removal of trees within the municipality.
The shade tree committee shall serve in an advisory capacity to the
commissioner of the department of public works and shall have no power
or authority for the regulation, planting, care and control of shade and
ornamental trees and shrubbery upon or in the highways, parks or
parkways within the jurisdiction of the township. All such authority shall
remain vested in the department of public works as set forth in this chapter.
§ 26-13.3. Membership; Appointment; Terms. [Ord. #2525, § I]
The advisory shade tree committee shall consist of five residents of the
township appointed by the commissioner of the department of public works,
who shall serve without compensation for a term of three years, except
that those first appointed shall be on a staggered basis. All appointments,
except those to fill vacancies, shall be effective January 1 next succeeding
the appointment. Any vacancy occurring by reason of the death, resignation
or removal of any member shall be filled for the unexpired term by the
commissioner of the department of public works.
§ 26-13.4. Organization and Meetings. [Ord. #2525, § I]
The committee shall organize annually by the election of one of its members
as chairman and the appointment of a secretary, who need not be a member.
The committee shall meet at least four times annually and make its
recommendations to the commissioner of the department of public works.
§ 26-13.5. Annual Report. [Ord. #2525, § I]
The advisory shade tree committee shall make, keep and preserve minutes
and records of its meetings and activities and shall make an annual report
to the department of public works before the 15th day of January of the
succeeding year.
§ 26-13.6. Appropriation and Expenses. [Ord. #2525, § I]
No expense shall be incurred or contract entered into by the advisory
shade tree committee unless the funds therefor shall have been previously
appropriated to the purpose thereof by the board of commissioners and
have been approved by the commissioner of the department of public works.
Chapter 27
HACKENSACK MEADOWLANDS DEVELOPMENT
COMMISSION (HMDC) PUBLIC SAFETY CODE
§ 27-1. GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 26-13.2 GENERAL § 27-1.1
1:811
§ 27-1.1. Short Title. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. I]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the HMDC Public Safety
Code.
§ 27-1.2. Construction, Scope, and Enforcement. [Ord. #2192, § I,
Art. I]
a. The provisions of this chapter shall be constructed as follows:
1. Words and phrases shall be read and construed within their content
and shall, unless another or different meaning is expressly
indicated, be given their generally accepted meaning, according to
the approved usage of language. Technical words and phrases, and
words and phrases having special meaning in the law, shall be
construed in accordance with such technical or special and
accepted meaning.
2. Any term in the singular shall include the plural.
3. Any terms or words in the masculine shall include females as well
as corporations, partnerships, associations, and other artificial
persons.
4. Any terms in reference to personage shall not discriminate against
race, color, national origin, religion, age or handicap.
5. Any requirements or prohibition of any act shall, respectively,
extend to and include the causing or procuring, directly or
indirectly, of such act.
6. No provisions hereof shall make unlawful any act necessarily
performed by any law enforcement officer, emergency personnel,
or employee of the Township of Lyndhurst or HMDC in the line of
duty or work as such, or by any person, his agents, or employees, in
the proper and necessary execution of the terms of any agreement
with the HMDC.
b. This chapter shall be effective within all the property, buildings,
facilities, waterways, parks, parkways, and playgrounds which are
owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of the HMDC.
c. Complaints for the violation of the provisions of the within chapter shall
be cognizable in the county district court pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:6-37
or in the municipal court of the Township of Lyndhurst. The provisions
of this chapter shall be enforced by the Township of Lyndhurst police
and by any other law enforcement officer having the powers of peace
officers as defined by the laws of the State of New Jersey.
d. If any section, article, or provision of this chapter, or the application
thereof to any person or circumstances, shall be declared to be invalid
or inoperative by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining
sections, articles, or provisions, to the extent that they are not invalid or
§ 27-1.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 27-1.2
1:812
§ 27-1.3. Definitions. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. I]
Unless otherwise expressly provided, or unless there is something in the
subject or context repugnant to such construction the following words and
phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meaning herein given:
ANIMALS — Shall mean and includes cats, dogs, horses, any fowl or birds
— any living creatures within jurisdiction of the park, other than people.
BEVERAGE CONTAINER — Shall mean a container designed to contain
beer malt beverage, wine, distilled spirits, and other alcoholic beverages,
mineral water, soda water, or other carbonated drinks or noncarbonated
drinks of any variety in liquid form and intended for human consumption.
BICYCLE — Shall mean any device or conveyance upon which a person may
ride propelled wholly or in part by human muscular power and having one
or more tandem wheels.
DOG — Shall mean any dog, bitch, or spayed bitch.
DRIVER, OPERATOR — Shall mean as defined in Title 32 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey.
LITTER — Shall mean any refuse, garbage, rubbish, paper, metal, wood,
beverage container, cans, glass, or other material or substance which is
thrown, deposited or permitted to collect or remain in any place, on HMDC
property, which may affect the health, welfare or safety of the public or
renders the roadways, parks, playgrounds, or other property unsightly.
LOITERING — Shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location,
including the concept of spending time idly, loafing, or walking aimlessly. It
shall also include the colloquial expression "hanging around." Standing or
speaking in a reasonable, orderly, lawful manner shall not be included in the
loitering hereafter dealt with.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean as defined in Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey.
MOTORCYCLE — Shall mean as defined in Title 39 of the Revised Statutes
of New Jersey.
MOTORIZED BICYCLE — Shall mean as defined in Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey.
MUNICIPALITY — Shall mean Township of Lyndhurst.
inoperative, shall not be affected nor invalidated thereby and shall be
enforced and effectuated.
e. Any person who is found guilty of committing an act which is prohibited
or which is declared to be unlawful or an offense or is found guilty of
violating either a rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
chapter and for which the chapter provides no specific penalty, shall be
punished pursuant to Section 3-1.3 of these Revised General
Ordinances and, shall further be subject to the replacement, repair or
restoration of any damaged HMDC property.
§ 27-1.2 GENERAL § 27-1.3
1:813
OWNER — Shall mean, with respect to ownership of vehicles, as defined
in Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey. When applied to
proprietorship of a dog or other animal, owner shall mean and include every
person having a right of property in such dog or other animal and every
person who has such dog or other animal in his care, custody, control or
keeping.
PARK — Shall mean any park, parkway, waterway, playground, reservation,
or other recreational facility, owned, leased, or otherwise under the control
of HMDC, which is devoted to active or passive recreation.
PATH — Shall mean any path, footpath, walk or walkway maintained for
pedestrians.
PEDESTRIAN — Shall mean as defined in Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of
New Jersey.
PERMIT — Shall mean any written license issued by or under the authority
of the HMDC permitting the performance of a specified act or acts.
PERSON — Shall mean any natural person, corporation, company,
association, firm, or partnership - masculine or feminine.
POLICE or OFFICERS — Shall mean a Township of Lyndhurst police officer
or a county police officer.
RECREATIONAL MOTOR VEHICLE — Shall mean, but is not expressly
limited to, motorcycles, motorized dirt bikes, motor bikes, mopeds, mini
bikes, motor scooters, go-carts, motorized skate boards, dune buggies,
swamp buggies, all terrain vehicles, and any other similar motor vehicle of
the type that are normally used on land for recreation, entertainment, or
pleasure.
ROADWAY — Shall mean as defined in Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of
New Jersey.
SAFETY ZONE — Shall mean that area or space officially set aside for the
exclusive use of pedestrians which is so plainly marked or indicated by
proper signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety
zone.
SNOWMOBILE — Shall mean as defined in Title 39 of the Revised Statutes
of New Jersey.
STOPPING or STANDING — When prohibited shall mean any cessation of
movement of a vehicle occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict of other traffic.
TRAFFIC — Shall mean pedestrians or vehicles (either singly or together)
while in the confines of the park's jurisdiction.
TRESPASS — Shall mean to remain without permission in any building or
upon any land or recreational facility owned, leased, or otherwise under
the control of the HMDC after said building, land or recreational facility is
closed.
§ 27-1.3 LYNDHURST CODE § 27-1.3
1:814
VEHICLE — Shall mean any wheeled conveyance, except a baby carriage
and/or wheelchair, including but not limited to bicycles, motorcycles,
motorized bicycles, motor vehicles, push carts, sleds, sleighs or tricycles
or any other conveyance whether motor powered, animal drawn or self
propelled. The term shall also include any trailer in tow of any size, kind or
description.
§ 27-2. PERMITS.
§ 27-2.1. General Provisions. [Ord. #2192, § II]
a. Permits shall be obtained by application to the HMDC and may be
issued for a variety of purposes including, but not limited to: special
use/access to properties owned, leased, or otherwise under the control
of the HMDC; specific recreational, educational, and commercial
activities on said properties; limited reserved use of public lands and
waterways.
b. Permits shall bear:
1. The name of the permitted group or individual;
2. The day and hours for which the permit is granted;
3. The park or recreational area or portion of area for which the
permit is granted;
4. Any other information that is requested by the HMDC that is
pertinent.
5. The HMDC has the right to request liability insurance covering
injuries to members of the general public.
6. Applications for permits shall be made to the executive director of
the HMDC, or a designated HMDC staff member; and the decision
whether or not to grant same shall rest within his/her sole
discretion.
c. A permit to do any act shall authorize the same only insofar as it may be
performed in strict accordance with the terms and conditions thereof.
Any violation by its holder or his agents, servants, and/or employees of
any term or condition thereof shall constitute grounds for its revocation
by the HMDC or by its authorized representative, whose action shall be
final.
d. A permit is violated when the group arrives more than one hour late to
use a reserved area and when the attendance exceeds the conditions of
the permit and/or the capacity of the park area for which the permit
was issued.
e. The HMDC retains the power to restrict or limit the use of certain
recreational facilities or park lands for specific purposes, provided that
§ 27-1.3 GENERAL § 27-2.1
1:815
§ 27-3. ANIMALS.
§ 27-3.1. Dogs. [Ord. #2192, § 1, Art. III]
said rules and regulations are not in conflict with this chapter and
provided further that same shall be posted in a conspicuous place.
f. In the event of issuance of a permit, all person, persons, employees,
and/or servants shall follow these standards:
1. The granting of a permit for a specific activity is separate and
distinct from the granting of any other permit available from the
HMDC.
2. The proposed activity, or use, in the park or recreational facility will
not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general
public's enjoyment of the park.
3. The proposed activity or use will not unreasonably interfere with or
detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety, and
recreational or educational use of the park.
4. The proposed activity or use will not include violence, crime,
disorderly conduct, or destruction to HMDC property or
surrounding areas.
5. The permit shall be available to any police officer or park official.
Failure to produce and exhibit any permit results in immediate
removal from that designated area.
a. No person owning or having a dog in his care, custody, control or
keeping shall cause, suffer, or allow such dog to soil, defile or defecate
on any thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, play area, park or place
where people congregate, unless that person shall immediately remove
any feces deposited by such dog in a sanitary method. The feces so
removed shall be disposed of in a sanitary manner. If removal is not
initiated, a fine consistent with that promulgated by the Township of
Lyndhurst Municipal Ordinance will be levied to the person owning, or
having a dog in his care, custody, control or keeping.
b. No person shall cause or permit any dog or other animal owned by him
or in his care, custody, control or keeping to go or be at large or run
free; and each dog or other animal so found at large may be seized and
disposed of as provided for by law or ordinance covering the disposal of
stray animals. The cost of recovery is to be funded by the owner or the
person having a dog or animal in his care, custody, control or keeping.
c. Every dog shall be restrained by a leash not exceeding six feet in length
and shall wear a collar with appropriate license tag affixed thereto of
the municipality wherein its owner resides.
§ 27-2.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 27-3.1
1:816
§ 27-3.2. Hunting, Trapping, Crabbing and Fishing. [Ord. #2192,
§ I, Art. III]
§ 27-3.3. Wildlife Sanctuaries. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. III]
§ 27-4. BICYCLE, RECREATION VEHICLE AND SNOWMOBILE.
§ 27-4.1. Bicycles. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. IV]
d. No person shall bring a dog or other domestic animal into areas that are
clearly marked by signs bearing the words "Domestic Animals
Prohibited in this Area."
e. No person shall tie or hitch any animal to any tree or plant or leave any
animal unattended.
a. No person shall hunt, molest, kill, wound, trap, abuse, shoot, pursue, or
throw missiles at, remove, or have in his possession any animal, reptile,
or bird found within the HMDC facilities, nor disturb its habitat, or
knowingly buy, receive, have in his possession, sell or give away any
such animal, reptile, bird, or eggs so taken, except as may be
specifically provided for and being in accordance with state/federal fish
and game laws.
b. No person shall give or offer or attempt to give or offer any animal or
bird, any tobacco, alcohol, or other known noxious substances.
c. No person shall kill, wound, discharge, or throw missiles at any fish in
such waters, or place therein any piscivorous fish, poison, or any other
substance injurious to fish.
d. No person shall at any time set or use a trap of any kind designed or
intended to take, hold, capture, or kill any bird or animal unless it is
used in accordance with the regulations of the State Division of Fish,
Game and Wildlife. Whenever a trap, the use of which is prohibited,
shall be found within the parks, same may be confiscated by any
Township of Lyndhurst police officer or other law enforcement officer,
including NJ Fish and Game Wardens.
e. No person shall crab or fish in any area owned or leased by the HMDC.
Sale of all fish and crabs from the tidal Passaic River and the
Hackensack River and its estuaries is prohibited by state law.
f. Unauthorized release of orphaned, injured, or abandoned wildlife is
prohibited.
a. Plant and animal wildlife are protected in all park areas. Any person
found abusing the sanctuary and damaging trails will be prosecuted to
the fullest extent of the law.
§ 27-3.1 GENERAL § 27-4.1
1:817
§ 27-4.2. Recreation Vehicles. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. IV]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or allow, permit or suffer
another to operate a motor vehicle or recreational motor vehicle on any
sidewalk, path, nature trail, footpath, footbridge, boardwalk, bicycle path,
lawn, wooded area, park, playground or any other property, owned, leased,
or otherwise under the control of the HMDC, except that the operation of
a motorized bicycle, shall be permitted while being operated on the public
roadway and only if in compliance with all the requirements of Title 39 of
the Revised Statutes of New Jersey.
a. All bicycles which are operated on property owned or under the control
of the HMDC shall be subject to inspection at any time to ascertain
whether the bicycle:
1. Is properly registered in the owner's municipality;
2. Has the proper license plate attached in a conspicuous location;
3. Is in proper mechanical condition to be operated safely;
4. Has an altered, mutilated or destroyed serial number on its frame.
b. In the event that a bicycle has an altered, mutilated, or destroyed serial
number (except if altered by a municipal police department), or if the
bicycle does not conform to any of the above requirements, the
Township of Lyndhurst police or other law enforcement officer may
confiscate and impound said bicycle, and any expenses involved in the
impoundment or storage of said bicycle shall be paid by the owner.
c. The owner of the confiscated or impounded bicycle may redeem said
bicycle provided that the necessary requirements listed above have
been fulfilled and ownership has been proven.
d. No operator of a bicycle shall have a bicycle laying, or standing upon
any sidewalk, footpath, footbridge, roadway, bridle path or any other
public land or in any building owned by the HMDC; which land is
commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, in such a manner as
to hinder or impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
e. No person shall operate a bicycle on a roadway, except as a
thoroughfare, and no person shall operate a bicycle upon any sidewalk,
path, nature trail, footpath, footbridge, or boardwalk, except those that
are specifically set aside for bicycle use.
f. Every person operating a bicycle on a roadway shall ride as near to the
right side of the roadway as practicable and persons riding bicycles
upon a roadway shall ride in single file. When a usable path for bicycles
has been provided adjacent to a roadway, bicycle riders shall use such
path and shall not use the roadway. All bicycles shall be ridden with
reasonable regard for the safety of others.
§ 27-4.1 LYNDHURST CODE § 27-4.3
1:818
§ 27-4.3. Snowmobiles. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. IV]
§ 27-4.4. Vehicles. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. IV]
§ 27-4.5. Penalties. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. IV]
Any person or persons who violate any of the provisions of this section
shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine as established by the Municipal
Court of the Township of Lyndhurst.
§ 27-5. NOISE.
§ 27-5.1. Noise Prohibited. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. V]
It is unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or
continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, or any noise which either
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or
safety of others.
§ 27-5.2. Definition of Noise. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. V]
The following acts are hereby declared to be examples of loud, disturbing
and unnecessary noise in violation of this chapter:
a. No person or persons shall operate a snowmobile on any property
owned or leased by the HMDC, except a police officer actually on duty,
other on duty emergency personnel and those persons directly involved
with the repair and maintenance of any snowmobiles owned by law
enforcement departments.
b. The Township of Lyndhurst police or a county police officer may
impound and confiscate any such snowmobile operated on state
property and remove same to a suitable storage place, and any
expenses involved in the impoundment or storage thereof shall be
borne by the owner.
a. No person shall leave a vehicle standing or parked at night in
established parking areas or elsewhere in the park area. No motor
vehicle shall be parked in said park areas from one-half hour after
sunset until sunrise, except as otherwise permitted.
b. No person shall drive a vehicle on any area except the paved park roads
or parking areas, or such areas as may on occasion be specifically
designated as temporary areas, authorized by the HMDC.
c. No person shall exceed the speed limits posted on roadways. That said
person can be fined by Township of Lyndhurst police officers as well as
any county or state officers.
a. The using, operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of
any radio receiving set, television, musical instrument, phonograph,
loud speaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the
§ 27-4.3 GENERAL § 27-5.2
1:819
§ 27-5.3. Sound Trucks. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. V]
Sound trucks are prohibited.
§ 27-5.4. Exceptions. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. V]
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply to church bells or
chimes, or to prohibit playing by a band or orchestra in a hall or building or
in the open air at HMDC or Township of Lyndhurst authorized events.
§ 27-5.5. Penalties. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. V]
Any person or persons who are found guilty of violating any of the
provisions of this section shall be immediately ejected from the area. If a
refusal occurs or the act is repeated, the person or persons shall receive
a fine as established by the Municipal Court of the Township of Lyndhurst.
Each day such violation is committed or is permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.
§ 27-6. DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
§ 27-6.1. Abandonment of Vehicles. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. VI]
§ 27-6.2. Washing or Repairing Motor Vehicles. [Ord. #2192, § I,
Art. VI]
producing or reproducing of sound, in such a manner as to disturb the
peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring inhabitants, or with louder
volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or
persons who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such
set, instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, machine or
device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet
from the place where it is located, shall be prima facia evidence of a
violation of this chapter.
b. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing at any time or place so
as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in the
vicinity.
a. No person shall cause, allow or permit a motor vehicle to be abandoned
or junked on any property owned, leased or otherwise under the control
of the HMDC.
b. A motor vehicle which has remained on HMDC property without
consent for a period of more than 48 hours, or for any period without
current license plates, shall be presumed to be an abandoned motor
vehicle.
a. No person shall wash or repair a motor vehicle in the park system or on
any other property which is owned, leased, or otherwise under the
control of the HMDC, except for such repairs as are reasonable and
§ 27-5.2 LYNDHURST CODE § 27-6.2
1:820
§ 27-6.3. Barricades. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. VI]
§ 27-6.4. Defacing State Property. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. VI]
necessary to repair a specific defect which has caused the vehicle to
become immobilized and which will remove such impediment to permit
removal of said vehicle.
a. No person shall fail to observe, remove or change any safety barricade,
sign, sign case, or other road, trail or park marking indicating that a
road, path, drive or parkway is closed or otherwise restricted as to
traffic.
b. No person shall, without permission, except in the event of immediate
emergency, barricade, close, or place any sign or marker on any road,
path, drive or parkway indicating that said road, path, drive or parkway
is closed or otherwise restricted as to traffic, nor shall any person place
broken glass, nails, tacks or other substance upon any road, parkway,
path, boardwalk, or other recreational facility so as to render same
dangerous or hazardous.
a. No person shall willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or
displace or remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces,
fences, railings, signs, monuments, boardwalks, paving or paving
materials, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances
thereof, plaques, stakes, or other boundary markers or any other
structure or equipment owned or otherwise under the control of the
HMDC.
b. No person shall dig or remove any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs,
grass or plants, nor shall any person cut timber or other wood or make
any excavation or in any other way remove, injure, impair or destroy the
natural resources or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any area
located in any facility owned or leased by the HMDC.
c. No person shall construct or erect any building or structure of any kind,
whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string any
public service utility into, upon or across such lands, except with a
special written permit issued by the HMDC, through the executive
director, and on any property owned, leased or otherwise under the
control of the HMDC.
d. No person using the restroom or washroom facilities owned or leased
by the HMDC shall fail to cooperate in maintaining said restroom or
washroom in a neat and sanitary condition.
e. No person shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or
plant or injure the bark, or pick flowers or seed of any tree or plant, dig
in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure the
natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
§ 27-6.2 GENERAL § 27-6.4
1:821
§ 27-6.5. Explosives and Firearms. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. VI]
f. No person shall climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments,
vases, planters, fountains, railing, fences or upon any other property
not designated or customarily used for such purposes.
g. No person shall throw, discharge, or otherwise place or cause to be
placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of
water in any park or any tributary stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing
into such water, any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which
will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
h. No person shall dump in, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass,
ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or
other trash. No such refuse or waste shall be placed in any waters in
any park, or left anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in
the proper receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles
are not provided, all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from
the park by the person responsible for its presence, and properly
disposed of elsewhere. A fine will be issued to any person or persons
who leave or purposely throw, deposit, drop or dispose of rubbish or
waste in any area other than those areas designated above.
i. Any person found guilty of defacing state property must repair, replace,
or pay for damages of said property.
a. No person shall bring into or have in his possession or control while on
any property or in any park or recreational facility owned, leased or
under the control of the HMDC any explosives, fireworks, or compound
or substance or mixture having properties of such a character that
alone or in combination with other substances, may decompose and
suddenly generate sufficient heat, gas or pressure, or any or all of the
three, to produce a rapid flaming, combustion, or noise.
b. No person shall carry or have in his possession, while on any property
owned, leased or otherwise under the control of the HMDC, any
dangerous weapon or any gun, pistol or revolver in which or upon
which loaded or blank cartridges may be used.
c. It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearms on any property owned,
leased or otherwise under the control of the HMDC, except as
authorized by law. Notwithstanding the above provisions, it shall be
lawful to utilize a starter's blank gun during HMDC and Township of
Lyndhurst authorized events.
d. No person shall shoot into park areas from beyond park boundaries. No
person shall carry or possess firearms of any description, or air-rifles,
spring-guns, bow and arrows, slings, or any other form of weapons
potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to human safety, or any
instrument that can be loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or any
§ 27-6.4 LYNDHURST CODE § 27-6.5
1:822
§ 27-6.6. Littering. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. VI]
§ 27-6.7. Loitering. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. VI]
kind of trapping device, except as may be specifically provided for and
being in accordance with state and federal fish and game laws.
a. No person shall throw or deposit or permit any servant, agent or
employee to throw or deposit any litter or beverage containers upon
any street, roadway, park, playground or other facility owned, leased or
under the control of the HMDC, except in public waste receptacles.
b. No person shall throw or deposit any litter or beverage containers in
any sewer, fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water on
property owned or otherwise under the control of the HMDC.
c. No person shall drive or remove any truck or other vehicle within
property owned or maintained by the HMDC, unless such vehicle is so
constructed or loaded as to prevent any load or contents of litter from
being blown or deposited upon any roadway, park, playground or other
facility owned or controlled by the HMDC.
d. No person, while a driver or passenger in a motor vehicle or aircraft,
shall throw or deposit any litter, handbills or other objects upon any
property owned or otherwise under the control of the HMDC.
e. No person shall deposit or dump truckloads or bagfuls of grass
clippings, tree clippings, leaves, or other debris upon any roadway,
park, playground or other facility owned, leased or under the control of
the HMDC, nor shall any person bring garbage from their home or
business to be deposited in HMDC refuse containers. Nor shall any
person, corporation, partnership or association, permit any of its
agents, servants and/or employees, to deposit or dump truckloads or
bagfuls of grass clippings, tree clippings, leaves or other debris upon
any roadway, park, playground owned or under the control of the
HMDC.
f. Any person who is found guilty of violating any of the provisions of the
above section shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine as
established by the Municipal Court of the Township of Lyndhurst and
shall further be subject to pay the costs of removing or cleaning said
debris or litter from HMDC property.
a. Whenever any HMDC staff or Township of Lyndhurst law enforcement
officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgement, decide that the
presence of any person in any public place is causing or likely to cause
any of the conditions enumerated in this section, he shall, if he deems it
necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety, order that
person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after
being ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of
this section.
§ 27-6.5 GENERAL § 27-6.7
1:823
§ 27-6.8. Minors. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. VI]
§ 27-6.9. Posting Bills and Soliciting. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. VI]
b. No person shall loiter in a public place in such a manner as to:
1. Clearly cause an immediate, actual, physical, violent reaction from
a reasonable person, which violent reaction will cause a threat to
the peace and order of the public;
2. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;
3. Obstruct, molest, interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place;
4. Cause excessive noise or disorder so as to interfere with the sleep
or peace and quiet of any person or neighborhood.
c. No person shall make unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or
insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person
or persons to whom they are made or in whose hearing they are made.
d. No person shall, except where specifically permitted by the Traffic
Ordinance of the Township of Lyndhurst, between one hour after sunset
and 11:00 p.m., remain in any unlighted vehicle or otherwise, at any
place, or, between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, or except in emergency,
cause or permit any vehicle, during any part of the period between one
hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise, to remain standing
for a longer period than 30 minutes except when its occupants are
attending a gathering or function held pursuant to a permit.
e. No person shall annoy, interfere with or harass any other person using
the parks or other facilities owned or under the control of the HMDC
nor shall any person do anything or any act tending to or inciting others
to commit a breach of the peace.
f. No person shall fail to obey the lawful instructions of any police officer
or interfere with said officer in any way, either directly or indirectly, in
the proper performance of his duties.
a. No parent or guardian or custodian of any minor shall permit or allow
him to do any act prohibited by this chapter.
b. Coherent signs shall be placed in any area where minors must be
accompanied by an adult.
a. No person shall expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall be
station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation, sale,
or display of any such article or thing. Exception is hereby made as to
any regularly licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority
and regulation of the HMDC.
§ 27-6.7 LYNDHURST CODE § 27-6.9
1:824
§ 27-6.10. Recreational Activities. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. VI]
b. No person shall hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill
on any land owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of the
HMDC; however, it shall not be deemed unlawful for any person to hand
out or distribute, without charge, to the receiver thereof, any
noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it.
c. No person shall throw or deposit any handbill, circular, or
advertisement in or upon any vehicle within the confines of property
owned or otherwise under the control of the HMDC. It shall not be
unlawful for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the
receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant in a vehicle
who is willing to accept it.
d. No person shall post, affix, or paint any notice, poster, or other paper or
device calculated to attract the attention of the public to any lamppost,
public utility pole, tree, or on any public structure or building owned,
leased, or otherwise under the control of the HMDC except as may be
authorized or required by law or except pursuant to a permit issued by
the HMDC.
e. No person shall solicit alms or contributions for any purpose while on
property owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of the HMDC.
f. No person, corporation, partnership, or association, charitable or
otherwise, shall engage in any business or commercial venture or
transaction, whether or not for profit, on any property owned, leased, or
otherwise under the control of the HMDC without first having obtained
a permit from HMDC's executive director.
a. Official opening time for HMDC facilities is approximately 9:00 a.m.,
and closing is sunset, approximately 5:00 p.m. Opening and closing
times can be affected by the seasons, adverse ground and weather
conditions, emergencies, and obstacles beyond the control of the
HMDC.
b. No person shall skate, sled, walk, or go upon any ice, except at such
times and upon such places as may be designated therefor and until
such ice is declared by, or under the authority of the HMDC to be in a
safe condition therefor.
c. No person shall coast with sleds, skis, toboggans, or other vehicles
whether with or without runners, except at such places as may be
designated therefor.
d. No person shall throw, catch, kick, or strike any base-ball, golf ball,
football, basketball, or other object except in places designated
therefor.
e. No person shall take part in or abet the playing of any games involving
thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows,
§ 27-6.9 GENERAL § 27-6.10
1:825
§ 27-6.11. Trespassing. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. VI]
§ 27-6.12. Alcoholic Beverages/Narcotics. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. VI]
§ 27-6.13. Fires and Picnics. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. VI]
javelins, horseshoes, quoits, or model airplanes except in those areas
set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or
comparatively dangerous games such as football, baseball, and lacrosse
is prohibited except on the fields and courts or areas provided therefor.
Roller skating and/or roller blading shall be confined to those areas
specifically designed for such pastime.
f. No person shall set up tents, shacks, or any other temporary shelter for
the purpose of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park
after closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used
or that could be used for such purpose, such as house trailer, camp
trailer, camp wagon, or the like except in those areas designated by the
HMDC for those purposes.
g. No person shall swim, bathe, or wade in any waters or waterways in any
park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor,
and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set forth or may
be hereinafter adopted. Nor shall any person frequent any waters or
places customarily designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing,
or congregate thereat when such activities are prohibited by the HMDC
upon finding that such use of the water would be dangerous or
otherwise inadvisable.
h. Golf driving and putting practice are not permitted at HMDC park
facilities for safety reasons.
i. For patrons' safety, hiking is limited to only the specified hiking trails.
j. Kites, remote control model boats, and/or planes may be operated only
where and when the HMDC allows such operation, in compliance with
regulations and/or permit conditions that may be hereinafter adopted.
a. No person shall remain without permission in any building or upon any
land or recreational facility owned, leased, or otherwise under the
control of the HMDC after said building, land or recreational facility is
closed. Any person found trespassing will be subject to a fine as
established by the Municipal Court of the Township of Lyndhurst.
a. No person shall buy, sell, offer for sale, possess, drink or consume any
or be under the influence of alcoholic beverages or illegal narcotic
drugs upon any property owned, leased or otherwise under the control
of HMDC.
b. Any person found possessing illegal drugs will be punished to the full
extent of the law.
§ 27-6.10 LYNDHURST CODE § 27-6.13
1:826
§ 27-7. PENALTIES. [Ord. #2192, § I, Art. VI]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or any rule or
regulation promulgated pursuant hereto shall upon conviction be subject
to the replacement, repair or restoration of any damaged park property
and shall be subject to a fine as established by the Municipal Court of the
Township of Lyndhurst.
Chapter 28
HOTEL AND MOTEL ROOM OCCUPANCY TAX
§ 28-1. PURPOSE. [Ord. #2492, § I]
It is the purpose of this chapter to implement the provisions of P.L. 2003,
c. 114, which authorizes the governing body of a municipality to adopt an
ordinance imposing a tax at a uniform percentage rate not to exceed 1%
on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2003, but before
July 1, 2004, and not to exceed 3% on charges of rent for every occupancy
on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel subject to taxation
a. No person shall kindle, build, maintain, or use a fire in any park or other
recreational facility owned or under the control of the HMDC.
b. No person shall throw away or discard any lighted match, cigar or
cigarette within or against any building, or under any tree, in any
underbrush, or anywhere else except designated receptacles.
c. No person shall have in his possession, or set, or otherwise cause to
explode or discharge or burn any firecrackers, torpedo rockets, or other
fireworks, firecrackers, or explosives of flammable material, or
discharge them, or throw them into any such areas from lands or
highways adjacent thereto. This prohibition includes any substance,
compound, mixture, or article that, in conjunction with any other
substance or compound, would be dangerous from any of the foregoing
standpoints.
d. No person shall picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated
for that purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate
activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to
secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all.
e. No person or persons shall use any portion of a picnic area or any of the
buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the
exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such areas and
facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
f. No person or persons shall leave a picnic area before all waste is placed
in the disposal receptacles. If no such waste receptacles are available,
then waste shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to
be properly disposed of elsewhere.
§ 27-6.13 GENERAL § 28-1
1:827
pursuant to subsection (d) of section 3 of P.L. 1966, c. 40 (N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3)
which shall be in addition to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to
statute or local ordinance or resolution by any governmental entity upon the
occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 28-2. TAX ESTABLISHED. [Ord. #2492, § I]
There is hereby established a hotel and motel room occupancy tax in the
Township of Lyndhurst which shall be fixed at a uniform percentage rate of
1% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the
Township of Lyndhurst on or after July 1, 2003, but before July 1, 2004, and
3% on charges of rent for every occupancy of a hotel or motel room in the
Township of Lyndhurst on or after July 1, 2004, of a room or rooms in a hotel
subject to taxation pursuant to subsection (d) of section 3 of P.L. 1966, c.
40, N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3 (sales tax).
§ 28-3. TAX IS ADDITIONAL TO ANY OTHER TAX OR FEE. [Ord.
#2492, § I]
The hotel and motel room occupancy tax shall be in addition to any other
tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or resolution by
any governmental entity upon the occupancy of a hotel room.
§ 28-4. REQUIREMENTS. [Ord. #2429, § I]
In accordance with the requirements of P.L. 2003, c. 114:
§ 28-5. COLLECTION OF TAX. [Ord. #2492, § I]
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be collected on behalf of the township
by the person collecting the rent from the hotel or motel customer. Each
person required to collect the tax herein imposed shall be personally liable
for the tax imposed, collected or required to be collected hereunder. Any
such person shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from a
a. All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be paid by the purchaser.
b. A vendor shall not assume or absorb any tax imposed by this chapter.
c. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer, or that the tax will be
refunded to the customer.
d. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day that the representation or advertisement continues shall
be deemed a separate offense.
e. The penalty for violation of the foregoing provisions shall be $250 for
each offense.
§ 28-1 LYNDHURST CODE § 28-5
1:828
customer as if the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the same time;
provided that the chief financial officer of the township shall be joined as a
party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
Chapter 29
BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
§ 29-1. PURPOSE. [Ord. #2740, § 1]
This chapter hereby creates an Economic Development Corporation for
the purpose of promoting and encouraging economic opportunities in the
Township of Lyndhurst, as more specifically defined herein and as may be
adopted by the Lyndhurst Economic Development Corporation, LEDC, not
inconsistent with this chapter. This chapter further allows the formation of
a special improvement district which for the purpose of this chapter may
be referred to as a, "Business Improvement District" pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:56-65 et seq. The LEDC and the BID shall be comprised of all of the
commercial property (as defined herein) within the Township of Lyndhurst,
as more fully described by block, lot and street address on file in the office
of the township clerk.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Lyndhurst hereby
designates the Lyndhurst Economic Development Corporation (the "LEDC")
to assist the board of commissioners in effectuating the purpose and intent
of the aforesaid Law and the goals and purposes of an "Economic
Development Commission," in the form of a corporation, to meet the
purposes of this chapter. The Township of Lyndhurst Board of
Commissioners hereby determines that the creation of an economic
development corporation and special improvement district will enhance the
welfare and economic growth of the area within the district, its businesses
and residents of the Township of Lyndhurst as a whole.
§ 29-2. FINDINGS AND SCOPE OF FINANCING. [Ord. #2740, § 2]
The Township of Lyndhurst Board of Commissioners hereby finds that the
properties and/or businesses comprising the district are an integral, vital,
economic and social component within the Township of Lyndhurst, and that
the board of commissioners desires to strengthen preexisting and longterm
businesses within the Township of Lyndhurst. The creation of the
Lyndhurst Economic Development Corporation will provide promotional,
administrative and other services to benefit those businesses, property
owners, and retail and commercial tenants, and inhabitants in the district
and will further assist the Township of Lyndhurst in promoting economic
growth and employment opportunities. It is, therefore, in the best interest
of the Township of Lyndhurst to create the LEDC, and designate it as the
management corporation to administer the district. All costs related to the
maintenance, administration and operation of the LEDC, including those
costs incurred in its role as management corporation shall be funded by
either a township budget appropriation, contributions by members, general
§ 28-5 GENERAL § 29-2
1:829
fundraising in support of LEDC activities, or by an approved special
assessment imposed and collected by the Township of Lyndhurst with the
regular property tax payment, or otherwise, on properties located within
district and as further approved by resolution of the LEDC and the Township
of Lyndhurst Board of Commissioners. All revenue for the purposes outlined
in this chapter shall be transferred to LEDC as the management corporation
to effectuate the purpose of this chapter.
§ 29-3. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE LYNDHURST ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF THE
BUSINESS DISTRICT ("THE DISTRICT"). [Ord. #2740, § 3]
§ 29-4. THE LYNDHURST ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
CORPORATION. [Ord. #2740, § 4]
a. Based upon the findings of board of commissioners and the desires of
the business owners, merchants and property owners comprising the
business community, the Lyndhurst Economic Development
Corporation is hereby established. The LEDC may serve as a special
improvement district corporation within the Township of Lyndhurst
pursuant to the aforesaid Law.
b. The business district shall consist of all nonresidential or commercial
property, within the geographic boundaries of the township. As used in
this chapter, the terms "commercial property" or "commercial
properties" shall include all properties within the township designated
as property tax code 4A and 4B by the Township of Lyndhurst tax
assessor. In the case of a mixed use commercial/residential property,
the tax assessor shall determine the assessment, if any, based on the
proportion of the property that is commercial. The properties currently
comprising the district are set forth on the aforesaid schedule.
c. Any properties within the township designated as commercial property
subsequent to the effective date of this chapter shall be included in the
district and shall be subject to the authority and provisions of this
chapter.
d. All commercial properties within the district shall be designated as
either Tier I or Tier II properties. Tier I properties shall be those
commercial properties within the township that are located in the
Lyndhurst Business District, specifically the Ridge Road corridor, Valley
Brook Avenue area, and Stuyvesant Avenue and as may be more
specifically defined in a resolution to be adopted by the board of
commissioners on or before December 31, 2010. Said resolution may be
amended by the board of commissioners, as the board deems necessary.
Tier II properties shall be all other properties located in the district.
a. The board of commissioners hereby designates the Lyndhurst Economic
Development Corporation as the district management corporation for
the district. The management corporation shall be a not-for-profit
corporation; 501-c(6) or equivalent.
§ 29-2 LYNDHURST CODE § 29-4
1:830
b. The membership of the corporation shall be as follows:
1. All owners of the real property subject to inclusion under Section
3D-Tier 1 of this chapter. In addition should a special assessment
be duly authorized and implemented for those properties located in
Tier 2, then those properties shall "automatically" become
members of the LEDC.
2. Any other business entity or other organization, doing business in
the township, interested in supporting the purposes of the
management corporation may attend meetings and participate in
same. Upon participating in any two meetings said business entity
or organization may apply to the LEDC Board of Directors for
inclusion in the LEDC membership. The LEDC may then
recommend by resolution, by a majority vote at a duly convened
board of directors meeting, that the Township of Lyndhurst Board
of Commissioners so include, by resolution, the business entity or
organization in the membership of the LEDC. The board of
commissioners shall not be under any obligation to include the
business entity or organization in the membership of the LEDC.
c. Upon the appointment of a full board of directors pursuant to this
chapter, the Lyndhurst Economic Development Corporation, as
management corporation, shall assume the management of the district.
Within 90 days of the adoption of this chapter, the board of directors
shall adopt bylaws, which may be amended from time to time by the
board of directors.
d. The board of directors of the LEDC shall be composed of 11 directors,
to be appointed according to this chapter. The LEDC bylaws shall
include a provision that a majority of the full board of voting directors
shall constitute a quorum. This number is six. All directors shall serve
on a volunteer basis and none shall receive any form of compensation
for serving on the board of directors. The board of directors shall be
composed as follows:
1. Voting Directors:
(a) One member of the Township of Lyndhurst Board of
Commissioners, selected by a majority of the board of
commissioners, which may include the mayor; and
(b) Six directors (members) selected by the Lyndhurst Merchants
Committee Chair Person. A minimum of four directors
(members) shall have their property or business located in Tier
1. Any such member does not have to be a Chamber of
Commerce member. Notwithstanding this provision the
Lyndhurst Merchants Association Chairperson may conduct a
ballot of district members, as defined in this chapter, for the
purpose of selecting these members; and
§ 29-4 GENERAL § 29-4
1:831
(c) Four directors (members) who either reside in the township or
work or own a business or property in the district, selected and
appointed by the mayor.
2. Nonvoting directors, who shall have the right to participate in
meetings and serve on subcommittees:
(a) The township economic development director, if one exists,
who shall be "automatically" appointed as a nonvoting director
by the board of commissioners, and in the alternative may be
appointed a voting director pursuant to Section 29-4d1(b) or
(c) of this chapter, however, any compensation paid to such
director shall NOT include time devoted to board meetings;
(b) Any professional consultant to the township, as appointed by
the mayor, a maximum of three such professional consultants
may be so appointed; and
(c) The economic development director, if one exists, may appoint
up to two non-voting directors. This may include members of
the board of education, additional Chamber of Commerce
members, or any other person as the EDC director deems
appropriate.
e. Notwithstanding the foregoing subsection(s) all of the initial eleven
voting directors shall all be selected and appointed solely by the mayor.
f. All voting directors shall serve their initial term until June 30, 2011.
Voting directors shall then be appointed or reappointed for the term
commencing on July 1, 2011, of which six voting directors shall be
randomly appointed to serve a two-year term and five shall serve a
three-year term, and any and all voting director appointed thereafter
shall serve a three-year term. The selection of the members holding the
initial two-year term shall be at the discretion of the mayor.
g. The officers (president, one or more vice presidents, treasurer and
secretary) of the LEDC shall be members of the board of directors and
elected by a majority vote of the board. No member of the board of
commissioners, or the economic development director, may hold an
officer's position.
h. The LEDC, as management corporation, shall have all powers necessary
and requisite to effectuate the purposes of this chapter and the district,
including but not limited to the power to:
Adopt bylaws for the regulation of its affairs and the conduct of its
business and to prescribe rules, regulations and policies in connection
with the performance of its functions and duties; and:
1. Fund the improvement of the exterior appearance of properties in
the district through grants or loans;
2. Fund the rehabilitation of properties in the district;
§ 29-4 LYNDHURST CODE § 29-4
1:832
3. Accept, purchase, rehabilitate, sell, lease or manage property in
the district;
4. Enforce the conditions of any loan, grant, sale or lease made by the
management corporation;
5. Provide security, cleanup and other services to the district,
supplemental to those provided normally by the Township of
Lyndhurst;
6. Undertake improvements designed to increase the safety or
attractiveness of the businesses in the Township of Lyndhurst,
including but not limited to litter cleanup and control, landscaping,
parking area and facility maintenance and other such
improvements generally permitted for pedestrian malls under
N.J.S.A. 40:56-66;
7. Publicize and promote the Township of Lyndhurst, it's businesses
and other resources;
8. Recruit new businesses to fill vacancies in, and to balance the
business mix of, the township;
9. Organize special events in the township;
10. Provide special parking arrangements for the township and its
businesses;
11. Employ such persons as may be required and fix and pay their
compensation from funds available to the management
corporation;
12. Retain legal counsel and other professionals;
13. Apply for, accept, administer and comply with the requirements
respecting an appropriation of funds or a gift, grant or donation of
property or money;
14. Make and execute agreements which may be necessary or
convenient to the exercise of the powers and functions of the
management corporation, including contracts with any person,
firm, corporation, government agency or other entity;
15. Administer and manage its own funds and accounts and pay its own
obligations;
16. Undertake improvements designed to increase the safety or
attractiveness of the businesses in the Township of Lyndhurst,
including but not limited to litter cleanup and control, landscaping,
parking area and facility maintenance and other such
improvements generally permitted for pedestrian malls under
N.J.S.A. 40:56-66;
17. Provide temporary decorative lighting in the township; and
§ 29-4 GENERAL § 29-4
1:833
§ 29-5. ASSESSMENTS IF SEPARATELY APPROVED. [Ord. #2740,
§ 5]
§ 29-6. ANNUAL REPORTS AND BUDGETS. [Ord. #2740, § 6]
18. Take any other actions that are necessary and proper to achieve the
purposes of this chapter and that are otherwise permitted by law.
The LEDC may be designated as a redevelopment entity by the
board of commissioners pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40A:12A-1 et seq.
a. The cost of promotions, operations, improvements and maintenance,
other than the cost of improvements and maintenance normally
incurred by the Township of Lyndhurst out of general funds, shall be
determined and approved pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-80 or N.J.S.A.
40:56-85, as determined by the LEDC, in its role as management
corporation, or in the alternative the aforesaid costs may be financed
through contributions by members, or "outside contributions" made
solely for the purposes set forth in this chapter. If a special assessment
is duly authorized by resolution of the board of commissioners the
initial formula for the assessment shall be as follows: each property's
current assessment, as determined by the Township of Lyndhurst Tax
Assessor for real estate tax purposes, will be multiplied by a rate to be
determined by the board of directors of the LEDC, in its role as
management corporation, to determine the budget and amount of the
special assessment, if any. The foregoing shall be collected
semiannually as a special assessment against properties that are within
the district.
b. Special assessments, if any, shall be payable on the first day of April and
October for the respective halves of the year and shall be received by
the Township of Lyndhurst Tax Collector or Treasurer within 10
calendar days following the date upon which such assessment is
payable. Any assessments not received within 10 calendar days
following the date upon which such assessment is payable shall be
subject to interest from the date the assessment was payable until the
date of actual payment, at the following rates:
1. For the first $1,500: 8% per annum or as set by statute;
2. For amounts in excess of $1,500: 18% per annum or as set by
statute.
c. Unpaid special assessments shall become a lien against commercial
properties and shall be collectible in the same manner as any other
municipal property taxes and assessments as provided by the laws of
the State of New Jersey.
a. The LEDC shall submit an annual report to the Township of Lyndhurst
Board of Commissioners within 30 days after the close of the fiscal year.
This report shall consist of a narrative covering the previous year's
§ 29-4 LYNDHURST CODE § 29-6
1:834
§ 29-7. MUNICIPAL POWERS RETAINED. [Ord. #2740, § 7]
Notwithstanding the creation of the Lyndhurst Economic Development
Corporation, the Township of Lyndhurst expressly retains all its police
powers and other rights and powers related to the area designated as within
the LEDC, the "district," or otherwise.
§ 29-8. MISCELLANEOUS. [Ord. #2740, § 8]
If any article, section, subsection, term or condition of this chapter is
declared invalid or illegal for any reason, the balance of the chapter shall
be deemed severable and shall remain in full force and effect. Further, this
chapter shall take effect after publication and passage according to law and
after the statutory requirements are met.
Chapter 30
CRANE OPERATIONS
operation and detailed financial statements, which shall be audited if
the amount of revenue collected by the LEDC exceeds $25,000, or if an
audit is otherwise required by Law.
b. The LEDC shall submit a detailed business plan and budget for the year,
2011 and each year thereafter and no later than December 1 of each
fiscal year, for approval by resolution of the Township of Lyndhurst
Board of Commissioners, consistent with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
40:56-84, said plan and budget is required even if no assessment is
contemplated. The budget shall be submitted with a report which
explains how the budget contributes to the goals and objectives for the
district.
c. The fiscal year of the LEDC, as management corporation will be January
1 to December 31.
d. If required the LEDC, as management corporation, shall cause an
annual audit of its books, accounts and financial sections to be made
and filed with the board of commissioners. The LEDC shall engage a
certified public accountant of the State of New Jersey who is not the
township auditor. This audit shall be completed and filed with the board
of commissioners within four months after the close of the fiscal year of
the LEDC. A certified duplicate copy of the audit shall be filed with the
Director of the Division of Local Government Services in the State of
New Jersey Department of Community Affairs and the municipal clerk
within five days of the filing of the audit with the board of
commissioners.
e. All books, records, accounts and reports of the LEDC shall be available
at all reasonable times for public inspection.
§ 29-6 GENERAL § 30-1
1:835
§ 30-1. DEFINITIONS. [11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 3002-18]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD — The Crane Operators License Advisory Board established
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26.3.
CERTIFICATION — Certification from the National Commission for the
Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization found by the
Board to offer an equivalent testing and certification program meeting
the requirements of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers ASME
B30.5 and the accreditation requirements of the National Commission for
Certifying Agencies.
COMMISSIONER — The Commissioner of Labor.
CRANE — Shall be defined in accordance with N.J.S.A. 45:26-1 through
45:26-17 (Licensure of Crane Operators Act), hereafter referred to as the
"Crane Operators Act."
CRANE OPERATOR — An individual engaged in the operation of a crane.
CRANE-RELATED EXPERIENCE — Operating, inspecting, training and
maintenance experience acceptable to the Board.
OPERATOR LICENSURE ACT — The 1926 OSHA Crane and Derricks in
Construction, also known as "OSHA Subpart CC."
PRACTICAL EXAMINATION — An examination demonstrating the
applicant's ability to safely operate a particular category or type of crane.
Practical examinations shall be conducted for the following crane
categories: lattice boom crawler cranes (LBC), lattice boom truck cranes
(LBT), telescopic boom cranes (TLL, swing cab) and (TSS, fixed cab), tower
cranes and overhead cranes.
§ 30-2. PERMIT REQUIREMENTS. [11-20-2018 by Ord. No.
3002-18]
a. Five days before any crane operator, contractor or any other person or
company initiates the use of a crane within the municipality, a permit
shall be obtained. In emergent situations, the Building Inspector may
waive this requirement in his or her own discretion if the operator
meets the balance of the requirements of this chapter.
b. The permit will be maintained with the municipality as well as with the
crane operator at all times; a copy of the permit shall be produced on
the work site when requested.
c. The following documents must be provided to the municipality in order
to be granted a permit:
1. Copy of crane operator certificate for one of the following
organizations:
§ 30-1 LYNDHURST CODE § 30-2
1:836
§ 30-3. CRANE OPERATING LICENSING. [11-20-2018 by Ord. No.
3002-18]
(a) National Commission for the Certification of Crane Operators
(NCCCO);
(b) Operating Engineers Certification Program (OECP); or
(c) Crane Institute of America certification.
2. New Jersey crane license.
3. Current medical examiner's card.
4. A copy of the most-recent and current proof of inspection for the
crane being operated (crane owner).
5. Insurance required as follows:
(a) Bodily injury:
(1) For any one person: in the amount of $500,000.
(2) For any occurrence: in the amount of $1,000,000.
(b) Property damage:
(1) For any one accident: in the amount of $500,000.
(2) For any aggregate of occurrences: in the amount of
$2,000,000.
6. Poof that the crane operator submits to a random drug testing
program.
7. Proof of completion of signal person qualification or certification
course.
d. Upon receipt of a properly completed application56 and compliance with
the requirements of this section, the Building Department shall issue or
deny the requested permit within five business days. If the application
is denied, the reasons for the denial are furnished to the applicant in
writing.
a. Licensure of crane operators, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 45:26-7. No person
shall engage in the operation of a crane, offer himself or herself for
employment as a crane operator or otherwise act, attempt to act, or
present or represent himself as a crane operator unless licensed as
such under the provisions of said act.
b. A crane operator's license shall be valid only in conjunction with a
current certification and only in the specialty or specialties for which
56.Editor's Note: A copy of the Application for Crane Permit is included as an attachment to
this chapter.
§ 30-2 GENERAL § 30-3
1:837
§ 30-4. FEE SCHEDULE. [11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 3002-18]
The permit fee for each crane shall be $100. Each permit is valid for 60 days
and may be extended and/or renewed, provided that compliance with the
requirements of this chapter continues to be met. The fee for an extended
or renewal permit is $50.
§ 30-5. NOTIFICATION OF ACCIDENT OR SAFETY ISSUE
REQUIRED. [11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 3002-18]
The owner of the property shall immediately notify the municipality of
every accident causing personal injury or damage to property involving a
construction crane covered by this chapter and shall afford the municipal
official every facility for investigating such accident. When an accident
involves the failure, breakage, damage or destruction of any part of the
apparatus, it shall be lawful to use such device until after an examination
by the municipality is made and approval of the equipment for continued
use is granted. It shall be the duty of the municipality to make a prompt
examination into the cause of the accident and to enter a full and complete
report thereof in the records of the municipality. Such records shall be open
for public inspection during regular business hours.
§ 30-6. SAFE OPERATIONS AND SAFETY EQUIPMENT;
INSPECTIONS. [11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 3002-18]
the crane operator is certified. The specialties are lattice boom crawler
crane (LBC), lattice boom truck crane (LBT), telescopic book cranes
(TLL, swing cab) and (TSS, fixed cab), tower cranes and overhead
cranes.
c. To be eligible for a license as a crane operator in the municipality, an
applicant shall fulfill each of the following requirements:
1. Be at least 18 years of age.
2. Receive certification from the National Commission for the
Certification of Crane Operators or any other organization found by
the Board to offer an equivalent testing and certification program
meeting the requirements of the American Society of Mechanical
Engineers ASME B30.5 and the accreditation requirements of the
National Commission for Certifying Agencies.
3. Have at least 1,000 hours of crane-related experience.
4. Maintain a current medical examiner's certification card.
d. The crane operator should reside in the municipality. If not, they should
reside in the same county as the municipality is located. The crane
operator shall reside in New Jersey.
a. All crane equipment shall be kept in safe working condition at all times
by the owner and licensee.
§ 30-3 LYNDHURST CODE § 30-6
1:838
§ 30-7. ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT. [11-20-2018 by Ord.
No. 3002-18]
§ 30-8. UNSAFE CRANES. [11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 3002-18]
b. If any safety or operational aid used or required to be used in
connection with the operation of a crane is not working properly, the
person operating such crane shall immediately shut down the crane
until such time that the required safety or operational aid is repaired or
replaced and the crane is restored to proper working order.
c. Any and all safety requirements promulgated by the Board,
Commissioner, or municipality must be adhered to at all times.
d. Every crane shall be thoroughly inspected by a competent designated
employee or authorized agent of the owner or lessee of such mobile
crane, tower crane or derrick at intervals not exceeding one month.
Such inspection shall include, but not be limited to, all blocks, shackles,
sheave, wire rope, connectors, and various devices on the master boom,
controls and braking mechanisms.
e. A written, dated, and signed record of each such inspection shall be
completed by the competent designated employee or authorized agent
who made the inspection. The most-recent record of such inspection
shall be posted inside the cab of such crane and shall be filed with the
municipality. Attached to such record of inspection shall be a written
designation naming the competent employee or authorized agent. Such
attached designation shall be signed by the owner or lessee of said
crane.
f. Every crane shall be inspected before being erected or operated for the
first time on any job.
g. Adjustments and repairs to cranes shall be made only by competent
designated persons.
a. The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Lyndhurst may
promulgate rules and regulations for the administration of the
provisions of this chapter.
b. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the Building
Department.
a. Any crane which is or hereafter becomes unsafe or otherwise
dangerous to human life or public safety, or which demonstrates
inadequate maintenance, shall be deemed to be in an unsafe condition
by the Municipal Engineer. All unsafe cranes shall be taken down or
removed or made safe, as the Municipal Engineer deems necessary and
as provided for in this section.
b. The Municipal Engineer shall cause a report to be filed on an unsafe
crane. The report shall state the nature of the unsafe condition.
§ 30-6 GENERAL § 30-8
1:839
§ 30-9. VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES. [11-20-2018 by Ord. No. 3002-18]
Appendix
Appendix A
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE ADMINISTRATION AND
OPERATION OF THE LYNDHURST POLICE DEPARTMENT
c. If an unsafe condition is found, the Municipal Engineer or municipal
agent shall serve on the owner, agent or person in control of the crane a
written notice that describes the condition being unsafe and specifies
the required repairs or improvements to be made to abate the unsafe
condition. Such notice shall require the person thus notified to declare
immediately to the Municipal Engineer or municipal agent exceptions
or rejection of the terms of the written notice.
d. Such written notice shall be deemed properly served if a copy is
delivered to the owner personally, or sent by certified or registered mail
addressed to the owner at the last known address with the return
receipt requested. If a certified or registered letter is returned showing
that the written order has not been delivered, a copy shall be posted in
a conspicuous place in or on the structure affected by such notice.
Service of such notice in the foregoing manner upon the owner's agent
or upon the person responsible for the crane shall constitute service of
notice upon the owner.
e. The equipment determined to be unsafe by the Municipal Engineer or
municipal agent may be restored to a safe condition. To the extent that
repairs, alterations or additions are made during restoration of such
equipment, such repairs, alterations or additions shall comply with all
applicable codes.
f. Any person who refuses or neglects to comply with the requirements of
notice to abate an unsafe condition shall be subject to a fine in
accordance with § 30-9.
a. Any person who operates a crane without meeting the requirements of
this chapter or any rule or regulation promulgated thereunder shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $1,000 and no more than $10,000 for
each violation. Each day of illegal operation shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
b. Any person or company who employs an unlicensed person as a crane
operator or who permits or directs an unlicensed person to operate a
crane shall be subject to a fine of not less than $2,000 nor more than
$20,000 for each violation. Each day of illegal operation shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense.
§ 30-8 LYNDHURST CODE § 30-9
1:840
CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1:1. ESTABLISHMENT OF THE LYNDHURST TOWNSHIP POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
1:1.1. Legal Authorization. [Ord. No. 2954-16]
The Police Department of the Township of Lyndhurst is established pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118 and shall after this be called the "Lyndhurst
Township Police Department."
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the Commissioner of Public Safety
is hereby designated as the "appropriate authority."
1:1.2. Township Ordinance.
The Police Department is established by authority of subsection 2-9.1, of
the Township of Lyndhurst Revised General Ordinances, entitled, "Police
Department Established."
1:1.3. Rules and Regulations Established.
The Rules and Regulations are adopted pursuant to the Township of
Lyndhurst Revised General Ordinances, subsection 2-9.14, Adoption of
Police Manual, for the government, discipline, administration and operation
of the Lyndhurst Township Police Department.
1:1.4. Right to Amend or Revoke.
In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118, the right is reserved by the
Appropriate Authority to amend or to revoke any of the rules and
regulations contained herein.
1:1.5. Previous Rules and Regulations, Policies and Procedures.
All rules and regulations previously issued, and policies and procedures
that are contrary to the rules and regulations contained herein, are hereby
revoked to the extent of any inconsistency. All other policies and procedures
shall remain in force.
1:2. THE NUMBERING SYSTEM.
1:2.1. Chapter and Section Designation.
Each chapter, section and subsection shall be designated by title and Arabic
numeral. All numbering breakdowns shall be arranged according to a
decimal sequence.
1:1 GENERAL 1:2.2
1:841
1:2.2. Chapter and Section Sequence.
The number preceding the colon shall enumerate the chapter, while the
number placed immediately to the right of the colon shall indicate the
section.
1:2.3. Subsection Sequence.
The number placed to the right of the decimal point, shall designate the
subsection.
1:2.4. Series Lettering.
Letters listed in series under sections and subsections shall be enclosed
within parentheses.
1:2.5. Flexibility of System.
This system shall provide a simple and quick method of referral to material
in this manual. This format has been designed to make specific reference to
particular sections or subsections possible and to facilitate expansion and
revision of the contents.
1:3. RULES AND REGULATION MANUAL.
1:3.1. Application.
These rules and regulations are applicable to all sworn employees of the
Lyndhurst Township Police Department and where appropriate, to all
civilian employees of the department.
1:3.2. Distribution.
One copy of these rules and regulations shall be distributed to each
employee of the department.
1:3.3. Responsibility for Maintenance.
It is the continuing responsibility of each employee to maintain a current
copy of the rules and regulations, including all additions, revisions and
amendments as issued.
1:3.4. Familiarization.
Employees shall thoroughly familiarize themselves with the provisions of
the rules and regulations. Ignorance of any provision of these rules and
regulations will not be a defense to a charge of a violation of these rules
and regulations. It is the continuing responsibility of each employee to seek
clarification through the chain of command for any rule and regulation
which is not fully understood.
1:2.2 LYNDHURST CODE 1:4
1:842
1:4. DEFINITIONS.
1:4.1. Acting.
Serving temporarily in a position to which the member is not ordinarily
assigned, usually in a position of higher rank. All the authority,
responsibilities and duties of the officer in the higher position devolve upon
the acting member.
1:4.2. Annual Leave.
Vacation period granted to all employees annually in accordance with The
Township of Lyndhurst Ordinances, current collective bargaining
agreement, the Employee Manual of the Township of Lyndhurst or other
employment agreements.
1:4.3. Appropriate Authority.
The Public Safety Commissioner of the Township of Lyndhurst as defined
and designated by authority of the Township Code of Lyndhurst pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:A14-118(e).
1:4.4. Authority.
The right to issue orders, give commands, enforce obedience, initiate action
and make necessary decisions commensurate with rank or assignment as
provided for in the department rules and regulations, policies and
procedures. Authority may be delegated by those so designated. Acts
performed without proper authority or authorization shall be considered to
be in violation of the rules and regulations.
1:4.5. Bureau.
A unit immediately subordinate to a Division.
1:4.6. Captain.
Captain of Police of the Lyndhurst Police Department.
1:4.7. Chain of Command.
Vertical lines of communication, authority and responsibility within the
organizational structure of the department. The unbroken line of authority
extending from the Chief of Police through a single subordinate at each
level of command down to the level of execution and vice versa.
1:4.8. Chief of Police: Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 2954-16 § 2]
Chief of Police of the Lyndhurst Police Department.
The Township of Lyndhurst Commissioner of Public Safety shall appoint a
Chief of Police who have all the powers set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:14-118
1:4 GENERAL 1:4.8
1:843
and who shall be directly responsible to the Commissioner of Public Safety
for the efficiency and routine day-to-day operations of the Lyndhurst Police
Department. The Chief of Police shall, pursuant to policies established by
the Commissioner of Public Safety:
1:4.9. Commanding Officer.
Any officer appointed to the rank of Captain or higher.
1:4.10. Days Off.
Those days determined by the Chief of Police, or designee, on which a given
employee is excused from Duty.
1:4.11. Department.
The Township of Lyndhurst, Department of Police.
1:4.12. Detail.
A temporary assignment of personnel for a specialized activity.
1:4.13. Detective.
A police officer promoted to conduct criminal investigations while in
uniform or in civilian clothing. All employees promoted to the position of
Detective must have served as a police officer for more than three years.
1:4.14. Directive.
A document detailing the performance of a specific activity or method of
operation.
a. Administer and enforce rules and regulations and special emergency
directives for the disposition and discipline of the force and its officers
and personnel.
b. Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties to force.
c. Prescribe the duties and assignments of all subordinates and other
personnel.
d. Delegate authority as the Chief may deem necessary for the efficient
operation of the force to be exercised under the Chief's direction and
supervision.
e. Report at least monthly to the Commissioner of Public Safety in such
form as shall be prescribed by the Commissioner of Public Safety on the
operation of the force during the preceding month, and make such
other reports as may be requested by the Commissioner of Public
Safety.
1:4.8 LYNDHURST CODE 1:4.15
1:844
1:4.15. Division.
A functional unit having jurisdiction-wide coverage whose commanding
officer reports directly to the Chief of Police or designee, as designated by
the department's rank structure.
1:4.16. Employee.
All employees of the department, whether sworn regular, special police
officers or civilian employees.
1:4.17. Gender.
Use of the masculine gender herein shall also include the female gender,
when applicable.
1:4.18. Good Moral or Ethical Character.
Includes those attributes of an employee that enhance their value to the
organization and to public service that include honesty, integrity,
truthfulness, obedience to the oath of office, mission of the organization and
code of ethics, respect for authority, and respect for the rights of others.
1:4.19. Headquarters.
The building that house the civilian and sworn employees of this
department.
1:4.20. Incompetence.
Incapable of satisfactory performance of duties for non-medical reasons.
1:4.21. Insubordination.
Failure or deliberate refusal of any employee to obey a lawful order given
by a supervisor. Ridiculing a supervisor or their order, whether in or out
of their presence. Disrespectful, mutinous, insolent, or abusive language
directed toward a supervisor.
1:4.22. Lawful Order.
Any written or oral directive issued by a supervisor to any subordinate or
group of subordinates in the course of police duty which is not in violation
of any law, ordinance or any rule and regulation.
1:4.23. Leave of Absence.
The period of time during which an employee is excused from active duty
and during which time no pay is received as approved by the governing
body or pursuant to Township Policy, or State and Federal Law.
1:4.15 GENERAL 1:4.24
1:845
1:4.24. Lieutenant.
Lieutenant of Police of the Lyndhurst Police Department.
1:4.25. May.
As used herein words may shall mean that the action indicated is permitted.
1:4.26. Member.
Any duly appointed police officer of the Department.
1:4.27. Military Leave.
The period of time during which an employee is excused from duty by
reason of serving the armed forces of the United States in an active capacity
as provided by law.
1:4.28. Neglect of Duty.
Failure to give suitable attention to the performance to duty. Examples
include, but are not limited to: failure to take appropriate action on the
occasion of a crime, disorder, or other act or condition deserving police
attention; absence without leave; failure to report to duty at the time
and place designated; unexcused absence from their assignment; failure to
conform to the department operating procedures. Neglect also connotes a
deviation from normal standards of conduct.
1:4.29. Off Duty.
The status of an employee during the period when they are free from the
performance of specified duties.
1:4.30. Officer in Charge.
Ranking member of the department on duty. Rank is determined by grade
first and by seniority second. Any member up to and including the rank of
Captain in charge of a shift, detail, etc.
1:4.31. Official Channels.
Through the chain of command.
1:4.32. On Duty.
The status of a member during the period of day when actively engaged in
the performance of duty. A police officer is subject to call at all times.
1:4.33. Order.
Any written or oral directive issued by a supervisor to any subordinate or
group of subordinates in the course of duty.
1:4.24 LYNDHURST CODE 1:4.34
1:846
1:4.34. Platoons.
A functional unit subordinate under the immediate direction of the Chief of
Police. It may be commanded by any rank, depending on its size and the
nature and importance of its function.
1:4.35. Plurality of Words.
The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.
1:4.36. Police Officer.
A sworn employee of the Police Department below the rank of Sergeant.
1:4.37. Probationary Police Officer.
Any member of the Police Department serving a satisfactory police
apprenticeship prior to permanent appointment to police officer, as
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:17B-66 et seq. and Lyndhurst Township Revised
Ordinances subsection 2-9.4.
1:4.38. Probationary Period.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:17B-66 et seq. and as defined in Lyndhurst Township
Revised General Ordinances subsection 2-9.4, all new members of the Police
Department or all newly promoted police officers are required to serve a
one year probationary period before receiving permanent appointment.
1:4.39. Senior Officer.
A member in any given rank with the longer service in that rank. Seniority
in the department is established first by the hiring date. Where conflict
occurs because of identical hiring dates, or identical service or dates of
appointment, the member with the lowest badge number will be the first
appointed and deemed to be the senior. In situations requiring decision or
control where the officers are of equal rank, the first appointment made
to the rank will make the decision and exercise control unless otherwise
directed by a higher ranking officer.
1:4.40. Sergeant.
Sergeant of Police of the Lyndhurst Police Department.
1:4.41. Shall/Will.
The words shall and will, as used herein, shall indicate that the action
required is mandatory.
1:4.42. Shift.
Any assigned tour of duty pursuant to existing collective bargaining
agreements.
1:4.34 GENERAL 1:4.43
1:847
1:4.43. Shift Commander.
The supervisory officer on a shift.
1:4.44. Should.
A recommended course of action or conduct; advice; an obligation as well
as an expectation. Personnel must be able to justify a deviation.
1:4.45. Sick Leave.
The period of time during which an employee is excused from active duty by
reason of illness or injury by the Commanding Officer or Officer in Charge
in absence of the Commanding Officer.
1:4.46. Special Duty.
Police service, the nature of which requires that the member be reassigned
from the performance of regular duties to perform other duties, as required
from time to time by the Chief of Police.
1:4.47. Staff Supervision.
An advisory relationship, outside the regular hierarchy of command and
responsibility, in which a supervisor may review the work of another
employee who is responsible to another superior officer.
1:4.48. Subordinate.
A member lower in rank than his superior officer.
1:4.49. Superior Officer.
A person holding a rank of Sergeant or above.
1:4.50. Supervisory Officer.
Member of the department assigned to a position requiring exercise of
immediate supervision over the activities of members and employees.
1:4.51. Suspension.
Suspension is the act of temporarily denying an employee the privilege of
performing their duties, and relieving them from the duty with or without
pay for a period of time, in consequence of alleged dereliction or violation
of any law, ordinance or any rule and regulation.
1:4.52. Tense of Words.
The words used in the present tense include the future.
1:4.43 LYNDHURST CODE 1:4.53
1:848
1:4.53. Tour of Duty.
The shift during which an individual member is on duty.
1:4.54. Township.
Township of Lyndhurst, New Jersey.
1:4.55. Unit.
Any number of members and/or employees of the department regularly
grouped together under one head to accomplish a law enforcement task.
1:4.56. Zone/Post.
A geographical area administratively designated for purposes of
investigation, supervision or patrol.
1:5. CODE OF ETHICS.
1:5.1.
All personnel shall read and abide by the Law Enforcement Code of Ethics.
1:5.2.
AS A LAW ENFORCEMENT EMPLOYEE, my fundamental duty is to serve
the community; to safeguard lives and property; to protect the innocent
against deception, the weak against oppression or intimidation and the
peaceful against violence or disorder; and to respect the constitutional
rights of all to liberty, equality and justice.
I WILL keep my private life unsullied as an example to all and will behave
in a manner that does not bring discredit to me or to my agency. I will
maintain courageous calm in the face of danger, scorn or ridicule; develop
self-restraint; and be constantly mindful of the welfare of others. Honest in
thought and deed both in my personal and official life, I will be exemplary
in obeying the law and the regulations of my department. Whatever I see or
hear of a confidential nature or that is confided to me in my official capacity
will be kept ever secret unless revelation is necessary in the performance of
my duty.
I WILL never act officiously or permit personal feelings, prejudices, political
beliefs, aspirations, animosities or friendships to influence my decisions.
With no compromise for crime and with relentless prosecution of criminals,
I will enforce the law courteously and appropriately without fear or favor,
malice or ill will, never employing unnecessary force or violence and never
accepting gratuities.
I RECOGNIZE the badge of my office as a symbol of public faith, and I
accept it as a public trust to be held so long as I am true to the ethics of
police service. I will never engage in acts of corruption or bribery, nor will
1:4.53 GENERAL 1:5.2
1:849
I condone such acts by other police officers. I will cooperate with all legally
authorized agencies and their representatives in the pursuit of justice. I
know that I alone am responsible for my own standard of professional
performance and will take every reasonable opportunity to enhance and
improve my level of knowledge and competence. I will constantly strive to
achieve these objectives and ideals, dedicating myself before God to my
chosen profession. . .LAW ENFORCEMENT.
1:6. MISSION STATEMENT.
Our mission is to work harmoniously with all the citizens to create and
augment a work environment, mutual respect, trust and dignity. We will
protect the lives, property and rights of all people, proactively address the
social issues that create the opportunity of crime and to be sensitive to the
needs of the community. With unwavering faith and honor, we continue to
demonstrate our commitment to the safety and posterity of our community.
1:7. VALUE STATEMENT.
The Lyndhurst Police Department will be guided by our core values in
pursuit of our mission. Our core values are:
LEADERSHIP — We will ensure that our members are dedicated, highly
trained and capable of handling the daily demands of the law enforcement
profession. We promote a collaborative environment for sharing
information, resources, assistance and expertise.
YES WE CAN — We believe in a "Yes We Can" attitude. We will exercise
physical courage by reacting appropriately to threats even when faced with
physical risk. We will demonstrate moral courage by doing the right thing
even if it's not popular with others.
NOBLE — We are proud of the reputation our department has built over
the years and are committed to continuing this through diligence and hard
work.
DEDICATION — We are dedicated to ourselves, our department, and to the
community and citizens that we serve. We will treat all persons in a dignified
and courteous manner, and exhibit understanding of ethnic and cultural
diversity, in both our professional and personal endeavors.
HONOR — We are committed to the highest ideals of honor and integrity to
maintain the respect and confidence of government officials, subordinates,
the public and fellow police officers.
UNIFIED EFFORTS — We believe in a partnership of support between the
police and the community that we serve. We will continue to strengthen that
support by developing new outreach programs and expand existing ones.
RESPECT — We will treat all persons in a dignified and courteous manner,
and exhibit understanding of ethnic and cultural diversity, in both our
professional and personal endeavors. We guarantee to uphold the principles
1:5.2 LYNDHURST CODE 1:7
1:850
and values embodied in the constitutions of the United States and the State
of New Jersey.
SERVICE — We provide service in a courteous, efficient, and accessible
manner. We foster community and employee involvement through problemsolving
partnerships. Recognizing and responding with sincerity to those in
need of our services.
TRUST — We have committed ourselves to elevated standards of trust,
responsibility and discipline while promoting justice in a fair and impartial
manner. We will earn the trust, and support of the citizens through active
partnership, involvement and service to the community we serve.
1:7 GENERAL 1:7
1:851

CHAPTER 2
Organization
2:1. RANK.
2:1.1. Rank Established.
Rank in the Township of Lyndhurst Police Department shall be established
pursuant to the Township Code of Lyndhurst subsection 2-9.1.
2:1.2. Rank and Seniority.
Rank and seniority shall be established in accordance with subsection
1:4.40.
2:1.3. Authorized Strength.
The official strength of the Township of Lyndhurst Police Department shall
be authorized by ordinance as approved by the Board of Commissioners.
The rank structure does not preclude or prohibit the Chief of Police, only
after written approval of the appropriate authority, when deemed
appropriate or necessary to assign personnel to a specific section or
function wherein the function or section calls for a higher ranking officer
that a lesser ranking officer can serve for an interim period. Any personnel
of the Police Department so assigned on an interim basis, will do so as
provided within the existing collective bargaining agreements.
2:1 GENERAL 2:1.3
1:853

CHAPTER 3
GENERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS
3:1. PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
3:1.1. Standards of Conduct.
Employees shall conduct their private and professional lives in such a
manner as to avoid bringing the department into disrepute.
3:1.2. Loyalty.
Loyalty to the department and to associates is an important factor in
department morale and efficiency. Employees shall maintain loyalty to the
department and their associates as is consistent with the law and personal
ethics.
3:1.3. Cooperation.
Cooperation between the ranks and units of the department is essential
to effective law enforcement. Therefore, all employees are strictly charged
with the establishing and maintaining a high spirit of cooperation within the
department.
3:1.4. Assistance.
All members are required to take appropriate action toward aiding a fellow
employee exposed to danger or in a situation where danger might be
impending.
3:1.5. General Responsibilities.
Police officers of all ranks shall at all times take appropriate action to:
3:1.6. Duty Responsibilities.
Employees of the department are always subject to duty although
periodically relieved of its routine performance. They shall, at all times,
respond to the lawful orders of supervisors and other proper authorities
as well as calls for assistance from citizens. Proper action must be taken
whenever required. The administrative delegation of the enforcement of
1. Protect life and property.
2. Preserve the peace.
3. Prevent crime.
4. Detect and arrest violators of the law.
5. Enforce all federal, state and local laws and ordinances within
department jurisdiction.
3:1 GENERAL 3:1.6
1:855
certain laws and ordinances to particular units of the department, does not
relieve members of other units from the responsibility of taking prompt,
effective police action within the scope of those laws and ordinances when
the occasion so requires. Employees assigned to special duties are not
relieved from taking proper action outside the scope of their specialized
assignment.
3:1.7. Neglect of Duty.
Employees shall not commit any act, nor shall they be guilty of any omission
that constitutes neglect of duty.
3:1.8. Performance of Duty.
All employees shall perform their duties as required or directed by law,
department rule and regulation, policy or order, or by order of a supervisor.
All lawful duties required by competent authority shall be performed
promptly as directed, notwithstanding the general assignment of duties and
responsibilities.
3:1.9. Questions Regarding Assignment.
Employees in doubt as to the nature or detail of their assignment shall seek
clarification from their immediate supervisor.
3:1.10. Insubordination.
Employees shall not commit acts of insubordination.
3:1.11. Obedience to Laws and Regulations.
Employees shall observe and obey all laws and ordinances, all rules and
regulations and orders of the department.
3:1.12. Criticism of Official Acts or Orders.
Employees shall not criticize the official actions, instructions, or orders
of any department member in a manner which is defamatory, obscene,
unlawful, or which tends to impair the efficient operation of the department.
3:1.13. Conduct Toward Employees.
Employees shall treat other employees with respect. They shall be
courteous and civil at all times in their relationships with one another. When
on duty, and particularly in the presence of other employees, or the public,
supervisors shall be referred to by rank.
3:1.14. Manner of Issuing Orders.
Orders from supervisor to subordinate shall be in clear, understandable
language, civil in tone, and issued in pursuit of department business.
3:1.6 LYNDHURST CODE 3:1.15
1:856
3:1.15. Unlawful Orders.
No supervisor shall knowingly issue any order which is in violation of any
law or ordinance.
3:1.16. Obedience to Unlawful Orders.
Obedience to an unlawful order is never a defense of an unlawful action;
therefore, no employee is required to obey an order which is contrary to
law or local ordinance. Responsibility for refusal to obey rests with the
employee. They shall be required to justify their actions.
3:1.17. Obedience to Unjust or Improper Orders.
Employees who are given orders which they feel to be unjust or contrary to
rules and regulations, must first obey the order to the best of their ability,
and they may proceed to appeal as provided in Subsection 3:1.19.
3:1.18. Conflicting Orders.
Upon receipt of an order conflicting with any previous order or instruction,
the employee affected will advise the person issuing the second order of
this fact. Responsibility for countermanding the original instruction then
rests with the individual issuing the second order. If so directed, the latter
command shall be obeyed first. Orders will be countermanded, or
conflicting orders will be issued only when reasonably necessary for the
good of the department. Notice of countermanded or conflicting order, is
to be given to the officer issuing the original order, by the countermanding
officer.
3:1.19. Reports and Appeals - Unlawful, Unjust, Improper Orders.
An employee receiving an unlawful, unjust or improper order, shall at first
opportunity, report in writing to the Chief of Police through the chain
of command. This report shall contain the facts of the incident and the
action taken. Appeals for relief from such orders may be made at the same
time. Intradepartmental action regarding such an appeal shall be conducted
through the office of the Chief of Police.
3:1.20. Soliciting Gifts, Gratuities, Fees, Rewards, Loans.
Employees shall not, under any circumstances, solicit any gift, gratuity,
loan, reward or fee where there is any connection between the solicitation
and their department membership or employment without written
permission from the Chief of Police. All solicitations must stay within the
perimeters of Federal and State law, directives from the Office of the New
Jersey Attorney General and Bergen County Prosecutor's Office.
3:1.15 GENERAL 3:1.21
1:857
3:1.21. Acceptance of Gifts, Gratuities, Fees, Loans.
Employees shall not accept either directly or indirectly any gift, gratuity,
loan, fee, or any other object of value arising from or offered because
of police employment or any activity connected with said employment.
Employees shall not accept any gift, gratuity, loan, fee or other object of
value, the acceptance of which might tend to influence the actions of said
employees or any other employee in any matter of police business, or which
might tend to cast an adverse reflection on the department or any employee
thereof. No employee of the department shall receive any gift or gratuity
from other employees junior in rank without the express permission of the
Chief of Police.
3:1.22. Other Transactions.
Employees are prohibited from buying or selling anything of value from or
to any complainant, suspect, witness, defendant, prisoner, or other person
involved in any case which has come to their attention or which arose out
of their department employment except as may be specifically authorized
by the Chief of Police. Employees are further prohibited from bidding,
purchasing, or having any financial interest in any property and equipment
available for sale by the Township of Lyndhurst.
3:1.23. Rewards.
Employees shall not accept any gift, gratuity or reward in money or other
compensation for services rendered in the line of duty to the community or
any person, business or agency except lawful salary and that which may be
authorized by law.
3:1.24. Disposition of Unauthorized Gifts, Gratuities.
Any unauthorized gift, gratuity, loan, fee, reward, or other object coming
into the possession of any employee shall be forwarded to the office of the
Chief of Police together with a written report explaining the circumstances.
3:1.25. Intercession - Soliciting.
Employees shall not solicit anyone to intercede with the Chief of Police,
Appropriate Authority, Mayor or members of the Township Committee in
relation to promotion, assignments, disposition of pending charges, or
findings in a department trial or other related matter. This shall not
preclude, however, an employee's right to legal counsel or Union
representative.
3:1.26. Persons and Places of Bad Reputation.
Employees shall not frequent places of bad reputation, or associate with
persons of bad reputation, except as may be required in the course of police
duty. This shall include any and all persons and places that the employee
3:1.21 LYNDHURST CODE 3:1.26
1:858
knows or should have known are involved in criminal activity or violations
of law past or present.
3:1.27. Withholding Information.
Employees shall not, at any time, withhold any information concerning
suspected criminal activity.
3:1.28. Reporting Violations of Laws, Ordinances, Rules and
Regulations or Orders.
Employees knowing of other employees violating laws, ordinances, or rules
and regulations of the department, or disobeying orders, shall report same
in writing to the Chief of Police through the chain of command. If the
employee believes the information is of such gravity that it must be brought
to the immediate personal attention of the Chief of Police or if the offending
employee is in the employee's chain of command, official channels may be
bypassed.
3:1.29. Harassment in the Workplace.
All employees of the department shall adhere to the policy and procedures
established by the Chief of Police and the Township of Lyndhurst regarding
Harassment in the Workplace.
3:1.30. Civil Rights.
All employees shall observe and respect the civil rights of all persons.
3:1.31. Work Expectation.
Employees are expected to perform their duties to the best of their abilities
at all times.
3:1.32. Respect.
Employees shall display respect for their supervisors, subordinates, and
associates. All employees are to display good ethical character in on and
off duty contexts and shall conduct their professional and private lives in a
manner to avoid bringing this agency disrepute.
3:1.33. Cowardice Display.
Police officers shall not display cowardice in the line of duty, nor in any
situation where the public or another officer may be subjected to physical
danger. Unless actually incapacitated themselves, officers shall aid, assist,
and protect other officers in time of danger or under conditions where
danger might be impending. This does not imply that officers should take
undue risks in the performance of their duties if alternative methods fail.
3:1.26 GENERAL 3:1.34
1:859
3:1.34. Use of Position.
Employees shall not, at any time, use or attempt to use their official
position, badge, credentials, or affiliation with the department or profession
for personal or financial gain or advantage.
3:1.35. Financial Obligation.
No employee shall incur any financial obligation on behalf of the
department without the approval of the Chief of Police.
3:1.36. Financial Liability.
No employee shall imply or accept financial liability for loss or damage on
behalf of the Township.
3:1.37. Debt — Incurring and Payment.
3:1.38. Retaliation.
No employee shall take any official action or initiate or engage in any legal
conduct with the intention to retaliate against any person for criticizing or
complaining about any employee.
3:1.39. Personal Relationships.
If a supervisor and subordinate enter into a dating relationship, marital
relationship or civil unions during the course of employment, and the
department reasonably believes the relationship may create a conflict of
interest, one of the employees shall be transferred to another position. Such
transfers shall be made in accordance with applicable collective bargaining
agreements. A supervisor or subordinate involved in a relationship as
described within shall report the relationship to the supervisor's
commander. Failure to report such a relationship may subject the involved
employees to discipline.
1. No employee shall borrow any money or otherwise become indebted to
any other employee.
2. Employees shall not solicit other employees to cosign or endorse any
promissory note or other loan.
3. No employee shall offer to act as a cosigner or endorser of any
promissory note or other loan for another employee.
4. Paragraphs 1-3 do not apply to transactions among employees related
to each other.
5. Employees shall promptly pay all just debts and legal liabilities incurred
by them.
3:1.34 LYNDHURST CODE 3:1.40
1:860
3:1.40. Action Off Duty.
While off duty, police officers shall take appropriate action as needed in
any police matter that comes to their attention within their jurisdiction as
authorized by New Jersey Law and Department Policy.
3:1.41. On-line Social Network/Personal Web Page.
While employees have a right to maintain personal web pages and websites,
their status as employees of the police department requires that the content
of those web pages and websites not be in violation of existing agency policy
or directives.
3:2. GENERAL CONDUCT ON DUTY.
3:2.1. Prohibited Activity on Duty.
Employees are prohibited from engaging in the following activities while on
duty with the exceptions as noted:
1. Employees shall not express personal opinion as official agency policy
or position.
2. Any item, object, or material that could be used or misconstrued as
official agency sanctioned property shall not be used or depicted on any
personal Internet posting without the express written permission of the
Chief of Police.
a. These items, objects, or materials include, but are not limited to:
photographs, images, reproductions or other depictions of agency
uniforms, badges, patches, equipment, weapons, marked or
unmarked units, reports, evidence, crime or crash scenes, etc.
1. Sleeping, loafing, idling;
2. Recreational reading (except at meals);
3. Conducting private business while on duty;
4. Unlawful gambling, unless to further a police purpose;
5. Smoking in public view;
6. Sexual conduct;
7. Soliciting or otherwise enhancing secondary employment interests
while on duty or as a result of an official duty;
8. Conducting secondary employment activities while on duty;
9. Taking any photographs, pictures, digital images of any crime scenes,
traffic crashes, people, or job related incident or occurrence with any
personal analog or digital device, camera or cellular telephone;
3:1.40 GENERAL 3:2.1
1:861
3:2.2. Alcoholic Beverages and Drugs.
10. Releasing any photographs, pictures, digital images of any crime
scenes, traffic crashes, people, or job related incident or occurrence
taken with a personal or agency analog or digital device, camera or
cellular phone to any person, entity, business, or media/Internet outlet
without the express written permission of the Chief of Police;
11. Audio recording which is not connected with an official investigation or
duties is prohibited;
12. Employees are forbidden to secretly videotape or record personal
conversations with other employees anywhere in headquarters or
substation. The exception to this is for an Internal Affairs investigation
or otherwise authorized by the Chief of Police;
13. Any other activity deemed inappropriate by the Chief of Police.
1. No employee of the department will appear for, or be on duty, under the
influence of alcohol or drugs, or be unfit for duty because of its use.
2. Employees of the department, shall not drink any kind of intoxicating
beverage while on duty, or take any drugs not duly prescribed and
necessary for health at any time, except on special assignment
authorized by the Chief of Police. Sworn employees shall not drink any
kind of intoxicating beverage while in uniform. An employee, while
assigned to duty in civilian clothes, may use intoxicants if absolutely
necessary in the performance of duty, provided such use does not
render them unfit for proper and efficient performance of duty. Under
no circumstances shall legally defined intoxication be considered
justifiable. Such use must be documented in writing, detailing the
reasons therefore and the amounts consumed.
3. Taking Medication on Duty. Employees of the department shall not take
any medication which may diminish their alertness or impair their
senses prior to or after reporting for duty unless directed by a
physician.
4. Notification about Medication. When employees are required to take
any prescription medication or any non-prescription medication which
may diminish their alertness or impair their senses, the employee shall
notify their supervisor as to the medication required, its properties, the
dosage and the period during which the employee is required to take
the medication. This notification shall be by the prescribing physician.
If the medication is a non-prescription drug the employee shall make
this notification. The required notification shall be made prior to the
employee reporting for duty. This information so provided shall be
confidential.
5. Intoxicating beverages may not be consumed at or in the police station
or ancillary facilities.
3:2.1 LYNDHURST CODE 3:2.2
1:862
6. No sworn member of the department shall, at any time when in
uniform, or any part thereof, except in the performance of duty, enter
any place in which intoxicating liquor is served/sold, unless authorized
by a supervisor. This provision does not include establishments with a
separate dining area where the serving of alcoholic beverages is not the
primary function (e.g. certain diners and restaurants which have a
liquor license).
7. Employees shall not bring into or keep any intoxicating liquor or drugs
on department premises except when necessary in the performance of a
police related task. Liquor or drugs brought into department premises
in the furtherance of a police related task shall be properly identified
and stored according to department policy.
8. No employee shall report for regularly scheduled duty, with the odor of
alcohol on their breath.
9. Employees of the department shall not consume alcoholic beverages
within eight hours prior to reporting for duty.
10. Supervisors shall not assign to duty or allow to remain on duty, any
member or employee whose fitness for duty is questionable due to the
use of alcohol or medication.
11. No liquor license shall be held by any regular police officer, or by any
profit corporation or association in which any such person is interested,
directly or indirectly.
12. The Department of Alcoholic and Beverage Control (ABC) prohibits the
employment of police officers who are employees of the local force in
the municipality where the licensed business is located. Hence,
members of the Lyndhurst Township Police Department may not be
employed by a business located in the Township which is licensed to sell
alcoholic beverages in this State. However, ABC laws and regulations
do not prohibit members of the Lyndhurst Township Police Department
from being employed by such licensed businesses which are located
outside the Township of Lyndhurst.
13. Police officers so employed shall not, while engaged in the selling,
serving, possessing or delivering of any alcoholic beverages: (1) have in
his possession any firearm, or; (2) wear or display any uniform, badge
or insignia which would identify them as a police officer.
14. No police officer so employed shall be permitted to work in excess of 24
hours per week in any such establishment.
15. No employee shall operate a Township vehicle after having consumed
alcoholic beverages.
3:2.2 GENERAL 3:2.3
1:863
3:2.3. Absence from Duty.
Every employee who fails to appear for duty at the date, time and place
specified without the consent of competent authority, is "absent without
leave." Such absence must be reported in writing to the supervisor
immediately. Absences without leave in excess of one day must be reported
in writing to the Chief of Police. Any member who is absent without leave
for a continuous period of five days shall forfeit their position in the
department, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122.
3:2.4. Roll Call/Briefing.
Unless otherwise directed, members shall report to roll call/briefings at the
time and place specified, properly uniformed and equipped. They shall give
careful attention to orders and instructions avoiding unnecessary talking or
movement.
3:2.5. Physical and Mental Fitness for Duty.
Police officers shall maintain sufficient physical and psychological condition
in order to handle the core functions required of a law enforcement officer,
and shall immediately report their inability to perform the core functions of
a law enforcement officer to their supervisor. Employees displaying conduct
that may be harmful to themselves or others shall be reported to the Chief
of Police and Supervisor immediately.
3:2.6. Loitering.
Sworn employees on duty or in uniform shall not enter public places except
to perform a police related task. Loitering and unnecessary conversation
in such locations are forbidden. Employees off duty and not on any official
standby shall not loiter in Police Department areas.
3:2.7. Smoking.
Employees shall not smoke on duty while in direct contact with the public
nor when in or out of uniform in public view, except that smoking is
permitted in public view at meal times. There shall be no smoking in police
headquarters or in police vehicles. These areas are non-smoking areas.
3:2.8. Relief.
Employees are to remain at their assignments and on duty until properly
relieved by other employees or until dismissed by competent authority.
3:2.9. Suspending Patrol for Meal or Break.
1. Members, while on lunch/meal breaks, must have their portable radios
"ON" to monitor the activities of the shift and to ensure immediate radio
contact, if necessary.
3:2.3 LYNDHURST CODE 3:2.9
1:864
3:2.10. Training.
Employees shall attend in-service training as directed by the Chief of Police.
Such attendance is considered a duty assignment.
3:2.11. Reports.
Employees shall promptly submit such reports as are required by the
performance of their duties or by competent authority. If a report is not
completed prior to the end of the shift, the employee, with the approval
of the Shift Supervisor, may complete the report on overtime. If the Shift
Supervisor deems that it is not urgent, "Not Complete" will be added to the
report.
3:2.12. Inspection.
From time to time the Chief of Police may call for full dress inspections
of the department or any part therefore. Sworn employees directed to
attend such inspections shall report in the uniform prescribed, carrying
the equipment specified. Unauthorized absence from such inspection is
chargeable as absence without leave.
3:2.13. Courtesy.
When meeting in public, employees on duty shall conform to normal
courtesy standards and refer to each other by rank/title.
3:2.14. National Colors and Anthem.
Uniformed employees will render full military honors to the national colors
and anthem at appropriate times. Employees in civilian dress shall render
proper civilian honors to the national colors and anthem at appropriate
times.
3:2.15. Possession of Keys.
No sworn employee, unless authorized by their supervisor shall possess
keys to any premises, not their own, on or near their assignment.
2. Members will be permitted to suspend patrol, subject to immediate call
at all times, for the purpose of having one meal during their shift, but
only such period of time shall be allowed therefore as is reasonably
necessary, and not to exceed 30 minutes. The member shall arrange to
suspend patrol only at such time as it will cause the least interference
with his regular duties.
3. Members are to arrange to take meals and breaks at times during the
shift so not more than one unit is at any one location at the same time.
The Shift Commander has the right to assign the time for meal and
break periods.
3:2.9 GENERAL 3:2.16
1:865
3:2.16. Address and Telephone Numbers.
Employees are required to maintain a working telephone in the place where
they reside. Changes in address or telephone number shall be reported to
the Chief of Police within 24 hours of the change. This shall be done in
writing and within the specified time whether the member or employee is
working or on leave. (Reports should be submitted in advance of the change
in the event of a planned move, noting the effective date of change.)
3:2.17. Personal Portable Radios/MP-3/I-Pod Type Devices.
The use of portable radios, MP-3, I-Pod type devices, or any other form
of entertainment, other than equipment authorized by the department, is
prohibited while on duty.
3:2.18. Driver's License.
Employees operating department motor vehicles shall possess and maintain
a valid New Jersey driver's license, with appropriate endorsements when
made necessary by their assignment. Whenever a driver's license is
revoked, suspended, or lost, the employee shall immediately notify the
appropriate supervisor giving full details.
3:2.19. Substance Testing.
1. Employees may be tested based upon reasonable suspicion. The Chief
of Police is authorized to order individual testing provided it is in
accordance with the NJ Attorney General's Drug Testing Policy.
Specimens shall be ordered from an employee when there exists
reasonable suspicion to believe that the employee is using substances.
Employees who refuse to submit to a test based upon reasonable
suspicion after being lawfully ordered to do so are subject to the same
penalties as employees who test positive.
2. Random drug screening may be ordered by the Chief of Police from
time to time. If the Chief of Police orders random drug screening it shall
be in accordance with the NJ Attorney General's Drug Testing Policy
and any policy mandated by the Bergen County Prosecutor. Employees
who refuse to submit to a test when randomly selected are subject to
the same penalties as those employees who test positive.
3. Any employee who serves as a witness on behalf of the collective
bargaining unit or is otherwise required to witness the selection of
employees for testing must maintain confidentiality. Anyone who
discloses the identity of an employee selected for random testing, or the
fact that a random selection is scheduled to take place prior to the
collection of urine samples, will be subject to discipline.
3:2.16 LYNDHURST CODE 3:2.20
1:866
3:2.20. All Other Conduct.
Conduct not specifically addressed by law, departmental policy, public
policy, philosophy, rule or regulation shall be consistent with existing law,
departmental policy, public policy, philosophy, rule or regulation.
3:3. UNIFORM, APPEARANCE AND IDENTIFICATION.
3:3.1. Regulation Uniforms Required.
All sworn employees of the department shall maintain in good order a
regulation uniform. Sworn employees shall appear neat, clean shaven and
well groomed while in uniform. All articles of uniform shall conform to
the departmental uniform regulations. Sworn employees shall not wear the
uniform or any part off duty, except while traveling to and from duty, without
the permission of the shift supervisor.
3:3.2. Wearing the Uniform.
Uniforms shall be kept neat, clean and well pressed at all times. While
wearing the uniform, members shall maintain a military bearing, avoiding
mannerisms such as slouching, shuffling and hands in the pockets. The
uniform hat shall be worn during special events as directed by the Chief of
Police or designee.
3:3.3. Civilian Clothing - Manner of Dress.
Employees shall wear proper civilian attire to meet the task objective such
as court, and training assignments. The employees may wear corporate
casual or traditional business attire as prescribed by the Chief of Police.
3:3.4. Personal Appearance.
Every employee of the department, while on duty, must at all times be neat
and clean in person, their clothes cleaned and pressed, and their uniform in
conformity with the rules and regulation of this department. The Grooming
Standards will not be deviated from without the written permission from the
Chief of Police.
1. Male Employees.
Hair shall be evenly trimmed at all times while on duty. The style shall
be no more than medium length and fullness. Bushy hair protruding
from the sides, back or front of the head is prohibited. Hair shall not be
more than four inches in length or of such length as to cover any portion
of the ears or extend below the eyebrows when headgear is removed;
nor shall it extend over the shirt or coat collar. A neat, tapered pattern
shaped at the rear of the neck shall be maintained. Hair length or style
shall not interfere with the wearing of headgear. Unusual, outrageous,
or faddish haircuts are prohibited. These include, but are not limited
to, names or symbols cut into the sides or top of the head, unusual
3:2.20 GENERAL 3:3.4
1:867
shapes such as an arrow, Mohawk style, cornrows, dreadlocks, beaded
ends, unusual dyes, colors or tints, etc. The unique quality and texture
of curled, kinked, waved and straight hair are recognized.
Wigs or hairpieces may be worn while on duty only for cosmetic reasons
to cover natural baldness or physical disfigurement. Wigs or hairpieces
must be of good quality and fit, present a natural appearance, conform
to the standards set forth in these rules and regulation, and fit properly
beneath the uniform hat, when applicable. They must not interfere with
the proper performance of duty or present a safety or foreign object
damage hazard.
Sideburns shall not extend downward beyond the lowest part of the ear
opening. Sideburns shall be trimmed and neat in appearance and the
base shall be clean shave horizontal line.
A clean shaven appearance is required except that mustaches are
permitted. Mustaches shall be neatly trimmed and shall not extend
more than 1/2 inch below or to the sides of the corner of the mouth.
Mustache ends will not be waxed or twisted. Unusual dyes, colors or
tints, etc., are prohibited.
Beards shall not be permitted on sworn personnel except for medical or
religious reasons. Waivers may be granted by the Chief of Police on a
case-by-case basis and only with compelling supporting documentation.
The Chief of Police may also grant a waiver for undercover operations.
Facial hair below the top lip, on the chin, or below the sideburns on the
jaw, is not permitted.
Hair growing from the chest, neck, ears or nose shall be neatly
trimmed. Chest hair shall not extend over the collar, tie or exposed Tshirt.
Fingernails shall be clipped and trimmed short. Nail polish and nail
paintings are prohibited.
The wearing of earrings shall be prohibited while in uniform. Eccentric
or faddish jewelry including, but not limited to, nose rings or studs,
tongue rings or studs, eyebrow rings or studs, etc., shall be prohibited.
While in uniform, only one ring per hand is permitted. While in uniform,
neck chains shall not be worn on the outside of the uniform. This neck
chain is in addition to any chain worn to identify the wearer as having
a medical condition.
While in uniform, only one wristwatch in addition to any bracelet worn
to identify the wearer as having a medical condition.
2. Female Employees.
Hair shall be kept clean, neatly shaped, and arranged in a professional
style. Hairstyles with a maximum of two braids may be worn. Pony
tails and pigtails are not permitted. When in uniform, hair shall not fall
3:3.4 LYNDHURST CODE 3:3.4
1:868
below a horizontal line level with the lower edge of the back of the
collar. Long hair, including braids, must be neatly and inconspicuously
fastened, pinned or secured to the head and may not dangle free at
any point. Hair length or style shall not interfere with the wearing of
headgear. Hair shall be coifed in such a manner as to not cause a hazard
around machines or electronic equipment such as printers and copiers.
Long hair may be worn in a bun or similar rolled style to conform to this
standard.
Unusual, outrageous, or faddish haircuts are prohibited. These include,
but are not limited to, names or symbols cut into the sides or top of
the head, unusual shapes such as an arrow, Mohawk style, cornrows,
dreadlocks, beaded ends, unusual dyes, colors or tints, etc. The unique
quality and texture of curled, kinked, waved and straight hair are
recognized.
When worn, hair ornaments shall not present a safety or foreign object
damage hazard. Banana clips, combs, and sharp pins are not
authorized. Barrettes similar to the hair color may be used to pin up
hair.
Wigs or hairpieces may be worn while on duty only for cosmetic reasons
to cover natural baldness or physical disfigurement. Wigs or hairpieces
must be of good quality and fit, present a natural appearance, conform
to the standards set forth in these rules and regulations and fit properly
beneath the uniform hat, when applicable. They must not interfere with
the proper performance of duty or present a safety or foreign object
damage hazard.
Cosmetics may be applied so that colors blend with the natural skin
tone. Exaggerated, outrageous, or faddish cosmetic styles are deemed
inappropriate and shall not be worn. Lipstick colors shall be
conservative and complement the individual. Long false eyelashes shall
not be worn when in uniform.
Brassieres that provide adequate support shall be worn.
Fingernails shall not exceed 1/4 inch measured from the fingertip,
for sworn personnel as it may interfere with the safe discharge of a
firearm. Fingernails for nonsworn personnel shall not exceed 1/2 inch
measured from the fingertip. Fingernail length shall not interfere with
the operation of electronic equipment or adversely effect performance.
Nail polish colors shall complement the skin tone. Sworn personnel are
prohibited from using nail polish colors that are bright, fluorescent, or
that present unusual luminescence or reflection.
The wearing of earrings shall be prohibited while in uniform. Eccentric
or faddish jewelry including, but not limited to, nose rings or studs,
tongue rings or studs, eyebrow rings or studs, etc., shall be prohibited.
While in uniform, only one ring per hand is permitted. While in uniform,
neck chains shall not be worn on the outside of the uniform. This neck
3:3.4 GENERAL 3:3.4
1:869
3:4. DEPARTMENT PROPERTY AND EQUIPMENT.
Employees are responsible for the proper care of department property
and equipment assigned to them. Damaged or lost property may subject
the responsible individual to reimbursement charges and appropriate
disciplinary action. Employees shall not use any department property or
equipment for personal business or pleasure.
3:4.1. Damaged - Inoperative Property or Equipment.
Employees shall immediately report to their supervisor in writing of any
loss of or damage to department property assigned to or used by them. The
immediate supervisor will be notified of any defects or hazardous conditions
existing in any department equipment or property.
3:4.2. Care of Department Buildings.
Employees shall not mar, mark, or deface any surface in any department
building. No material shall be affixed in any way to any wall in department
buildings without specific authorization from the Chief of Police.
3:4.3. Notices.
Employees shall not mark, alter, or deface any posted notice of the
department. Notices or announcements shall not be posted on bulletin
boards without permission of the Chief of Police or unless in conformance
with collective bargaining agreements. Under no circumstances will
notices, pictures, etc., be posted that are degrading, obscene, or considered
detrimental to the good order of the police department. Final judgment of
improperly posted material will be made by the Chief of Police.
3:4.4. Department Vehicles, Use.
Employees shall not use any department vehicle without the permission of
a shift supervisor. Department vehicles shall never be used for personal
chain is in addition to any chain worn to identify the wearer as having
a medical condition.
While in uniform, only one wristwatch in addition to any bracelet worn
to identify the wearer as having a medical condition.
3. Tattoos.
They cannot be vulgar, indecent, sexist, and racist or incite libidinous
thoughts. Tattoos, similar markings or brands cannot be on the head,
face, or neck.
4. Eyeglasses.
Eyeglasses worn by sworn police personnel while on duty or in uniform
shall be conservative in design.
3:3.4 LYNDHURST CODE 3:4.4
1:870
business or pleasure, except for the Chief of Police subject to a written
agreement with the appropriate authority and the Township.
3:4.5. Operation of Motor Vehicles.
Members and employees, when driving vehicles of any description, private
or the department, shall not violate the traffic laws, except only in cases
of absolute emergency, and then only in conformity with the law regarding
same. They shall set an example for other persons in the operation of their
vehicles.
3:4.6. Transporting Citizens.
Such transportation will be done at the direction or permission of the shift
supervisor.
3:4.7. Reporting Accidents.
Whenever a police officer shall be involved in any accident, or cause any
damage, while in charge of or using a motor vehicle owned by the
department, he shall as soon as possible notify the officer in charge. It shall
be the duty of the officer in charge to cause an investigation to be made of
same, and a written report made to the Chief of Police.
Whenever a police officer shall be involved in any accident, or cause any
damage, while in charge of or using an off duty motor vehicle, he/she shall
as soon as possible notify the officer in charge. It shall be the duty of the
duty officer to cause an investigation to be made of same, and a written
report made to the Chief of Police.
Whenever an employee is involved in any accident or cause any damage
while operating a motor vehicle in which a violation of the law is charged
against the employee, he/she shall report the accident or damage to the
Shift Supervisor immediately. A copy of the official report will be forwarded
to the Chief of Police.
3:4.8. Presumption of Responsibility.
In the event that Township property is found bearing evidence of damage
which has not been reported, it shall be prima-facie evidence that the last
person using the property or vehicle was responsible.
3:4.9. Inspection.
Departmental property and equipment is and remains the property of the
department and is subject to entry and inspection without notice, including,
but not limited to, lockers, desks, filing cabinets, computers, and
department vehicles.
3:4.4 GENERAL 3:4.10
1:871
3:4.10. Liability.
If department property is damaged or lost as a result of misuse or
negligence by an employee, that employee may be held liable to reimburse
the department for the damage or loss and is subject to disciplinary action.
3:4.11. Responsibility for General Appearance and Maintenance.
A driver shall be responsible for the general appearance and cleanliness
of their assigned vehicle. The driver will further insure that all necessary
equipment is present and in proper working condition.
3:4.12. Parking of Department Vehicles.
It shall be the responsibility of any employee operating a department
vehicle to see that it is properly parked off the traveled portion of the
highway at a crime scene, fire, etc., unless such vehicle is being used
to light the scene, create a road block, or under other extenuating
circumstances. When the vehicle is parked at headquarters, it will be
secured.
3:5. COMMUNICATIONS, CORRESPONDENCE.
3:5.1. Restrictions.
Employees shall:
3:5.2. Forwarding Communications to Higher Commands.
Any employee receiving a written communication for transmission to a
higher command, shall, in every case, forward such communication, unless
withdrawn by the initiating party. A supervisor receiving a communication
from a subordinate directed to a higher command shall endorse it indicating
approval, disapproval, or acknowledgment.
3:5.3. Department Address - Private Use Of.
Employees shall not use the department as a mailing address or delivery
drop site for private purposes. The department address shall not be used for
any private motor vehicle registration or driver license.
3:5.4. Telephones/Electronic Devices.
Department telephone equipment and electronic devices may not be used
for the transmission of messages involving toll charges without the express
approval of a commanding officer. Employees must identify their name, rank
and assignment when answering the telephone.
1. Not use department letterhead stationery for private correspondence.
2. Only send correspondence out of the department over the signature of,
or for the Chief of Police with proper authorization.
3:4.10 LYNDHURST CODE 3:5.5
1:872
3:5.5. Contracts.
No employee shall make any contract on the part of or purchase any articles
for use by the department without first having obtained the authorized
consent of the Chief of Police.
3:5.6. Radio Discipline.
All employees of the department operating the police radios shall strictly
observe regulations for such operation as set forth in department orders
and by the Federal Communications Commission.
3:5.7. MDT & Static Terminal Discipline.
All members of the department operating the MDT or the Static Terminal
shall strictly observe regulations for such operations as set forth in
departmental orders and policies, as well as, those set forth by the Bergen
County Prosecutor's Office and any other governmental agency.
3:5.8. Truthfulness.
Employees shall not knowingly lie, give misleading information, or falsify
oral or written communications in any official report when it is reasonable
to expect that the information may be relied upon because of the employee's
affiliation with this department.
3:5.9. Confidential Information.
3:6. PUBLIC ACTIVITIES.
3:6.1. Conduct Toward the Public.
Employees shall be courteous in their dealings with the public. They shall
perform their duties, avoiding harsh, violent, profane or insolent language
and shall remain calm regardless of provocation. Upon request, they are
1. Employees shall not reveal any confidential business of the department.
They shall not impart confidential information to anyone except those
for whom it is intended, or as directed by their supervisor.
2. Employees shall not make known to any person, any department order
which they may receive, unless so required by the nature of the order.
3. Contents of any department record or report filed in the police
department shall not be exhibited or divulged to any person other than
a duly authorized person, except on approval of the Chief of Police, or
under due process of law, or as permitted under department
regulations.
4. Employees shall not release or expose any employee's home address,
home telephone, pager number, or personal information to a nonemployee
without the express permission of the Chief of Police.
3:5.5 GENERAL 3:6.1
1:873
required to supply their names, photo identification and badge numbers in
a courteous manner. They shall attend to all reasonable requests from the
public quickly and accurately, avoiding unnecessary referral to other parts
of the department.
3:6.2. Impartial Attitude.
All employees, must remain completely impartial toward all persons coming
to the attention of the department. Violations of the law are against the
people of the state and not against the individual officer. All citizens are
guaranteed equal protection under law. Exhibiting partiality for or against
a person because of race, creed, color, national origin, ancestry, age, sex,
gender identity or expression, affectional or sexual orientation, marital
status, familial status, liability for service in the Armed Forces of the United
States, disability, atypical hereditary cellular or blood trait, genetic
information, nationality, pregnancy or other protected class (N.J.S.A. 10:5-1
et seq.) is conduct unbecoming a public employee. Similarly, unwarranted
interference in the private business of others when not in the interests of
justice is conduct unbecoming a public employee.
3:6.3. Disparaging Nationality, Race, or Creed or Protected Class.
Courtesy and civility toward the public is required of all employees of the
department. Employees shall not use words which humiliate, disparage,
demean, degrade, ridicule, or insult a person because of their race, creed,
color, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, gender identity or expression,
affectional or sexual orientation, marital status, familial status, liability
for service in the Armed Forces of the United States, disability, atypical
hereditary cellular or blood trait, genetic information, nationality,
pregnancy or other protected class. (N.J.S.A. 10:5-1 et seq.)
3:6.4. Availability When on Duty.
Members on duty shall not conceal themselves except for some police
purpose. They shall be immediately and readily available to the public
during duty hours.
3:6.5. Public Statements.
Employees of the department shall not make public statements concerning
the work, plans, policies, or affairs of the department, which may impair or
disrupt the operation of the department or which are obscene, unlawful or
defamatory except for those permitted by law.
3:6.6. Subversive Organizations.
No employee shall be a member of or connected with any subversive
organization except when necessary in the performance of duty and then
only under the direction of the Chief of Police. A subversive organization
is an organization with the purpose for revolutionary and rebellious acts
against a government entity.
3:6.1 LYNDHURST CODE 3:6.7
1:874
3:6.7. Affiliation with Certain Organizations Prohibited. [N.J.S.A.
38:23-4]
Employees may become members of a fire department, auxiliary corps, first
aid unit or other civic organization provided such membership does not
interfere with their obligation as a department employee. Employees shall
not affiliate themselves with any organizations whose constitutions impose
provisions which might in any way exact prior consideration and prevent the
proper and efficient functioning of the department. This prohibition does
not apply to the active military or naval services of the United States or of
this State, in time of war, in an emergency, or for or during any period of
training, or pursuant to or in conjunction with the operation of any system
of selective service.
3:6.8. Affiliation with Radical Group.
No employees except in the discharge of police related duties shall
knowingly associate with or have any dealings with any person or
organization which advocates or which is instrumental in fostering hatred,
prejudice or oppression against any individual or group.
3:6.9. Commercial Testimonials.
Employees shall not permit their names or photographs to be used to
endorse any product or service which is in any way connected with law
enforcement without permission of the Chief of Police. No employee shall
utilize the agency name, affiliation, patch, badge, emblem, logo or
reasonable facsimile thereof, in furtherance of any personal business,
outside employment venture or objective without the express permission of
the Chief of Police.
3:6.10. Public Appearance Requests.
All requests for public speeches, demonstrations, and the like, will be
routed to the Chief of Police for approval and processing. Employees
directly approached for this purpose shall suggest that a party submit their
request to the Chief of Police.
3:7. POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
3:7.1. Participating - Political Activities.
Employees shall not engage in political activity while on duty or while in
uniform, or at any time if to do so would conflict with their duties or impair
their ability to perform their duties. No employee shall directly or indirectly
use or seek to use their authority or official influence to control or modify
the political actions of another person.
3:6.7 GENERAL 3:7.2
1:875
3:7.2. Election to Public Office.
Employees may run for public office in accordance with New Jersey State
Law, but may not campaign nor engage in any activity connected with
candidacy for such office during any tour of police duty. Employees shall
not display any political material on any governmental property or on their
person while on duty or in uniform.
3:7.3. Non-Partisan Activities - Limitation.
Police officers may engage in non-partisan political activities except when
such activities will impair or harm the operation or discipline of the
department.
3:7.4. Soliciting Prohibited.
Employees of the department shall not solicit contributions for political
purposes while on duty nor shall they directly or indirectly use or attempt
to use their official position to influence of their office for political reasons.
3:7.5. Contributions.
Employees may contribute funds or any other thing of value to candidates
for public office subject to the provision of law governing such
contributions.
3:7.6. Polling Duties.
Employees shall not engage in any polling duties in the Township of
Lyndhurst, except in the performance of their official duties.
3:7.7. Displaying of Political Material.
Employees shall not display any political material on any government
property or on their person while on duty or in uniform.
3:8. JUDICIAL AND INVESTIGATIVE ACTIONS, APPEARANCE AND
TESTIFYING.
3:8.1. Court Appearance.
Attendance at a court or quasi-judicial hearing as required by subpoena,
resulting from department employment, is an official duty assignment.
Permission to omit this duty must be obtained from the prosecuting attorney
handling the case or other competent court officials. When appearing in
court, either the official uniform or business attire shall be worn. Employees
shall present a neat and clean appearance, avoiding any mannerism which
might imply disrespect to the court.
3:7.2 LYNDHURST CODE 3:8.2
1:876
3:8.2. Duty of Employees to Appear and Testify.
It shall be the duty of every employee to appear and testify upon matters
directly related to the conduct of his/her office, position or employment
before any court, grand jury, or the State Commission of Investigation. Any
employee failing or refusing to so appear and to so testify shall be subject
to removal from his/her office, position or employment.
3:8.3. Testifying for the Defendant.
Any employee subpoenaed to testify for the defense in any trial or hearing
or against Township of Lyndhurst in any hearing or trial shall notify the
Chief of Police through the chain of command upon receipt of the subpoena.
The Chief of Police or designee shall also notify the Township of Lyndhurst
Attorney.
3:8.4. Department Investigations - Testifying.
Employees are required to answer questions by or render material and
relevant statements to a competent authority in a department personnel
investigation when so directed.
3:8.5. Truthfulness.
Employees are required to be truthful at all times whether or not under
oath.
3:8.6. Civil Action, Court Appearance - Subpoena.
Employees shall not volunteer to testify in civil actions and shall not testify
unless legally subpoenaed. Employees shall accept all subpoenas legally
served. If the subpoena arises out of department employment or if the
employee is informed that they are a party to a civil action arising out of
department employment, they shall immediately notify the Chief of Police
through the chain of command of the service or notification and of the
testimony they are prepared to give.
Employees shall not volunteer or agree to testify as an expert witness
in civil actions without the prior written approval of the Bergen County
Prosecutor and the Chief of Police.
3:8.7. Civil Depositions and Affidavits.
Employees shall confer with their commanding officer before giving a
deposition or affidavit on a civil case. If a commander determines that the
case is of importance to the Township of Lyndhurst, they shall inform the
Chief of Police before the deposition or affidavit is given.
3:8.2 GENERAL 3:8.8
1:877
3:8.8. Civil Cases.
Employees shall not serve civil process or assist in civil cases unless the
specific consent of the Chief of Police is obtained. They shall avoid entering
into civil disputes, particularly while performing their duties, but shall
prevent or abate a breach of the peace or crime in such cases.
3:8.9. Internal Affairs Investigations.
The Lyndhurst Police Department hereby adopts and incorporates the
"Internal Affairs Policy & Procedures" of the Police Management Manual
promulgated by the Police Bureau of the Division of Criminal Justice in the
Department of Law and Public Safety to govern the conduct of internal
affairs investigations.
3:8.8 LYNDHURST CODE 3:8.9
1:878
CHAPTER 4
PERSONNEL REGULATIONS
4:1. SURRENDER OF DEPARTMENT PROPERTY.
4:1.1. Upon Separation from the Department.
Members and employees are required to surrender all department property
in their possession upon separation from the service. Failure to return nonexpendable
items may cause the person to reimburse the department for
the fair market value of the article(s). The Chief of Police shall withhold
a final paycheck upon separation until all department property is
surrendered.
4:1.2. Under Suspension.
Any employee under suspension shall immediately surrender their badge,
handgun and all other department equipment requested, to their
commanding officer pending disposition of the case. Any employee under
suspension shall immediately surrender all department or Township of
Lyndhurst property in their possession to the commanding officer to which
they are assigned.
4:2. ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE.
4:2.1. Administrative Leave.
The Chief of Police may authorize an employee to be absent from duty
with pay for a period of 10 consecutive working days. The purpose of
administrative leave is to provide for the health and well being of an
employee. Administrative leave may be part of the debriefing process that
is associated with a major disaster or emergency where there is a great
loss of life or serious injury or a life threatening situation that involved the
employee during their regular course of duty. Administrative leave is not
part of the disciplinary process.
4:3. SICKNESS, INJURY LEAVE, FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE.
4:3.1. Reporting Sick or Injured.
Employees unable to report for duty because of sickness or injury shall
make an immediate report to the supervisor on duty in person or by
telephone, but not less than one hour prior to the start of a tour of duty,
stating their reason illness or injury, which prohibit reporting for duty. If
unable to report, a relative or other responsible person shall notify the
supervisor of all pertinent facts either in person or by telephone.
Anyone who remains absent from duty due to injury or sickness for a period
in excess of three consecutive days or more shall present certification that a
physician has examined the employee. Any employee who has been absent
from duty for a continuous period longer than 10 days shall furnish the
4:1 GENERAL 4:3.1
1:879
Township of Lyndhurst with their physician's medical report certifying that
the employee is physically fit to return to regular duty.
4:3.2. Address of Confinement.
Once an employee is on sick or injury leave, they are automatically confined
to their primary residence during their regular duty hours. Employees who
had reported that they are not in their primary residence are required
to remain at the location they indicated they were. This section does not
prohibit an employee from relocating to their primary residence to
recuperate. Any movement of one's location while on sick leave must be
reported to their supervisor.
It is recognized that it may become necessary to leave one's location while
on sick leave. Reasons include, but are not limited to, physician's visits,
hospital visits, physical therapy visits, pharmacy visits, other essential life
necessities, or religious obligations. Should it become necessary to leave
their location, their supervisor must be notified.
4:3.3. Sick or Injured on Duty.
Employees taken sick or injured on duty shall report the facts to the Shift
Commander and shall remain on duty until relieved, unless excused by the
Shift Commander. The exception to this rule and regulation would be where
the sickness or injury is disabling to the point of preventing compliance.
4:3.4. Unauthorized Absence.
Employees who absent themselves in an improper manner shall be subject
to disciplinary action. Unauthorized absence occurs when employees:
4:4. MILITARY LEAVE OF ABSENCE.
1. Are not at home or who are not at their place of confinement, while on
sick leave;
2. Feign illness or injury;
3. Deceive the physician in any way as to their true condition;
4. No employee shall, while on sick leave, travel or participate in any
activity, unless authorized in writing by a physician.
5. Any employee reporting ill for a tour of duty shall not be eligible for any
overtime until 16th hours after the completion of the reported shift of
illness/injury.
6. Are injured or become sick as the result of improper conduct; or
7. Violate any provisions concerning the reporting of sickness or injury.
4:3.1 LYNDHURST CODE 4:4.1
1:880
4:4.1. Military Reserve Leave.
An employee who is a member of the Armed Forces of the United States
shall be entitled to leave of absence from duty in accordance with all
applicable federal, state and local statutes and policies.
4:4.2. Enlistment or Re-enlistment in National or State Military
Organization.
Employees of the department shall not enlist, re-enlist or accept a
commission in any federal or state military organization without having
made prior notification to the Chief of Police.
4:4.3. Extended Leave, (Surrender of Department Property).
Before reporting for extended military service, employees of the
department shall surrender all requested department property held by them
to their commanding officers.
4:4.4. Field Training Leave.
Employees going on military leave for field training must notify the
supervisor at least 30 days before the date their training period is scheduled
to begin. They must also submit copies of their official military orders at
least five days prior to the date they are to report for duty.
Injuries sustained while on active duty, active duty training, or inactive duty
training must be promptly reported to this department as it may impact
upon work performance. Copies of any medical or treatment forms must
accompany the notification report.
Military disciplinary action resulting from active duty, active duty training,
or inactive duty training must be promptly reported to this department.
4:5. RESIGNATION.
4:5.1. Resignation to Be in Writing.
All resignations must be in writing and bear the signature of the person
resigning. Employees shall provide the Chief of Police not less than 14 days'
written notice.
4:5.2. Resignation Prohibited While Charges Are Pending.
Employees are prohibited from resigning while charges are pending against
them unless authorized by the Chief of Police.
4:4.1 GENERAL 4:5.2
1:881

CHAPTER 5
DISCIPLINARY REGULATIONS
5:1. DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
5:1.1. Disciplinary Action.
Department employees regardless of rank or assignment, shall be subject
to disciplinary action, according to the nature or aggravation of the offense,
for violating their oath and trust by committing an offense punishable
under the laws or statutes of the United States, the State of New Jersey,
municipal ordinances, or failure, either willfully or through negligence or
incompetence to perform the duties of their rank of assignment; or for
violation of any special order, policy and procedure or rule of the
department; or for failure to obey any lawful instruction, order, or command
of a superior or supervisor. Disciplinary action in all cases will be decided
on the merits of each case.
The disciplinary system established herein shall reflect the overarching
emphasis for improving the quality of service being delivered by employees
of this department. Discipline should not engender a strictly negative
connotation. The disciplinary process is meant to correct employee actions
and conduct that tend to impede the efficient and effective operation of the
department. The proper use of discipline can achieve this objective without
realizing a reduction in morale. Training and counseling shall be a function
of the department's overall disciplinary system. In lieu of discipline, training
and counseling shall be corrective actions used to modify an employee's
performance.
5:1.2. Establishing Elements of Violation.
Existence of facts establishing a violation of the law, ordinance, or rule is all
that is necessary to support any allegation of such a basis for disciplinary
action. Nothing in this manual prohibits disciplining or charging employees
merely because the alleged act or omission does not appear herein, in
the department, or in laws and ordinances within the cognizance of the
department.
5:2. DEPARTMENT AUTHORITY FOR CORRECTIVE ACTION/
DISCIPLINE.
All disciplinary procedures shall be in accordance with the laws of the
State of New Jersey, applicable case law, collective bargaining agreements,
personnel manual, administrative regulations and Lyndhurst Township
Code. With the exception of emergency suspensions, department discipline
must be taken or approved by the Chief of Police. Whenever an employee
is recommended for dismissal by the Chief of Police, the Commissioner
of Public Safety will make the decision only after seeking the advice of
the township attorney. There must be a complete review of the employee's
personnel file and all other facts to determine if there is sufficient cause
5:1 GENERAL 5:2
1:883
for the dismissal. Terminated employees may request a hearing under the
applicable grievance procedure.
5:2.1. Corrective Action.
5:2.2. Discipline.
1. In certain situations, formal discipline is not required in order to
correct employee performance in various areas. Performance based
issues may be corrected by using training and counseling outlined
below:
Training - Training is encouraged as a means of improving employee
effectiveness and performance through positive and constructive
methods. Training and discipline are not mutually exclusive. Certain
minor offenses may be handled through targeted training. Supervisors
have an affirmative obligation to observe the conduct and appearance
of employees and detect those instances wherein corrective action
(training) may be necessary. Training includes:
• Verbal Instruction - The supervisor may, depending on the
circumstances, provide individual on the spot training where such
is indicated.
• Peer Training - The supervisor may assign the employee to another
employee with experience in the area where training is indicated.
• In-Service Training - The supervisor may refer the employee to an
in-service training program.
Counseling - Counseling is indicated where personal actions or job
performance are in conflict with basic police practice and agency
written directives. Certain first offenses are sufficiently minor in
nature and may be handled by supervisors by documenting the
counseling session on a performance notice. Facts to be considered in
making these decisions will include, but are not limited to the person's
intent, receptivity of the supervisory consulting and their desire to
correct the problem. More serious infractions may indicate the need
for a stronger response in place of, or in addition to, counseling.
There is no right to a hearing for counseling notices except as may
exist under applicable collective bargaining agreements. The final
disposition notice regarding the corrective action shall be filed in the
employee's personnel file.
2. All training and counseling resulting from a performance issue shall be
documented and forwarded through the appropriate chain of command
to the Chief of Police or designee.
1. Repeat performance based issues or minor misconduct issues may be
corrected through formal discipline by using the following actions:
5:2 LYNDHURST CODE 5:2.2
1:884
5:2.3. Appeals Procedure.
The appeal of discipline or corrective action imposed against an employee
may be taken consistent with laws of the State of New Jersey and/or the
grievance procedures of the current collective bargaining agreements and/
or employee manuals. Any employee of the department who has been tried
Oral Reprimand - They are intended to be the least intrusive form of
discipline. To be effective, however, oral reprimands must be timely.
Otherwise, the employee may believe future infractions will be
tolerated. In some cases, a minor infraction may warrant more than
counseling, but less than a written reprimand. In those instances, a
report of the offense shall be documented and issued to the employee
as a verbal reprimand. There is no right to a hearing for an oral
reprimand, unless provided for in the current collective bargaining
agreement. The final disposition notice regarding the discipline shall be
filed in the employee's personnel file indefinitely.
Written Reprimand - In some cases, the misconduct may warrant more
stringent measures. In these instances, a report of the offense shall
be documented and issued to the employee as a written reprimand.
There is no right to a hearing for written reprimands except as may
exist under applicable collective bargaining agreements. The final
disposition notice regarding the discipline shall be filed in the
employee's personnel file indefinitely.
2. Serious violations and those committed as one in a series of repeated
violations require swift and certain punitive measures in order to
maintain proper discipline within the department. The final disposition
notice regarding the discipline shall be filed in the employee's
personnel file indefinitely. The following disciplinary actions may be
taken in accordance with the laws of the State of New Jersey:
• Voluntary surrender of time off in lieu of other action;
• Suspension or Fine;
• Demotion in rank;
• Dismissal.
3. Such actions are taken when an employee's performance deficiency is
repeated despite prior corrective action, or when a violation is serious
and significant enough to require punitive action. Depending upon the
seriousness of the violation, punitive disciplinary action may not always
be based upon the progressive disciplinary process. It may be
necessary to utilize punitive disciplinary action with the first
occurrence of an act or behavior.
4. All punitive actions applied as a result of discipline shall be documented
and forwarded through the appropriate chain of command to the Chief
of Police or designee. The disciplinary document shall be filed in the
employee's personnel file.
5:2.2 GENERAL 5:2.3
1:885
and convicted upon any disciplinary charge or charges may also obtain
review in the Superior Court.
5:2.3 LYNDHURST CODE 5:2.3
1:886
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. DISPOSITION OF LEGISLATION.
This Disposition List provides a list of the ordinances used in the
preparation of Code supplements. The word Special after the ordinance
description or the word NCM in the Disposition column indicates material
that is special in nature/non-Code material and has not been included in the
Code.
Ord. No. Adoption Title
Supp.
No.
2664 9-9-2008 Request for public records, 2-30 23
2769 Bond Ordinance, Special 23
2770 Bond Ordinance, Special 23
2771 Bond Ordinance, Special 23
2772 Bond Ordinance, Special 23
2773 Acquisition of property, Special 23
2774 CAP Ordinance, Special 23
2775 12-14-2010 No parking, 7-5.3; Bus stops, 7-13.2;
Residential parking areas, 7A-2
23
2776 Rescinded 23
2777 11-9-2010 Licensing use of public property, 4-19 23
2778 10-12-2010 Parking permitted all times, 7-5.3;
special parking permits, 7-7
23
2779 Acquisition of property, Special 23
2780 10-12-2010 Licensing of food handling
establishments, 22-3
23
2781 1-27-2011 Rent control, 8-4.1, 8-4.9, 8-4.16 23
2782 CAP Ordinance, Special 23
2783 12-14-2010 Coordination of General Services, 2-5.1 23
2784 12-14-2010 Promotion process, Special 23
2785 Nonunion Salary Ordinance, Special 23
2786 1-27-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-6.1 23
2787-11 3-8-2011 Licensing use of public property, 4-19.2,
4-19.3
23
2788-11 3-8-2011 Nonunion Salary Ordinance, Special 23
5:2.3 GENERAL § DL-1
1:887
Ord. No. Adoption Title
Supp.
No.
2789-11 Handicapped parking, 7-6.1 23
2790-11 CAP Ordinance, Special 23
2791-11 Not used 23
2792-11 5-10-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-6.1, parking
prohibited, snow and other emergencies,
7-19
23
2793-11 5-10-2011 Purchasing Associate, 2-5.2 23
2794-11 Tabled 23
2795-11 5-10-2011 Licensing practice of permanent
cosmetics — application, 22-9.4
23
2796-11 5-10-2011 Sick leave, 5-13; leave of absence —
injury in line of duty, 5-14
23
2797-11 5-10-2011 Licensing use of public property, 4-19.3 23
2798-11 5-10-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-6.1 23
2799-11 5-10-2011 Relocation Assistance Committee,
21-21.3
23
2800-11 5-10-2011 Retail business and commercial
establishments — hours of operation,
3-26.1
23
2801-11 5-10-2011 Dumpsters, 7-20; engine braking, 7-22 23
2802-11 23
2803-11 23
2804-11 23
2805-11 23
2806-11 6-21-2011 Kennels, pet shops, shelters, pounds,
9-7; penalties 9-8
23
2807-11 7-27-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-6.1 23
2808-11 7-27-2011 Fees — Summer camp; Community Pool
membership, 4-14.1
23
2809-11 7-27-2011 Lyndhurst Water Utility, 12-1.1 23
2810-11 Retired 23
2803-11 8-9-2011 Attendance Secretary, 2-5.13 24
2811-11 8-9-2011 Uniform Fire Safety Code, 11-3 24
2812-11 8-9-2011 Bond, Special 24
2813-11 8-9-2011 Bond, Special 24
2814-11 8-9-2011 Bond, Special 24
§ DL-1 LYNDHURST CODE § DL-1
1:888
Ord. No. Adoption Title
Supp.
No.
2815-11 Tabled 24
2816-11 8-9-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-6.1; resident
parking permits, 7A-2
24
2817-11 8-9-2011 Salary, Special 24
2818-11 8-9-2011 Salary, Special 24
2819-11 8-9-2011 Salary, Special 24
2820-11 8-9-2011 Refund bond, Special 24
2821-11 8-9-2011 Fire zones and fire lanes, Ch. XI, Sched.
A
24
2822-11 8-9-2011 Purchase/acquisition of easement,
Special
24
2823-11 10-25-2011 Illegal dwelling units — Payment of
relocation costs, 21-21.8; violations and
penalties, 21-21.10
24
2824-11 10-25-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-6.1, Sched. IX-A 24
2825-11 10-25-2011 Acquisition of property, Special 24
2826-11 10-25-2011 Waiver of construction fees for damages
due to Hurricane Irene, 8-1.3
24
2827-11 10-11-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-6.1; parking
prohibited at all times, 7-5.3; no
stopping or standing, 7-5.5; parking
prohibited for street cleaning, 7-5.7
24
2828-11 11-10-2011 Administrative offices — Property
Maintenance Code, 13-17.1
24
2829-11 10-11-2011 Sick leave, 5-13 24
2830-11 12-6-2011 Handicapped parking, 7-6.1, Sched. IX-A;
parking permits and parking lots, 7A-2,
Sched. A
24
2831-11 1-10-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-6.1, Sched. IX-A 24
2832-11 Postponed 24
2833-11 3-13-2012 Permitted uses in the R-A District, 21-4.2 24
2834-12 2-14-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-6.1 and Sch. IXA
24
2835-12 Pending 24
2836-12 2-14-2012 Fees for recreation services, 4-14.1 24
2837-12 3-13-2012 School crossing guards, 2-23.2, 2-23.7,
2-23.12
24
§ DL-1 GENERAL § DL-1
1:889
Ord. No. Adoption Title
Supp.
No.
2838-12 4-10-2012 Health Department — definitions, 22-1.2;
Health Council, 22-1.4
24
2839-12 3-13-2012 Design standards, 21-5.14 24
2840-12 4-10-2012 Permitted uses in Business District,
21-4.5
24
2841-12 4-10-2012 Salary, Special 24
2842-12 3-13-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-6.1, Sched. IX-A 24
2843-12 4-10-2012 Criminal history record background
checks, 5-5.5
24
2844-12 4-10-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-6.2, Sched. IX-B 24
2845-12 5-8-2012 Defense and indemnification, 2-32 24
2846-12 CAP,
Special
24
2847-12 5-8-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-6.1, Schedule
IX-A
24
2848-12 5-8-2012 Special 24
2849-12 5-8-2012 Reimbursable fees, 4-14.1 24
2850-12 5-8-2012 Alcoholic beverage license fees, 6-3.4 24
2851-12 Pending 24
2852-12 5-8-2012 Board of Education parking lots, 7-18.1,
Schedule XXIII-A
24
2853-12 Not used 24
2854-12 Pending 24
2855-12 Refinancing Bond, Special 24
2856-12 Salary, Special 24
2857-12 6-12-2012 Fire Official and Fire Inspector —
Appointment, term qualifications,
removal, 11-3.5
24
2858-12 Capital, Special 24
2859-12 6-26-2012 Not used 24
2860-12 6-26-2012 Handicapped parking, 7-6.1, Schedule
IX-A; Resident permit parking, 7A-2,
Schedule A
24
§ DL-1 LYNDHURST CODE § DL-1
1:890
Ord. No. Adoption Title
Supp.
No.
2861-12 6-26-2012 Zoning permit fee, 2-21.9; pinball and
pinball amusement fees, 4-2; other
mechanical amusement devices, 4-3;
pool tables, 4-4.6; motels and tourist
lodges-applications, 4-6.6; registration of
merchants and businesses, 4-10;
business licenses, transient merchants,
mercantile licenses, 4-11; dealers in
secondhand goods, 4-12; fees for
services, 4-14; swimming pools —
permit, 18-4; application for
development, 19-1.14; food handling
establishments — licensing fees, 22-3.2;
food and beverage vending machines,
22-5; personal service establishments,
22-8; permanent cosmetics and
tattooing, 22-9
24
2862-12 7-10-2012 Department of Public Safety — create 3
part-time clerical positions; eliminate
part-time secretary to Commissioner of
Public Safety; eliminate full-time
secretary to Fire Official, Special
25
2863-12 Salary, Special 25
2864-12 Capital, Special 25
2865-12 9-11-2012 Definition of portable pool, 18-1 25
2866-12 9-11-2012 Handicapped parking, turn prohibited,
7-11
25
2867-12 10-9-2012 Zoning — design standards — residential
structures, 21-5.14; definitions, 21-12
25
2868-12 Capital improvements, Special 25
2869-12 Tabled 25
2870-12 10-9-2012 No parking anytime, 7-5.3; parking
prohibited certain hours, 7-5.4;
handicapped parking, 7-6.1
25
2871-12 10-9-2012 Alcoholic beverages — hours of sale,
6-4.1; Sundays, 6-4.2; New Years Day,
6-4.3
[Repealed by Ord. No. 2877-12]
25
§ DL-1 GENERAL § DL-1
1:891
Ord. No. Adoption Title
Supp.
No.
2872-12 12-11-2012 Itinerant restaurants — processing
requirements, 3-12.5; transient
merchants and mercantile licenses —
fees, 4-11.8; dealers in second hand
goods- application, 4-12.2; Public Affairs
Department fees, 4-14.2; Police
Department fees, 4-14.3; canvassers,
peddlers and solicitors — application,
4-16.3; taxicabs — license fees, 15-4,
applications, 15-5, investigation of
applicant and fingerprinting, 15-6; uses
permitted in Business District, 21-4.5;
definitions, 21-12; massage therapy —
requirements for license — body art,
22-9
25
2873-12 Salary, Special 25
2874-12 12-11-2012 Parking prohibited certain hours, 7-5.4;
parking prohibited for street cleaning,
7-5.7; handicapped parking, 7-6.1
25
2875-12 12-11-2012 Uniform Construction Code fees —
waiver for hurricanes, 8-1.3e; Zoning —
Schedule of Bulk Regulations — height
in flood plain, 21-6 and Schedule
25
2876-12 12-11-2012 Emergency services volunteers —
LOSAP, 2-25
25
2877-12 12-11-2012 Alcoholic Beverages — Repeals
Ordinance No. 2871-12, amends hours of
sale, 6-4.1; Sundays, 6-4.2; New Years
Day, 6-4.3; hours of sale for wine and
malt alcoholic beverages for
consumption off licensed premises, 6-4.9
2878-13 Tabled 26
2879-13 3-12-2013 Parking prohibited at all times, 7-5.3;
parking prohibited certain hours, 7-5.4;
parking time limited, 7-5.6; handicapped
parking, 7-6.1; permits and parking lots,
7A-2
26
2880-13 3-12-2013 Itinerant restaurants, 3-12.5; dealers in
secondhand goods, 4-12.2; fees for
police services, 4-14.3; canvassers,
peddlers and solicitors, 4-16.3
26
2881-13 6-11-2013 Uniform Fire Code, 11-1.2, 11-1.3,
11-3.2, 11-3.4, 11-3.8, 11-3.11, 11-5
26
§ DL-1 LYNDHURST CODE § DL-1
1:892
Ord. No. Adoption Title
Supp.
No.
2882-13 CAP, Special 26
2883-13 6-11-2013 Parking prohibited at all times, 7-5.3;
handicapped parking, 7-6.1; one-way
streets, 7-8
26
2884-13 8-27-2013 Parking prohibited at all times, 7-5.3;
parking time limited, 7-5.6; handicapped
parking, 7-6.1; one-way streets, 7-8;
speed limits, 7-16
26
2885-13 Acquisition, Special 26
2886-13 8-27-2013 Angle parking, 7-5.12 26
2887-13 Number retired (not used) 26
2888-13 8-27-2013 Create office of township attorney, 2-5.14 26
2889-13 8-27-2013 Internal financial controls, 2-14.3A;
2-15.8; Personnel — salary and benefits,
5-8; repeal 5-29.4 — 5-29.9; amend sick
and disabled employees — unable to
perform duties, 5-30; adds severability,
5-56
26
2890-13 8-27-2013 Water utility rates and fees, 12-1.10 26
2891-13 12-10-2013 Payment system for crossing guards,
2-23.12
26
2892-13 Tabled 26
2893-13 12-27-2013 Bus stops, 7-13.1 26
2894-13 12-27-2013 Parking prohibited at all times, 7-5.3;
one-way streets, 7-8; traffic signals, 7-10;
turn prohibitions, 7-11; turns required,
7-11A
26
§ DL-1 GENERAL § DL-1
1:893
Ord. No. Adoption Title
Supp.
No.
2895-13 12-27-2013 Salary, Special Editor's Note: Pursuant
to Section 3 of Ordinance No. 2895-13,
the positions of general services
coordinator, health administrator, deputy
registrar, information technology, parttime
clerical in the assessor's office,
garbage inspector, chemical inspector,
parking enforcement officer/bailiff,
special officer/maintenance, assistant
DPW superintendent, youth center
chaperone and purchasing agent are not
re-authorized to be paid. The purchasing
agent position is included in a shared
services agreement, incorporating the
provisions of a licensed "qualified
purchasing agent" (QPA)
26
2896-13 12-27-2013 Water utility rates and fees, 12-1.10 26
2897-13 12-27-2013 Signs — Business district, awnings,
21-9.4
26
2898-14 4-8-2014 Emergency squad fees, 2-11.7 26
2899-14 Tabled 26
2900-14 5-13-2014 Parking prohibited at all times, 7-5.3;
parking prohibited certain hours, 7-5.4;
parking time limited, 7-5.6; handicapped
parking, 7-6.1; resident parking only,
7A-2
26
2901-14 5-13-2014 CAP ordinance, Special 26
2902-14 5-13-2014 Personnel — Hours of employment, 5-10 26
2903-14 5-13-2014 Off-duty employment of police officers,
3-31.1
26
2904-14 7-8-2014 Parking prohibited at all times, 7-5.3;
turns required, 7-11A
27
2905-14 8-12-2014 Water utility rates, 12-1.10 27
2906-14 Not adopted 27
2907-14 9-9-2014 Handicapped parking, 7-6.1; parking
prohibited certain hours, 7-5.4
27
2908-14 Salary, Special 27
§ DL-1 LYNDHURST CODE § DL-1
1:894
Ord. No. Adoption Title
Supp.
No.
2909-14 11-12-2014 No parking, 7-5.3; no parking certain
hours, 7-5.4; handicapped parking, 7-6.1;
handicapped parking off-street municipal
parking yards and Board of Education
property, 7-6.2; stop intersection, 7-9.2;
mid-block crosswalks, 7-25.1
27
2910-14 12-16-2014 Personnel-Salary and benefits, 5-8; hours
of employment, 5-10; severability, 5-57
27
2911-15 2-10-2015 Deletes 12-1.1A; amends 12-1.2, 12-1.4,
12-1.6, 12-1.8, 12-1.9, 12-1.11, 12-1.15,
12-1.19, 12-1.22, 12-1.23, 12-1.25,
12-1.32
27
2912-15 4-14-2015 Amends traffic-handicapped parking,
7-6.1; turn prohibitions, 7-11; turns
required, 7-11A; loading zone, 7-12; no
passing zone, 7-17; temporary parking
prohibited for snow plowing, 7-19; midblock
crosswalks, 7-25.1
27
2920-15 9-8-2015 Amends Ch. V, Personnel Policies,
Practices and Regulations, 5-3,
applicability; 5-58, severability
28
2913-15 6-9-2015 Amends 4-17.3, application procedurelimousine
and livery service; amends
21-4.2, uses permitted in R-A District
29
2914-15 6-9-2015 Amends Ch. XXI Zoning; 21-12,
definition-total lot coverage
29
2915-15 6-9-2015 CAP Bank, Special 29
2916-15 6-9-2015 Appropriation, Special 29
2917-15 6-9-2015 Amends 7-5.4, parking prohibited certain
hours; 7-6.1, handicapped parking on
streets; 7-7, special permit parking;
7-19, parking prohibited snow removal
and other emergencies; 7-25.1, midblock
crosswalks
29
2918-15 9-8-2015 Amends Ch. VII, Traffic, 7-5.4, parking
prohibited certain hours; 7-5.7, parking
prohibited street cleaning, 7-6.1,
handicapped parking; Amends Ch. XI
Fire Prevention; 11-1.4 Fire lanes-
Schedule A
29
2919-15 9-8-2015 Grant of utility easement, Special 29
§ DL-1 GENERAL § DL-1
1:895
Ord. No. Adoption Title
Supp.
No.
2920-15 9-8-2015 Amends Ch. 5, Personnel Policies; 5-3,
applicability, codified in Supp. No. 28
29
2921-15 10-13-2015 Amends Ch. VII, Traffic; 7-6.1,
handicapped parking
29
2922-15 11-10-2015 Amends Ch. VII, Traffic; 7-6.1,
handicapped parking
29
2923-15 11-10-2015 Amends Ch. V, Personnel Policies; 5-10,
hours of employment
29
2924-15 12-8-2015 Amends Ch. VII, Traffic; 7-6.1
handicapped parking
29
2925-15 12-8-2015 Easement, Special 29
2926-16 2-16-2016 Amends Ch. VII, Traffic; 7-6.1,
handicapped parking; 7-5.4, parking
prohibited certain hours
29
2927-16 2-16-2016 Annual salary Deputy Chief, Special 29
2928-16 2-16-2016 Annual salaries for patrol officers,
Special
29
2929-16 Tabled 29
2930-16 5-10-2016 Amends Ch. VII Traffic; 7-6.1,
handicapped parking on street; 7-5.7,
parking time limited
29
2931-16 5-10-2016 CAP Bank, Special 29
2932-16 5-10-2016 Non-union Salary, Special 29
2933-16 Union Salaries for DPW and Parks;
Special
29
2934-16 5-10-2016 Amends Ch. II Administration; 2-9.1
Police Department established
29
2657-08 9-9-2008 Amends Ch. XIII Property Maintenance
Code; adds 13-11.17 Containers to Be
Screened; amends Ch. XXII Health,
22-2.7 Receptacle Location,
Maintenance and Screening on Premises
30
2935-16 6-14-2016 Amends Ch. VII Traffic; 7-6.1 and
Schedule IX-A Handicapped Parking On
Street
30
2936-16 Not Received 30
§ DL-1 LYNDHURST CODE § DL-1
1:896
Ord. No. Adoption Title
Supp.
No.
2937-16 6-14-2016 Amends Ch. II Administration; 2-9 Police
Department, Appointments,
Qualifications, and right of Appointment
2-9.4
30
2938-16 8-9-2016 Amends Ch. II Administration; Repeals
Ord. Nos. 2526, 2555, 2613, 2784,
Promotion Policy in Police Department
30
2939-16 6-27-2016 Amends Ch. II Administration; 2-9.14
Adoption of Police Manual; establish
Code Appendix 2-Rules and Regulations
for the Administration and Operation of
the Lyndhurst Police Department
30
2940-16 6-14-2016 Adopts Redevelopment Plan for Block
89, Lot 9, Special
30
2941-16 Not Received 30
2942-16 Not Received 30
2943-16 6-27-2016 Amends Ch. VII Traffic; 7-5.3 and
Schedule IV Parking Prohibited at All
Times
30
2944-16 6-27-2016 Amends Ch. VII Traffic; 7-6.1 and
Schedule IX-A Handicapped Parking On
Street
30
2945-16 6-27-2016 Amends Ch. II Administration; 2-9.14
Adoption of Police Manual; Establish
Code Appendix 2-Rules and Regulations
for the Administration and Operation of
the Lyndhurst Police Department
30
2946-16 8-9-2016 Amends Ch. II Administration; 2-9.16
Police Department, Promotions
30
2947-16 8-9-2016 Amends Ch. II Administration; 2-9 Police
Department; 2-9.4 Appointments,
Qualifications, and Right of Appointment
30
2948-16 Not Received 30
2949-16 10-11-2016 Amends Ch. VII Traffic; 7-6.1 and
Schedule IX-A; Handicapped Parking On
Street
30
2950-16 10-11-2016 Amends Ch. VII Traffic; 7-18.1 and
Schedule XXIII-A Movement of Traffic on
Municipal Property and Board of
Education Property; Franklin School
30
§ DL-1 GENERAL § DL-1
1:897
Ord. No. Adoption Title
Supp.
No.
2951-16 11-7-2016 Amends Ch. VII Traffic; 7-6.1 and
Schedule IX-A Handicapped Parking On
Street
30
2952-16 12-12-2016 Amends Ch. VII Traffic; 7-5.3 and
Schedule IV Parking Prohibited at All
Times on Certain Streets
30
2953-16 12-12-2016 Amends Ch. XI Fire Prevention; 11-1,
11-1.2 Uniform Fire Code and
International Fire Code; deletes 11-3.12
and adds 11-3.12 Fire Watches; amends
11-3.13 Mobile Food Vehicle Safety
30
2954-16 1-10-2017 Amends Code Appendix 2-Rules and
Regulations for the Administration and
Operation of the Lyndhurst Police
Department; amends 1:1.1
Commissioner of Public Safety
designated as appropriate authority;
adds 1:4.8 Chief of Police: Powers and
Duties
30
2955-16 1-10-2017 Amends Ch. VII Traffic; 7-6.1 and
Schedule IX-A Handicapped Parking On
Street; amends Ch. VIIA Parking Permits
and Parking Lots; 7A-2 and Schedule A
Residential Permit Parking
30
2956-16 1-10-2017 Amends Ch. VII Traffic; 7-9.2 and
Schedule XIII Stop Intersections
30
2957-16 1-10-2017 Amends Ch. IX Animals; establish 9-10
Feral Cat, Trap, Neuter, Return (TNR)
Program 9-10.1 — 9-10.11
30
2958-17 2-21-2017 Amends Ch. VII Traffic; 7-6.1 and
Schedule IX-A Handicapped Parking On
Street
30
2959-17 2-21-2017 Amends Ch. VII Traffic; 7-19 and
Schedule XXIV Temporary Parking
Prohibition for Snow Plowing and
Removal
30
2960-17 2-21-2017 Amends Ch. IX Animals; amends 9-10.11
Feral Cat Program Study and Review to
revise end of study date
30
2961-17 3-15-2017 Amends Ch. VII Traffic; 7-6.1 and
Schedule IX-A, Handicapped Parking on
Street
30
§ DL-1 LYNDHURST CODE § DL-1
1:898
Ord. No. Adoption Title
Supp.
No.
2962-17 Not Received 30
2963-17 3-15-2017 Amends Ch. VIII Building and Housing;
adds 8-9 Guidelines for Short-Term
Rental Property 8-9.1 — 8-9.8
30
2964-17 Not Received 30
2965-17 6-23-2017 Amends Ch. VII Traffic, 7-5.3 and
Schedule IV Parking Prohibited at All
Times on Certain Streets
30
2966-17 6-23-2017 Amends Ch. VII Traffic; 7-6.1 and
Schedule IX-A, Handicapped Parking On
Street
30
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2967-17 Not Adopted 31
2968-17 8-8-2017 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 31
2969-17 8-8-2017 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
2970-17 9-13-2017 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 31
2971-17 10-10-2017Salaries NCM 31
2972-17 10-10-2017Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
2973-17 10-10-2017Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
2974-17 11-13-2017Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
2975-17 11-13-2017Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
2976-17 11-13-2017Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
2977-17 NCM 31
2978-17 Not Adopted 31
2979-17 11-13-2017Sewer and Water
Amendment
Ch. 12 31
2980-17 11-13-2017Health Amendment Ch. 22 31
2981-17 12-20-2017Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 31
§ DL-1 GENERAL § DL-1
1:899
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2982-17 1-16-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 21 31
2983-17 12-20-2017Alcoholic Beverage
Control Amendment
Ch. 6 31
2984-17 1-16-2018 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
2985-17 1-16-2018 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
2986-18 2-13-2018 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
2987-18 2-13-2018 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
2988-18 2-13-2018 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
2989-17 3-20-2018 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
2990-18 3-20-2018 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
2991-18 3-20-2018 Acquisition of Property NCM 31
2992-18 4-10-2018 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
2993-18 4-10-2018 General Licensing
Amendment
Ch. 4 31
2994-18 5-8-2018 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 31
2995-18 6-12-2018 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
2996-18 6-12-2018 Personnel Policies,
Practices and
Regulations Amendment
Ch. 5 31
2997-18 6-12-2018 Bond NCM 31
2998-18 8-14-2018 Fire Prevention
Amendment
Ch. 11 31
2999-18 9-11-2018 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
3000-18 10-16-2018Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 31
3001-18 11-20-2018Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
3002-18 11-20-2018Crane Operations Ch. 30 31
§ DL-1 LYNDHURST CODE § DL-1
1:900
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
3003-18 NCM 31
3004-18 12-19-2018Street Vacation NCM 31
3005-18 12-19-2018Street Vacation NCM 31
3006-18 12-19-2018Street Vacation NCM 31
3007-18 12-19-2018Street Vacation NCM 31
3008-18 12-19-2018Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
3009-18 12-19-2018Zoning Amendment Ch. 21 31
3010-18 NCM 31
3011-19 2-26-2019 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
3012-19 3-12-2019 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
3013-19 3-12-2019 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
3014-19 NCM 31
3015-19 4-9-2019 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
3016-19 4-9-2019 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
3017-19 4-9-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 31
3018-19 5-14-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 31
3019-19 5-14-2019 Administration
Amendment
Ch. 2 31
3020-19 5-14-2019 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
3021-19 5-14-2019 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
3022-19 5-14-2019 Grant Appropriation NCM 31
3023-19 NCM 31
3024-19 NCM 31
3025-19 6-11-2019 Traffic Amendment Ch. 7 31
3026-19 6-11-2019 Traffic Amendment;
Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7; Ch.
7.1
31
§ DL-1 GENERAL § DL-1
1:901
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
3027-19 6-11-2019 Traffic Amendment;
Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7; Ch.
7.1
31
3028-19 7-9-2019 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
3029-19 7-9-2019 Flood Damage
Prevention Measures
Ch. 23 31
3030-19 9-10-2019 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
3031-19 10-9-2019 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
3032-19 10-9-2019 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
3033-19 10-9-2019 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
3034-19 10-9-2019 Parking Permits and
Parking Lots Amendment
Ch. 7A 31
3035-19 NCM
3036-19 Not Adopted
3037-19 NCM
3038-19 11-7-2019 Traffic Schedules
Amendment
Ch. 7.1 31
§ DL-1 LYNDHURST CODE § DL-1
1:902

ZONING
21 Attachment 1
SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS
TOWNSHIP OF LYNDHURST, NEW JERSEY
ZONING, CHAPTER 21 (§ 21-6)
 [Ord. No. 2067; Ord. No. 2301; Ord. No. 2303; Ord. No. 2336, §§ I — III; Ord. No. 2567, § 3; Ord. No. 2653, § 1; Ord. No. 2675, § 1; Ord. No. 2679, § 2;
Ord. No. 2875-12, § 2; amended 1-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2982-17]
Minimum Lot Dimensions Minimum Yard Dimensions
Street Side
(Corner Lot)
Feet
Maximum
Principal
Building
Coverage Maximum Height
District
Area
Square Feet
Width
Square Feet
Depth
Feet
Front
Feet
Rear
Feet
Side
(Interior Lot)
Feet Feet Stories
R-A One Family Dwelling 5,000 50 100 203
204
6 each
R-B One Family Dwelling 15 both2
(Same as for R-A
District)
106
30%5
328
2 1/2
R-B Two Family Dwelling 5,5001
551
100 203
204
6 each
R-C Three and Four Family
Dwelling
6,000 60 100 20 20 6 each 15 both2
106
30%5
35 3
R-C Multi Family Dwelling And
Garden Apartment
15,000 100 125 20 20 10 each 10 30% 35 3
B Business 4,000 40 100 0 10 0 each7
10 60% 359
3
M-1 Light Industrial 10,000 100 100 25 25 10 each 25 60% 35 3
M-2 Heavy Industrial 10,000 150 200 25 25 10 each 25 50% 40 4
C-GI Commercial - General
Industrial
4 Acres 200 200 50 50 25 each 50 50% 40 4
1 These regulations shall not apply to any existing lots of record as of the effective date of Ordinance No. 2336, adopted November 10, 1997. For such existing lots the bulk requirements are as follows:
Minimum lot area 5,000 square feet.
Minimum fifty-foot frontage width.
2 For lots which exceed 50 feet in width, the minimum side yard dimensions shall be as follows; (1) Lot width of 51’: 7’ each side, 16’ both sides; (2) Lot width of 52’: 8’ each side, 17 feet both sides; (3) Lot width of 53’: 9’ each side, 18 feet both sides; (4) Lot width of 54’:9 feet
each side, 19 feet both sides; (5) Lot width of 55 feet or greater: 10 feet each side, 20 feet both sides.
3 Average Front Yard Setback Modifications. In such cases in the R-A and R-B residential zoning districts where the existing dwellings on the adjacent lots on each side form an existing setback line, the minimum front yard setback for a new dwelling or an addition to an existing
dwelling shall be modified to the average setback of the existing dwellings on the adjacent lots or the required setback of 20 feet, whichever is greater, but in no case shall it be required for the setback to exceed 35 feet.
4 Average Rear Yard Setback Modifications. In such cases in the R-A and R-B residential zoning districts where the existing dwellings on the adjacent lots on each side form an existing setback line, the minimum rear yard setback for a new dwelling or an addition to an existing
dwelling shall be modified to the average setback of the existing dwellings on the adjacent lots or the required setback of 20 feet, whichever is greater, but in no case shall it be required for the setback to exceed 35 feet.
5 The total lot coverage in R-A and R-B zones shall not exceed 60%. The maximum total lot coverage shall increase 5% for every 500 square feet in area over 5,500 square feet, but in no event shall exceed 70%.
6 The yard requirements for a corner lot shall be 10 feet on the side facing the street. The yard dimensions on the other side shall be in accordance with the dimensions for interior lot.
7
If adjacent to a residential zone, the minimum side yard dimensions shall be 10 feet from each side and 20 feet for both sides.
8 The maximum height for dwellings located in Zone AE on the flood maps adopted under Ordinance Section 23-3.2 shall be 35 feet.
21 Attachment 1:1 Supp 31, Nov 2019
XXXXX CODE
9 The maximum height in the Business Restaurant Overlay Zone shall be increased to 40 feet and 3 stories when an as-of-right application having sufficient parking for a restaurant on the ground floor is submitted to the Township pursuant to Subsection 21-4.5a6 and 7 and the
property is situated in the B-R Zone. Any application for any restaurant use shall include a statement of proof of sufficient parking and the location of each required parking space. If sufficient parking is not available and not identified by the applicant, then such application shall
not be permitted to proceed.
21 Attachment 1:2 Supp 0, Xxx 20xx