Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 7-23-2019 by Ord. No. 2332-19]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, the ordinances of the Township of Lawrence
of a general and permanent nature adopted by the Township Council of the
Township of Lawrence, as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters
and sections by General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 442
are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the "Code of the
Township of Lawrence," hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-3. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-4. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
Township Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the
public until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance
shall be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the Township
of Lawrence by impressing thereon the Seal of the Township, as provided by
law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of
the Township, to be made available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-5. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the governing
body to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into
such Code so that reference to the "Code of the Township of Lawrence "shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing said Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:3
§ 1-6. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the Township of Lawrence, pursuant to law, shall cause this
Adopting Ordinance to be published, in the manner required, in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Township. Sufficient copies of the
Code shall be maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the
public at all times during regular office hours. The enactment and
publication of this Adopting Ordinance, coupled with availability of copies of
the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered
to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-7. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in his or her office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code
book, at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-8. Sale of Code book.
Copies of the Code, or any chapter or portion of it, may be purchased from
the Clerk, or an authorized agent of the Clerk, upon the payment of a fee
authorized by the Township. The Clerk shall also arrange for procedures for
the periodic supplementation of the Code.
§ 1-9. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Township
of Lawrence to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section or
any part of this ordinance shall be subject, upon conviction, to one or more
of the following: a fine of not more than $2,000, imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or a period of community service not exceeding 90 days, in the
discretion of the Judge imposing the same.
§ 1-10. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections or parts
thereof.
§ 1-6 LAWRENCE CODE § 1-11
1:4
§ 1-11. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other sections or parts thereof.
§ 1-12. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
A. Except as provided in § 1-13, Ordinances saved from repeal, below, all
ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Township of Lawrence
which is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed
to remain in full force and effect.
B. Repeal of specific ordinances. The Township Council of the Township of
Lawrence has determined that the following ordinances are no longer
in effect and hereby specifically repeals the following legislation:
(1) Former Chapter 2, Administration, Article VI, Other Committees, §§
2-93 and 2-94, of the 1971 Code.
(2) Former Chapter 2, Administration, Article VIII, First Aid Squad, of
the 1971 Code.
(3) Former Chapter 4A, Anti-Discrimination, of the 1971 Code.
(4) Former Chapter 5, Building, Article I, §§ 5-8 through 5-11, of the
1971 Code.
(5) Former Chapter 5, Building, Article IV, of the 1971 Code.
(6) Former Chapter 8, Fire Prevention, Article I, §§ 8-1 and 8-2, of the
1971 Code.
(7) Former Chapter 10A, Historic Landmarks, of the 1971 Code.
(8) Former Chapter 15, Offenses - Miscellaneous, Article I, § 15-2, of
the 1971 Code.
(9) Former Chapter 15, Offenses - Miscellaneous, Articles II, III and IV,
of the 1971 Code.
(10) Former Chapter 17A, Pedestrian Walkways, of the 1971 Code.
(11) Former Chapter 20A, Soil Removal, Erosion and Sedimentation
Damage, of the 1971 Code.
§ 1-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-13
1:5
§ 1-13. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in §
1-12 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
§ 1-14. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to March 5, 2019.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any
action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place or any portion thereof.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the Township's indebtedness.
H. Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of property
or any lawful contract, agreement or obligation.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges or the approval
of the municipal budget.
J. The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
K. All currently effective ordinances pertaining to the rate and manner of
payment of salaries and compensation of officers and employees.
L. Any ordinance adopting or amending the Zoning Map.
M. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
N. All currently effective land use ordinances and amendments.
§ 1-13 LAWRENCE CODE § 1-14
1:6
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:49-4, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Township Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. In addition, the changes, amendments or revisions as set forth in
Schedule A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith,
to become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-14B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 7-23-2019 by Ord. No.
2332-19." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in
the Township offices.
§ 1-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7

ARTICLE II
Definitions and Interpretation
[Derived from § 1-2 of the 1971 Code]
§ 1-15. Definitions. [Amended 7-23-2019 by Ord. No. 2332-19]
For the purpose of this Code, and in the interpretation and application of
all other ordinances heretofore or hereafter adopted, except as the context
may otherwise require, the following definitions shall be used in the Code:
CHARTER — The pertinent provisions of the Optional Charter Law of the
State of New Jersey governing Council-Manager Plan A (Article 9)2 under
which this Township government is constituted.
CLERK or TOWNSHIP CLERK — The Municipal Clerk duly appointed
pursuant to law.
COUNCIL, TOWNSHIP COUNCIL — The Township Council of the Township
of Lawrence.
COUNTY — The County of Mercer.
DAYS — The calendar days.
DEPARTMENT — An organized unit of the government established or
designated by this Code as a department.
DIRECTOR — The head of an administrative department of the Township
government.
GOVERNING BODY — The Municipal Council as constituted by the
Township Charter.
LICENSED — Licensed in accordance with the appropriate section or
chapter of this Code.
MONTH — A calendar month unless otherwise specifically provided.
MUNICIPALITY — The Township of Lawrence in the County of Mercer.
OFFICER OR OFFICIAL — The title of an officer or official shall be
construed as if the words "of the Township of Lawrence" followed it.
ORDINANCE — Any act of local legislation heretofore or hereafter adopted,
and including this Code, so long as it is adopted by the procedure required
for the adoption of an ordinance and so long as it remains in force and effect
pursuant to law.
OWNER — As applied to a building or land, shall mean and include any
part owner, any corporation, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in
partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part
of such building or land.
2. Editor’s Note: See N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81 et seq.
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
PERSON — Move and extend and be applied to associations, firms,
partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as individuals.
PRECEDING, FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
PUBLIC GROUNDS, PUBLIC SQUARES, PUBLIC PLACE or PUBLIC
PLACES — Severally be construed to mean any and every public ground,
public square, public park or other public place within the Township.
SIDEWALK — Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways.
STREET — Includes an avenue, road, alley, lane, highway, boulevard,
concourse, driveway, culvert, sidewalk, and crosswalk, and every class of
road, square, place or municipal parking field used by the general public.
Street shall be considered to include a sidewalk or footpath, unless the
contrary is expressed or unless such construction is inconsistent with the
apparent intent.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lawrence in the County of Mercer and State
of New Jersey.
TOWNSHIP CLERK, CHIEF OF POLICE OR SUCH OTHER NAMED
TOWNSHIP OFFICER — The Township Clerk, Chief of Police or such other
Township Officer or Department, respectively, of the Township of Lawrence,
New Jersey.
WEEK — Seven days.
YEAR — A calendar year unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 1-16. Rules of construction. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
In the construction of this Code and of all other ordinances, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with
the manifest intent of the Township Council:
A. Committee. Whenever in this Code any committee is mentioned by
name or title, such committee shall be understood to be the committee
of the Township Council designated by such name or title, unless
otherwise indicated.
B. Computation of time. In computing any period of time, the day of the
act or event after which the designated period begins to run shall not be
included. The last day of the period so computed shall be included,
unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the
period shall run until the end of the next day which is neither a
Saturday, Sunday nor a holiday. When a period of time prescribed or
allowed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and
legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation.
C. The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future,
the present.
§ 1-15 LAWRENCE CODE § 1-16
1:10
D. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
E. The singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
F. Shall is mandatory and may is permissive.
G. Writing and written shall include printing, typewriting and any other
mode of communication using paper or similar material which is in
general use, as well as legible handwriting.
H. And may be construed as meaning or, and or as and, if the sense
requires and indicates such meaning.
I. Whenever a specific time is used in this Code, it shall mean the
prevailing and established time in effect in the State of New Jersey
during any day in any year.
J. Any citation of a statute, law or ordinance contained in this Code shall
be deemed to refer to such statute, law or ordinance as amended,
whether or not such designation is included in the citation.
K. Chapter shall mean one of the major divisions of this Code identified by
an Arabic numeral and divided by subject matter.
L. Section shall mean a major subdivision of a chapter.
M. Subsection shall mean a subdivision of a section, identified by a
decimal number.
N. Paragraph shall mean a subdivision under a subsection, identified by
an alphabetical letter or Arabic number.
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-16
1:11

ARTICLE III
General Penalty
[Derived from § 1-6 of the 1971 Code]
§ 1-17. Maximum penalty.
§ 1-18. Minimum penalty. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The Township Council may prescribe that for the violation of any particular
provision of the Code or of any particular ordinance at least a minimum
penalty shall be imposed which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed
at an amount not exceeding $100. The Court before which any person is
convicted of violating any ordinance or Code provision shall have power to
impose any fine, term of punishment, or period of community service not
less than the minimum and not exceeding the maximum fixed in the Code or
such ordinance.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Code or other
ordinance of the Township, where no specific penalty is provided
regarding the section violated, shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by one or more of the following: a fine not exceeding $2,000
(unless otherwise stipulated) or imprisonment for a period not
exceeding 90 days or to a period of community service not exceeding 90
days at the discretion of the Judge of the Municipal Court.
B. For a violation of any housing or zoning code, the enforcement officer
shall provide a thirty-day period in which the owner shall be afforded
the opportunity to cure or abate the condition and shall also be afforded
an opportunity for a hearing before a Court of competent jurisdiction
for an independent determination concerning the violation. Subsequent
to the expiration of the thirty-day period, a fine greater than $1,250
may be imposed if a Court has not determined otherwise or, upon
reinspection of the property, it is determined that the abatement has
not been substantially completed. For the violation of an ordinance
pertaining to unlawful solid waste disposal, at least a minimum penalty
shall be imposed which shall consist of a fine which may be fixed at an
amount not exceeding $2,500 or a maximum penalty by a fine not
exceeding $10,000 to construct, acquire, operate or maintain any and
all public improvements, projects or enterprises for any public purpose,
subject to referendum requirements otherwise imposed by law, and to
exercise all powers of local government in such manner as its governing
body may determine. [Amended by Ord. No. 1689-02; Ord. No.
1878-06; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 1-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-19
1:13
§ 1-19. Additional fine for repeat offenders. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who is convicted of violating this Code or an ordinance within
one year of the date of a previous violation of the same provision of this
Code or of the same ordinance and who was fined for the previous violation
shall be sentenced by a Court to an additional fine as a repeat offender. The
additional fine imposed by the Court upon a person for a repeated offense
shall not be less than the minimum or exceed the maximum fine fixed
for a violation of the ordinance or Code provision, but shall be calculated
separately from the fine imposed for the violation of the ordinance or Code
provision.
§ 1-20. Default of payment of fine. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person convicted of the violation of any provision of this Code or any
ordinance may, in the discretion of the Court by which he was convicted,
and in default of the payment of any fine imposed therefor, be imprisoned in
the County jail or place of detention provided by the Township for any term
not exceeding 90 days, or be required to perform community service for a
period not exceeding 90 days.
§ 1-21. Separate violations.
Except as otherwise provided, each and every day in which a violation of
any provision of this Code or any other ordinance of the Township exists
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 1-22. Application. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The maximum penalty stated in this section is not intended to state an
appropriate penalty for each and every violation. At the discretion of the
Judge of the Municipal Court, any lesser penalty, including a nominal
penalty or no penalty at all, may be appropriate for a particular case or
violation.
§ 1-19 LAWRENCE CODE § 1-22
1:14
Chapter 10
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
§ 1-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-22
1:15

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 10-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CHARTER or TOWNSHIP CHARTER — The Council-Manager Plan of the
Optional Municipal Charter Law pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-81.
DEPARTMENT — An organization unit or group of organization units of the
Township government, established or designated as a department by this
chapter and each nondepartmental board, committee, office or agency.
DIRECTOR OR DEPARTMENT HEAD — The administrative head of a
department, regardless of his title.
MANAGER OR TOWNSHIP MANAGER — The Manager or Acting Manager
duly appointed under that title pursuant to the Charter and this Code.
§ 10-2. Township Seal.
The Township Seal as heretofore adopted and in use on the effective date
of this section (January 1, 1970) shall continue to be the legal seal of the
Township.
§ 10-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-2
1:17

ARTICLE II
Transfer to Council Manager Plan
§ 10-3. Transfers of personnel, records and property.
On January 1, 1970, all personnel and all records and property of the
Township, except as otherwise provided by this chapter, are transferred
to the respective departments, offices and agencies to which their
administrative functions, powers and duties are allocated and assigned by
this chapter.
§ 10-4. Civil Service.
All officers and employees who were in the Classified Service of the Civil
Service on January 1, 1970, are transferred to the appropriate department
and division to which their respective functions, powers and duties are
allocated and assigned by this chapter, and they shall not by such transfer
be adversely affected in seniority, pension, demotion or salary rights, as
provided in the New Jersey Statutes, Title 11.
§ 10-5. Pension rights.
Pension fund membership and rights of any officer or employee shall not,
without his consent, be adversely affected by any transfer pursuant to this
chapter. The Manager shall provide by appropriate regulation for necessary
records, contribution controls and otherwise for the further protection
of the pension fund membership and rights of officers and employees in
accordance with this section as need appears.
§ 10-6. Violations of chapter.
Where no other sanction is provided by or pursuant to law, a violation of
any regulatory provisions of this chapter shall constitute a disorderly person
offense.
§ 10-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-6
1:19

ARTICLE III
Council and Council Meetings
§ 10-7. Powers of Council.
§ 10-8. Meetings of Council. [Amended by Ord. No. 1333-92 § 2-8;
Ord. No. 1481-96; 7-23-2019 by Ord. No. 2332-19]
§ 10-9. Mayor. [Amended 11-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2113-11; 7-23-2019
by Ord. No. 2332-19]
A. Generally. All powers of the municipality and the determination of all
matters of policy shall be vested in the Municipal Council, except as
otherwise provided by the Charter or this chapter.
A. Regular meetings. The Council shall hold regular meetings on the first
and third Tuesday of each month at 6:30 p.m., and during the months of
June, July and August the Council meetings will commence at 6:00 p.m.,
except that Council may, by resolution, reschedule the meeting within
the same month. All regular meetings of the Council shall be held in the
Municipal Building of the Township. [Amended 7-23-2019 by Ord.
No. 2333-19]
B. Special meetings. The Mayor, whenever he deems it in the public
interest, may, and upon request in writing of a majority of the Council,
shall call a special meeting of the Council. A request by the Councilmen
or Mayor for a special meeting shall state the time and purpose of the
meeting and no other business may be considered. The Mayor shall
deliver the call for a special meeting to the Municipal Clerk who shall
forthwith deliver copies thereof to each Councilman at his residence or
at such place as he may designate in advance. Except in the case of an
emergency, special meetings shall be held within the Township and may
not be called upon less than two days' notice.
C. Adjourned meetings. An adjourned meeting shall be considered a
continuation of the preceding meeting and the business of the Council
shall be resumed where it was left at the adjournment.
D. Public meetings. All regular and special meetings of the Council shall
be open to the public. The Manager, Attorney, Clerk and such other
municipal officers and employees as may be required by general or
special order of the Council shall attend regular meetings of Council.
E. Executive meetings. The Council is permitted to hold private, executive
meetings to the extent provided by state law. Such meetings are not
open to the public due to the sensitive nature of the subject matter.
Minutes will be taken at such meetings and will be released to the
public at the earliest practical date in accordance with state law.
A. At 12:00 noon on the first day of January following each election of
Councilmembers, the Municipal Council shall assemble at Township
§ 10-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-9
1:21
§ 10-10. Alternate meeting place.
Whenever the public interest shall be better served by the conduct of any
meeting of Council at a place within the Township, other than the Municipal
Building, and upon reasonable notice to the public under the circumstances,
Council may designate another public place suitable for the conduct of a
public meeting. In the event of an emergency, the failure to provide notice
of such a decision shall not be grounds for invalidating the proceedings
conducted at such alternate site.
§ 10-11. Ordinances, resolutions and contracts. [Amended by Ord.
No. 1364-93 § 2-10]
Hall, organize and elect one of the Councilmembers Mayor of the
Township. The Mayor shall be chosen by ballot by majority vote of all
members of the Council. If the members shall be unable, within five
ballots to be taken within two days of the organization meeting, to elect
a Mayor, then the member who, in the last election for members of the
Municipal Council, received the greatest number of votes shall be the
Mayor. Should such person decline to accept the office, then the person
receiving the next highest vote shall be the Mayor and so on until the
office is filled.
B. Vacancies in the office of the Mayor shall be filled by the Council for the
remainder of the unexpired term.
C. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council and shall have a
voice and vote in its proceedings. All bonds, notes, contracts and
written obligations of the Municipality shall be executed on its behalf by
the Mayor or, in the event of his absence or temporary disability, by
such Councilperson as the Township Council shall designate to act as
Mayor during the Mayor's absence or disability. The powers and duties
of the Mayor shall be only such as are expressly conferred upon him by
the Charter.
D. The Mayor is authorized to approve or disapprove bingo and raffle
applications for and on behalf of the Council pursuant to the state
statute.
A. Ordinances and resolutions.
(1) Preparation of ordinances. Ordinances shall be prepared for
presentation to the Council upon the request of a Councilman, or of
majority vote of the Council, or requested in writing by the
Manager.
(2) Prior review by administrative staff. All ordinances, resolutions and
contract documents, before presentation to the Council shall:
(a) Have been approved as to form and legality by the Township
Attorney or his authorized representative; and
§ 10-9 LAWRENCE CODE § 10-11
1:22
(b) Have been examined as to administrative consideration by the
Manager or his authorized representative.
(3) The Manager shall submit to the Council a written memorandum
concerning the administrative aspects of each ordinance,
resolution and contract unless he shall advise the Council that no
administrative questions are involved. Each administrative
memorandum may include the specific comments and
recommendations of the Director concerned with the subject of the
memorandum.
(4) Introduction for passage or approval.
(a) Ordinances, resolutions and other matters or subjects
requiring action by the Council shall be introduced and
sponsored by a member of the Council; except that the
Manager or Attorney may present ordinances, resolutions and
other matters or subjects to the Council and any Councilperson
may assume sponsorship thereof by moving that such
ordinances, resolutions, matters or subjects be adopted;
otherwise, they shall not be considered.
(b) Ordinances and resolutions shall be called up for action on
motion of a member of the Council.
(c) Upon introduction, an ordinance shall be properly published in
the manner required by general law and must be subject to a
public hearing before it can be adopted. No ordinance shall
take effect less than 20 days after its final passage by Council,
unless the Council shall adopt a resolution declaring an
emergency and at least 2/3 of all the members of the Council
vote in favor of such resolution.
(d) Resolutions and awarding of bids, unless laid over by a
majority vote of the Council, shall be acted upon the day of
introduction or presentation. The public shall have an
opportunity to be heard before any bid is awarded.
B. Contracts.
(1) Township Council as contracting unit. Unless otherwise expressly
provided herein, by ordinance or by law, the Township Council
shall, as the governing body, constitute the sole and exclusive
contracting unit of the Township as such is defined in N.J.S.A.
40A:11-2, and no other board, commission, committee, officer,
department, branch or agency of the Township (hereafter "board")
shall have any power or authority to enter into, commit or bind the
Township to any contract, obligation or commitment (hereafter
"contract"), or contract to incur any liability or expend any money
whatsoever, whether for the performance of work or furnishing
materials or otherwise.
§ 10-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-11
1:23
(2) Appropriation required; compliance with section. No contract shall
be entered into, nor any liability incurred nor any money expended:
(a) For which no appropriation has been provided, or in excess of
the amount appropriated, as provided by law; or
(b) Except in strict accordance with the provisions of this
subsection;
(c) Any contract or commitment made in violation of the foregoing
shall be null and void and no moneys shall be paid thereon.
(3) Contracts under the amount authorized in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2 of the
Local Public Contracts Law.
(a) The Township Manager shall, subject to appropriations
authorization as provided by law, have the authority, acting
alone, to enter into any contract or agreement or otherwise
incur any liability or expend money on behalf of the Township:
[1] For the performance of any work or the furnishing or
hiring of materials or supplies if the cost or price does not
exceed in the aggregate the amount authorized in N.J.S.A.
40A:11-2 of the Local Public Contracts Law in the fiscal
year, and is thus exempt from public advertising for bids
and bidding therefor, all in strict accordance with the
criteria for such exemption set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-3;
and
[2] For all other types of purchases, contracts or agreements
which may be exempt from public advertising for bids and
bidding therefor as provided in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5;
provided, the liability incurred or money expended or to be
expended does not exceed in the aggregate the amount
authorized in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2 of the Local Public
Contracts Law in the fiscal year, as provided for under the
criteria in Subsection B(3)(a) above.
(b) All contracts authorized in this Subsection B(3) shall be in
writing, approved in advance as to form by the Township
Attorney, and shall be entered into by the Manager either: (a)
on the Manager's own initiative or upon direction of the
Township Council, or (b) upon the written request submitted
on behalf of any board or officer of the Township. If submitted
to the Manager in accordance with paragraph (b) hereof by any
board or officer, and in accordance with appropriation
authorization, it shall be entered into by the Manager within
two weeks after receipt of such submission, or by the next
succeeding regular meeting of the Township Council,
whichever event later occurs, failing which for any reason the
request shall be referred by the Manager to the Township
Council, together with a full report and recommendation
§ 10-11 LAWRENCE CODE § 10-11
1:24
thereof, and the Township Council shall thereupon assume
complete jurisdiction over disposition thereof.
(c) The contracts entered into by the Manager pursuant to this
Subsection B(3) need not previously be presented to the
Township Council in accordance with Subsection A(2) above,
but full itemized reports of all such contracts shall be rendered
to the Township Council for all such contracts entered into
during the preceding calendar month not later than the second
regular meeting of the Township Council in the following
month.
(4) Contracts over the amount authorized in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2 of the
Local Public Contracts Law.
(a) The Mayor and Municipal Clerk shall, subject to appropriations
authorization as provided by law, and upon approval by
resolution of the Township Council, have the authority to enter
into any contract or agreement or otherwise incur any liability
or expend money on behalf of the following:
[1] For the performance of any work or the furnishing or
hiring of material or supplies if the cost or price exceeds in
the aggregate the amount authorized in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2
of the Local Public Contracts Law in the fiscal year, and is
thus subject to the requirements for public advertising for
bids and bidding therefor, all as set forth in and in strict
accordance with the criteria for such requirements set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-4; and
[2] For all other types of purchases, contracts or agreements
which may be exempt from public advertising for bids and
bidding therefor as provided in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-5;
provided, the liability incurred or money expended or to be
expended exceeds in the aggregate the amount authorized
in N.J.S.A. 40A:11-2 of the Local Public Contracts Law in
the fiscal year, as provided for under the criteria in
Subsection B(4)(a) above.
(b) All contracts authorized in this Subsection B(4) shall, before
presentation to the Township Council, be in writing, and shall
have been approved in advance as to form and legality by the
Township Attorney and shall have been examined as to
administrative consideration by the Manager or his authorized
representative, who shall otherwise comply with all the
requirements of §§ 10-11A(2), above, and 10-29D of this Code.
Such contracts may be initiated either: (a) on the Township
Council's own initiative, (b) on the Manager's own initiative, or
(c) upon the written request submitted on behalf of any board
or officer of the Township. If submitted to the Manager in
accordance with paragraph (c) by any board or officer, and in
§ 10-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-11
1:25
§ 10-12. Dealings with administrative officers and employees.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:69A-91, the Council and its members will deal with
administrative officers and employees solely through the Manager, and may
not give orders to any of the Manager's subordinates, either publicly or
privately, except as may be otherwise required in the event of a legislative
investigation pursuant to the Charter.
§ 10-13. Agenda.
accordance with appropriation authorization, it shall be
prepared and transmitted to the Township Council by the
Manager within two weeks after receipt of such submission,
or by the next succeeding regular meeting of the Township
Council, whichever event later occurs, in compliance with
§§ 10-11A(2), above, and 10-29D of this Code.
(5) Purpose. The purpose of this subsection shall be deemed to be
solely the administrative and budgetary coordination of all
contracting authority by the Township in order to better effectuate
and consolidate implementation of the requirements of the Local
Budget Law, N.J.S.A. 40a:4-1 et seq., and the Local Public Contracts
Law, N.J.S.A. 40a:11-1 et seq., but nothing herein shall be
construed to impair or affect: (a) the right of any board or officer to
select its own staff, as provided by ordinance or by law; (b) the right
of any board or officer to act separately as an independent
"contracting unit" if and to the extent expressly so provided by
ordinance or by law; or (c) the independent functions of any board
or officer in carrying out its duties as provided by ordinance or by
law.
(6) Petty cash. Notwithstanding any other provision hereof to the
contrary, the Township Council may by resolution, from time to
time, in its discretion establish and fund petty cash accounts and
establish procedures for the disbursement of funds therein by such
board or officer in such amounts and in such manner as may be
prescribed by such resolution in accordance with law.
A. Any member of Council, the Municipal Attorney, or the Township
Manager on behalf of the Administration, may place an item on the
agenda for Council meetings.
B. All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, documents or
other matters to be submitted to the Council shall be delivered to the
Municipal Clerk no later than 12:00 noon on the Wednesday prior to the
meeting date. [Amended 3-5-2019 by Ord. No. 2321-19]
C. The Municipal Clerk shall immediately prepare an agenda of such
matters, together with such additional matters already received, in
conformity with the prescribed order of business as hereinafter
provided and shall make a copy available to each member of the Council
§ 10-11 LAWRENCE CODE § 10-13
1:26
§ 10-14. Presiding Officer.
The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the Council, and the Chairman
Pro-Tempore may preside as otherwise provided by this chapter. The
Presiding Officer may vote on all questions, his name being called last.
§ 10-15. Procedures of council meetings. [Amended by Ord. No.
1454-96; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
by 5:00 p.m. on the Friday prior to the meeting date in the Municipal
Clerk's office.
D. The Municipal Clerk shall also furnish the Manager and the Municipal
Attorney with a copy of such agenda in the Municipal Clerk's office at
5:00 p.m. on the Friday prior to the Council meeting.
E. The Municipal Clerk shall promptly post a copy of the agenda in the
Municipal Building and shall distribute copies to any person upon
request.
A. Call to order.
(1) The Mayor shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the
meeting, and shall immediately call the Council to order.
(2) In the absence of the Mayor, the Municipal Clerk shall call the
Council to order. The Clerk shall then determine whether a quorum
is present and in the event a quorum is present call for the election
of a Chairman Pro Tempore. Upon the appearance of the Mayor the
Chairman Pro Tempore shall forthwith relinquish the chair upon
the conclusion of the business immediately before the Council.
B. Roll call. At the beginning of each meeting of the Council, the Municipal
Clerk shall call the roll of the members in alphabetical order, and the
names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. If any member
appears after the roll call, the Clerk shall enter in the minutes the time
of attendance of such member.
C. Quorum. A majority of the whole number of members of the Council
shall constitute a quorum. If a quorum is not present within 30 minutes
after the hour appointed for the meeting of the Council, the person
presiding may thereupon adjourn the meeting until the next day unless
by unanimous agreement those members present select another hour
or day. The names of the members present and their action at such
meeting shall be recorded in the minutes by the Municipal Clerk.
D. Order of business. At each regular meeting of the Council, the order of
business shall be as follows: [Amended 1-22-2013 by Ord. No.
2147-13]
(1) Mayor's Welcome and Statement of Proper Notice.
§ 10-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-15
1:27
§ 10-16. Communications to Council members.
All communications, documents and correspondence regarding any
business of the Township which is addressed to the Mayor or to any member
of Council shall be distributed to all other Council members upon receipt.
The date and time of distribution to the Mayor and Council members shall
be stamped upon the communications, documents and correspondence by
the Municipal Clerk.
§ 10-17. Reading of minutes.
Unless a reading of the minutes of a Council meeting is requested by a
majority of the Council, such minutes when signed by the Mayor and the
Municipal Clerk may be approved without reading; provided that the Clerk,
at least three full working days preceding the day of the meeting, shall
deliver a copy thereof to each member of the Council.
(2) Pledge of Allegiance.
(3) Roll Call.
(4) Special Proclamations, Recognitions and Presentations.
(5) Public Participation - five-minute limitation per speaker.
(6) Review and Revision of Agenda.
(7) Adoption of Minutes of Previous Meetings.
(8) Awarding and/or Rejecting of Bids*.
(9) Introduction of Ordinances.
(10) Adoption of Ordinances*.
(11) Manager's Report.
(12) Attorney's Report.
(13) Clerk's Report.
(14) Old Business.
(15) New Business.
(16) Public Participation - three-minute limitation per speaker.
(17) Resolutions.
(18) Council Initiatives and Liaison Reports.
(19)Written Communications.
(20) Executive Session (if authorized).
(21) Adjournment.
§ 10-15 LAWRENCE CODE § 10-18
1:28
§ 10-18. Voting.
§ 10-19. Committees.
§ 10-20. Appointments.
A. The vote upon every motion, resolution or ordinance shall be taken by
roll call in alphabetical order except that the Mayor shall be polled last,
and the yeas and nays shall be entered upon the minutes. No ordinance
or resolution may be adopted without the affirmative vote of a majority
of all the members of the Council.
B. Upon the call of the roll no member shall discuss or explain his vote;
and the silence of any Councilman who is present shall be recorded as
an affirmative vote unless he stated directly that he abstains.
C. The minutes of each meeting shall be signed by the presiding officer
and by the Municipal Clerk.
A. There shall be no standing committees of the Council, other than the
Committee of the Whole. The rules of the Council shall govern the
meetings of the Committee of the Whole so far as applicable.
B. Special committees of the Council for legislative purposes may be
appointed by the Mayor pursuant to resolution. No special committee
shall proceed to the consideration of any matter referred to it unless a
majority of the members of the committee shall be present. All
committee meetings shall be held at the Township Municipal Building
or in any other public building. No special committee shall report on a
matter referred to it at the same meeting at which the reference is
made, except by the unanimous consent of the members of the
committee.
A. Appointment of Township officials. Appointments to office by the
Council may be made by the affirmative vote of a majority of Council.
Whenever the Council intends to act upon an appointment of a
Township Official, including an appointment to fill a vacancy on the
Council, it shall give notice of such intention at least one week before
acting on the appointment; provided, that the Council may, on a fourfifths
vote of the members thereof, dispense with the notice of intention
to act and may make or approve such appointment forthwith. This rule
shall be applicable whether an appointment is to be made in advance of
or after the expiration of a term of office, or to fill a vacancy created by
resignation, death or retirement.
B. Appointments by Council.
(1) With respect to appointments to be made by the Council, any
member of the Council may nominate as many candidates as there
are offices to be filled. The Council will consider such nominations
at a regular meeting of the Council. Where there is a single office to
be filled, the sense of the Council on the appointment shall be taken
§ 10-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-20
1:29
§ 10-21. Rules of debate.
§ 10-22. Manner of addressing Council.
as to each nominee in alphabetical order, and the first nominee to
receive a majority shall be deemed appointed.
(2) Where there is more than one office to fill, such as on a board,
committee or authority, the same procedure shall be followed with
respect to each office separately until the total number of
appointments to be made has been completed.
(3) In the discretion of the chair, a group of nominations may be
considered at once where there is no apparent division in the
Council as to the nominees included in the group.
A. Question under consideration. When a question is presented and
seconded, it is under consideration and no motion shall be received
thereafter, except to adjourn, to lay on the table, to postpone or to
amend, until the question is decided. These motions shall have
preference in the order in which they are mentioned and the first two
shall be decided without debate.
B. Presiding Officer. Such member of the Council as may be presiding,
may move, second and debate from the chair, subject only to such
limitations of debate as are by these rules imposed upon all members,
and shall not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a
Councilman by reason of his being the Mayor or Presiding Officer.
C. Getting the floor. Every member desiring to speak for any purpose
whatsoever shall address the Presiding Officer, and upon recognition,
shall confine himself to the question under debate, avoiding all
personalities and indecorous language. A member may only speak once
on the same subject but may speak to clear up a matter of fact or
explain a material part of this speech, except that a member after
moving a question may once again speak on the same subject.
D. Interruption. A member once recognized shall not be interrupted when
speaking unless it be to call him to order or as herein otherwise
provided. If a member while speaking be called to order, he shall cease
speaking until the question of order be determined by the Presiding
Officer, and if determined to be in order, he shall be permitted to
proceed.
E. Appeals. Any member may appeal to the Council from the decision of
the Chairman upon a question of order. The chair shall thereupon
submit to the Council the question "Shall the decision of the chair be
sustained?" and the Council without debate shall decide by a majority
vote.
F. Privilege of closing debate. The Councilman moving the adoption of an
ordinance or resolution shall have the privilege of closing the debate.
§ 10-20 LAWRENCE CODE § 10-22
1:30
§ 10-23. Decorum at Council meetings.
§ 10-24. Enforcement by sergeant-at-arms.
The Chief of Police or such members of the Police Department as he may
designate shall be the sergeant-at-arms of the Council meetings. He shall
carry out all orders and instructions given by the Presiding Officer for the
purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the Council meetings.
§ 10-25. Preparation of minutes.
A. In the proper order of business at all meetings of Council, a person may
address the Council upon recognition by the Chair. A person addressing
the Council shall step up to the microphone, shall give his name and
address in an audible tone of voice for the record, and shall have the
right to address the Council without limitation as to time. All remarks
shall be addressed to the person, other than members of the Council
and the Council as a body and not to any member thereof. No person
having the floor shall be permitted to enter into any discussion, either
directly or through a member of the Council, without the permission of
the Presiding Officer. No question shall be asked a Councilman except
through the Presiding Officer.
B. Notwithstanding any ordinance or provision to the contrary, a person
shall have the right to address the Council without limitation as to time
regarding any proposed resolution on the agenda prior to Council
voting on said resolution, or any proposed ordinance which is on the
agenda for second reading by Council.
A. By Council members. While the Council is in session, the members must
preserve order and decorum, and a member shall neither by
conversation or otherwise, except as herein provided, delay or interrupt
the proceedings, the peace of the Council, disturb any member while
speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the Council or its Presiding
Officer.
B. By other persons. Any person making impertinent or slanderous
remarks or who shall become boisterous while addressing the Council
shall forthwith be barred from further audience before the Council by
the Presiding Officer unless permission to continue or again address
the Council be granted by the majority vote of the Council.
A. Generally. The minute records generally should contain every formal
action of the governing body whether such action is represented by a
motion, resolution or an ordinance.
B. Remarks of Councilmen. A Councilman may request, through the
Presiding Officer, the privilege of having an abstract of his statement on
any subject before the Council, not exceeding 100 words, entered in the
minutes. If the Council consents thereto, such abstracts shall be
entered in the minutes.
§ 10-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-25
1:31
§ 10-26. Robert's Rules of Order.
To the extent not inconsistent with this chapter or with the Charter, Robert's
Rules of Order shall govern the meetings and proceedings of the Council.
§ 10-27. Suspension of rules of procedure.
Any of the rules of procedure of the Council may be suspended by
unanimous consent of the Council members present.
C. Council Committee reports. A detailed report given by a Council
Committee and requested to be made a part of the minutes must be
prepared in writing and submitted to the Municipal Clerk. It shall be
included in the minutes with the consent of the Council.
D. Other matters. The judgment of the Municipal Clerk shall serve as a
guide on the question of selection of details to be included in the
minutes in the absence of formal action by the Council.
§ 10-25 LAWRENCE CODE § 10-27
1:32
ARTICLE IV
Township Manager
§ 10-28. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be selected and appointed solely on the basis of his
executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to his
actual experience in, or his knowledge of, accepted practice in respect
to the duties of his office as hereinafter set forth. At the time of his
appointment, he need not be a resident of the Township, but within six
months after his appointment and thereafter during his tenure in office he
shall reside within the Township.
§ 10-29. Powers and duties.
The Manager, subject to policies established by the Council, shall:
A. Be the chief executive and administrative officer of the Township and
supervise all departments of the Township government.
B. Execute all laws and ordinances of the Township.
C. Appoint and remove all department heads, office directors and other
officers, subordinates and assistants for whose selection or removal no
other method is provided by the Charter or this chapter; except that he
may authorize the head of a department to appoint and remove
subordinates in such department; and report all appointments or
removals at the next meeting thereafter of the Council.
D. Negotiate contracts for the Township subject to the approval of the
Council; make recommendations concerning the nature and location of
Township improvements, and execute Township improvements as
determined by the Council.
E. See that all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the Township or its
inhabitants in any statute, public utility franchise or other contract are
faithfully kept and performed, and upon knowledge of any violations
call the same to the attention of the Council.
F. Attend all meetings of the Council with the right to take part in the
discussions, but without the right to vote.
G. Recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as he may deem
necessary or expedient, keep the Council advised of financial conditions
of the Township, make reports to the Council as requested by it and at
least once a year make an annual report to the Council on the
administration of the Township government.
H. Investigate at any time the affairs of any officer or department of the
Township.
§ 10-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-29
1:33
§ 10-30. Delegation of administrative duties.
The Manager may, in his discretion, allocate, assign or delegate functions
or powers to a department head for more efficient administration of the
Township government; provided that any such delegation, allocation or
assignment shall not relieve the Manager of any of his responsibilities under
the Charter or this Code, nor shall it be inconsistent with any express
requirement of the Charter or Code. Any such delegation shall be in writing
and shall be promptly reported to the Council and recorded in its minutes.
§ 10-31. Acting Manager.
The Council may designate a qualified administrative officer to act as
Manager during a vacancy in the office. This individual may be either an
officer of the Township or a nonemployee with demonstrated experience.
The Manager may designate a qualified administrative officer of the
Township to perform his duties during his temporary absence or disability.
In the event of his failure to make such designation, the Council may by
resolution appoint an officer of the municipality to perform the duties of
the Manager during such absence or disability until he shall return or his
disability shall cease.
§ 10-32. Removal.
The Manager shall serve the Council, and shall be subject to removal as
provided by the Charter. A resolution of removal shall not be in order
unless and until the Manager shall have been given written notice of the
intention to offer it at least 10 days prior thereto. At least 30 days before
such removal shall become effective, the Council shall by a majority vote
of its members adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reasons for the
removal. The Manager may reply in writing and may request a public
hearing, which shall be held not less than 20 days nor more than 30
days after the filing of such request. After such public hearing, if one be
requested, and after full consideration, the Council by majority vote of
its members may adopt a final resolution of removal. By the preliminary
resolution, the Council may suspend the Manager from duty, but shall in
I. Act as head of any department in the event of a vacancy or the absence
or disability of a department head, or designate another Township
officer to serve temporarily in such event.
J. Have custody, management and control of all Township property which
is not otherwise allocated or assigned to a department by this Code.
K. With the approval of the Council, arrange for such insurance and
suretyship coverage as may be required to protect the Township against
risks of loss from whatever cause. All insurance policies and surety
bonds shall be filed for safekeeping with the Township Clerk.
L. Perform such other duties as may be required by Charter, ordinance or
resolution of the Council.
§ 10-29 LAWRENCE CODE § 10-32
1:34
any case cause to be paid him forthwith any unpaid balance of his salary
and his salary for the next three calendar months following adoption of the
preliminary resolution.
§ 10-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-32
1:35

ARTICLE V
Personnel
§ 10-33. Personnel management.
A. Merit system. All appointments and promotions in the civil service of
the Township shall be made according to merit and fitness in
accordance with the requirements of the constitution, statues and
applicable regulations of the state.
B. Personnel rules and policies. The Manager shall prepare and administer
a system of personnel rules and policies which shall be approved by the
Council, subject to the requirements of the State Civil Service System
and not inconsistent with outstanding collective bargaining
agreements. Such rules and policies shall be adopted by resolution and
shall include provision for:
(1) The classification of all Township positions, based on the duties,
authority and responsibility of each position, with adequate
provision for reclassification of any position whenever warranted
by changed circumstances.
(2) A pay plan for all Township positions.
(3) The policies and procedures regulating reduction in force and
removal of employees.
(4) The hours of work, attendance regulations and provisions for sick
and vacation leave.
(5) The policies and procedures governing persons holding provisional
appointments.
(6) The policies and procedures governing relationships with employee
organizations.
(7) Policies regarding in-service training programs.
(8) Other practices and procedures necessary or desirable to the
administration of a sound personnel system.
C. Grievance procedure. The Manager, with the approval of Council, shall
establish procedures for the hearing and adjustment of employee's
grievances, and shall communicate these procedures to all affected
personnel. The Manager shall keep the Council informed on all
grievances under consideration and the action taken thereon.
D. Full-time service required for officers and employees. Every Municipal
Officer and employee whose compensation is established on a full time
basis shall devote his entire time during business hours to the duties of
his office.
§ 10-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-33
1:37
E. Dual appointments. The Manager may, with the approval of the Council,
serve as head of one or more departments. The Manager may appoint
the same person to serve as head of two or more departments; and a
department head may also be appointed by the Manager to serve as
head of a division within his department.
F. Temporary absence or disability. In the event of the temporary absence
or disability of any administrative officer or employee, or in the event of
a vacancy in any office, the Manager may designate a qualified person
to serve in such office temporarily in an acting capacity, and any such
appointee shall have all the functions, powers and duties of an
incumbent until such absence or disability terminates or such vacancy
is filled by appointment.
G. Surety bonds.
(1) Every officer or employee of the Township who, by virtue of his
office or position, is entrusted with the receipt, custody or
expenditure of public money or funds and any other officer or
employee who may be required to do so by the Council shall, before
entering upon the duties of his office or position, execute and
deliver a surety bond in such amount as may be fixed by resolution
of Council, binding him to the Township in its corporate name and
conditioned upon the true and faithful performance of his duty.
Each officer or employee required by law to give bond shall execute
such a bond with sufficient surety and deliver the same to the
Clerk; except that the Clerk shall deliver his bond to the Director of
Finance-Treasurer before he enters upon the discharge of the
duties of his office or employment.
(2) If any officer or employee shall neglect to execute and deliver his
bond as herein required within 30 days after due notification of
election or appointment, his office may be declared vacant by the
Council.
(3) In every case in which any person is required by the laws of the
state or by any ordinance to give bond for the faithful performance
of his duties, such bond shall be secured by a corporate surety
authorized to do business in this state and the premium therefor
shall be paid by the Municipality. Each such bond shall be approved
by the Township Attorney as to form and sufficiency, and nothing in
this section shall be construed to prevent the use of one or more
blanket bonds when so approved.
H. Delivery of funds and records. Upon the termination of office or the
employment of any officer or employee, that employee shall forthwith
deliver to his successor, or if there be no successor to the Clerk or other
person who may be designated by the Council to receive the same, all
money, papers, books, memoranda, accounts and data of any nature
whatsoever pertaining to his office.
I. Political activity. A Township officer or employee shall not:
§ 10-33 LAWRENCE CODE § 10-33
1:38
§ 10-34. Financial disclosure.
(1) Use his official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering
with or affecting the result of an election or a nomination for office.
(2) Directly or indirectly coerce, attempt to coerce, command or advise
a state or local officer or employee to pay, lend or contribute
anything of value to a party, committee, organization, agency or
person for political purposes.
J. Unexcused absences of a board or committee member. A member of any
Board or Committee who does not have a statutory term or tenure of
office and who has been absent inexcusably from three successive
regular meetings of such Board or Committee may be removed from
office by Council after notice and an opportunity to explain the
absences.
K. Conflicts of interests.
(1) A Township officer or employee, elected or appointed, paid or
unpaid, shall not:
(a) Be interested, directly or indirectly, in any contract with the
Township or in the compensation for work done or for
materials or supplies furnished to the Township or to any
contractor or other person furnishing the same, nor shall be
participate in any profits of such contractor or other person or
receive any compensation, commission, gift or other reward
for his services except the salary or fees established by law or
by ordinance or resolution of the Council.
(b) Accept or solicit anything of value as consideration for or in
connection with the discharge of his official duties other than
the fee or compensation prescribed pursuant to law.
(c) Engage in any business or transaction or accept any private
employment or commitment, or have any financial or other
personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with
the proper discharge of his official duties in the public interest
or which would tend to impair his independence of judgment or
action in the performance of his official duties.
(d) Accept any gift or gratuity, whether in the form of service, loan
or promise, or in any other form, from any person, firm or
corporation which would tend to influence him in the discharge
of his duties.
(2) No officer or employee shall represent private interests before the
Council or before any Board, Committee or agency of the Township.
Nor shall any officer or employee represent private interests in any
action or proceedings against the interest of the Township in any
litigation to which the Township is a party.
§ 10-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-34
1:39
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter:
GIFT — Any money or thing of value received other than as income,
and for which a consideration of equal or greater value is not received,
but shall not include any political contribution reported as otherwise
required by law, any loan made in the ordinary course of business, nor
any gift received from a member of a person's household or from a
relative within the third degree of consanguinity of such person or his
spouse, or from the spouse of any such relative.
INCOME — Any money or thing of value received, or to be received
as a claim on future services, whether in the form of a fee, expense,
allowance, forbearance, forgiveness, interest, dividend, royalty, rent,
capital gain, or any other form of recompense, or any combination
thereof.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL — Members of the Township Council, Planning
Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment of the Township of Lawrence,
the Municipal Manager, Municipal Clerk, Director of Finance-
Treasurer, Engineer, Chief of Police, Tax Assessor, Tax Collector,
Community Development Director, Comptroller, Director of Housing
and Redevelopment, Director on Aging, Public Works Director,
Construction Official or Zoning Officer, Recreation Director and Health
Director who hold such office on April 15 of any year, or who held such
office during any portion of the calendar year ended on the immediately
preceding December 31. The term "public official" shall also mean any
candidate in any general election for any of the foregoing offices which
are elective, and any new appointee to any of the foregoing offices
which are appointive.
B. Disclosure. Each public official shall file annually with the Clerk of the
Township, on or before the 15th day of April in each year for the
calendar year ended on the immediately preceding December 31, a
verified personal financial disclosure statement which shall contain
under oath or affirmation the following information and thereafter be a
public record available for inspection and copying without fee during
normal business hours of the Township Clerk's office:
(1) The source but not the amount of all income in the amount of
$1,000 or more received by such public official or the public
official's spouse during the preceding calendar year. Amounts of
income realized from various sources totaling, but with no single
source accounting for, $1,000 or more, shall be aggregated and
identified as to the profession, employment, business or particular
enterprise or investment which was the source of such income;
(2) The source and amount of any gifts received from any single source
having an aggregate value of $200 or more by such public official
or the public official's spouse during the preceding calendar year;
(3) The name and address of all business organizations or labor unions
in which such public official or the public official's spouse has been
§ 10-34 LAWRENCE CODE § 10-34
1:40
an officer, director, owner, trustee, employee, partner or limited
partner, or has had any fiduciary relationship at any time during
the preceding calendar year;
(4) The name and address of each business organization in which such
public official or public official's spouse holds or at any time during
the preceding calendar year period held, stocks, securities or other
ownership or debt interest;
(5) Each creditor to whom such public official or public official's
spouse (or both) owes, or has owed during the preceding calendar
year, amounts in excess of $1,000. Installment loans owed to a
vendor of goods arising out of a retail transaction, and loans owed
to any financial institution regulated by the state or federal
government need not be disclosed;
(6) The address and legal description of all real estate in the state in
which such public official or public official's spouse (or both) had
any direct or indirect interest during the preceding calendar year;
(7) No provision of this section shall be interpreted to prevent any
public official or public official's spouse from filing more detailed
information that is required or any explanation pertaining to any
item disclosed.
C. Form of financial disclosure statement. The Township Clerk shall
prepare and submit for consideration of the Township Council a
financial disclosure reporting form to be used in the implementation of
this section, which shall, to the extent consistent with the provisions of
this section, conform to the State of New Jersey's form of "Financial
Disclosure Statement for Public Officer and Spouse" prepared pursuant
to Executive Order No. 15 signed January 7, 1975. The form may be
amended from time to time by the Township Council on its own
initiative or following a recommendation by the Township Clerk not
later than September 1 of each year for use both by candidates in the
November general election of that year, when applicable, and on the
next succeeding April 15 filing date.
D. Implementation and enforcement.
(1) The Township Clerk shall deliver a written advance compliance
notice(s) to each public official as defined herein prior to their
respective applicable filing dates advising of the availability of the
current financial disclosure reporting form with applicable
ordinances in the Clerk's office and of their next succeeding
applicable filing date, in accordance with the following schedule:
§ 10-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-34
1:41
Addressee
Ordinance Compliance
Notice(s)
Incumbent public official Not later than the last day of
February and again by the last
day of March for the April 15
filing date in each year.
Candidates for election as
public official
Within one month after
nomination for the elective
public office and again not later
than 90 days before the general
election for the filing date of
two months before the general
election.
Newly appointed public official Within one week of the effective
date of initial appointment for
the filing date 30 days
thereafter.
(2) Any public official as defined herein may, for good cause and upon
request to and as determined by resolution of the Township Council
in its discretion, be granted a reasonable extension of time for
compliance consistent with the nature of the good cause shown.
(3) In the event a required filing has not been made by the date
specified herein and no applicable extension of time has been
requested or granted, before any violation of this section shall be
deemed to have occurred, the Township Clerk shall prepare and
deliver a delinquency notice within three days after any omitted
filing date giving the public official to the end of the 10th day after
the prescribed filing date to comply herewith, failing which there
shall be deemed a violation of this section, and, in addition to the
penalties for violation set forth herein, the public official shall then
be deemed to have resigned and the office declared vacant
retroactively as of the prescribed omitted filing date.
(4) Service of the foregoing notices by the Township Clerk shall either
be by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the public official's last known residence address, or
both. Wherever applicable in the context of this section, the term
public official shall also include the public official's spouse, and any
dates for notices or filings herein which occur on Saturdays,
Sundays, or legal holidays observed by the Township shall be
deemed extended by the number of business days thereby lost.
E. Violation and penalties. Any public official or public official's spouse
who willfully and knowingly fails or refuses to file a financial disclosure
statement pursuant to this section, or who files a statement which is
false, misleading, inaccurate or incomplete in any substantial or
§ 10-34 LAWRENCE CODE § 10-34
1:42
§ 10-35. Legal defense of officers and employees.
material manner, shall be deemed in violation thereof and shall be liable
for the penalty stated in Chapter I, Article III.
A. Upon the commencement of any legal action, civil or criminal, against
any officer or employee of the Township of Lawrence individually and
based upon any act or omission of such officer or employee in an official
capacity arising out of or incidental to the performance of official duties
such that the Township of Lawrence has an interest in the matter, the
officer or employee concerned was acting or purporting to act in
discharge of a duty imposed or authorized by law, and such actions or
inactions were taken in good faith, the officer or employee concerned
shall, within three business days of service of the summons or
complaint, deliver duplicate copies of the same each to the Township
Manager and to the applicable Department supervisor with a request
for determination by the Township of its obligation, if any, to provide
legal defense against such action.
B. The Township Manager shall obtain copies of any files pertaining to the
matter in the possession of the Department supervisor concerned or
elsewhere in Township files and, after conferring with the Township
Attorney, make a recommendation to the Township Council, enclosing
the applicable file with the summons/complaint, respecting its legal
defense at the next succeeding conference of the Township Council.
C. The Township Council, at its next succeeding regular meeting
immediately following the Township Manager's recommendation, shall,
by resolution, make a determination either:
(1) That the Township is not obligated by law to provide legal defense
in the matter, which decision shall be final; or
(2) Is conditionally so obligated.
D. The Township Manager shall forthwith notify the officer or employee
concerned of the Township Council's decision, and, in the event it is
affirmative with respect to a conditional obligation to provide legal
defense, the procedures in Subsection E hereof shall apply.
E. A defendant/respondent officer or employee notified of Township
Council's decision to provide conditionally for the legal defense of any
action against such officer or employee individually shall be free to
select an attorney of his/her own choosing subject to the following
conditions:
(1) A written retainer agreement shall be entered into with such
attorney and submitted promptly to the Township Council for
approval to its satisfaction by resolution based upon a reasonable
prevailing hourly rate, with retainer fee permitted only if credited
against hours expended, and providing for payment of necessary
disbursements. No legal services other than of an emergent nature
§ 10-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-35
1:43
shall be performed unless and until said retainer agreement has
been so approved prior thereto.
(2) At the final conclusion of the trial of the action, the Attorney shall
submit on Township invoice forms a sworn, itemized statement of
the services rendered and disbursements incurred, a copy of the
court's judgment or order and opinion (if any), and a concise
statement, attaching pleadings, transcripts or exhibits or portions
thereof as may be necessary in support of the asserted Township
obligation to pay for such defense in lieu of reimbursement to the
officer or employee concerned.
(3) The Township Council shall promptly thereafter and by resolution
determine, in its sole and exclusive discretion, whether the
Township is legally obligated to pay for the legal defense of the
matter, in whole or in part, in lieu of reimbursement to the officer
or employee concerned, as may be required by law and based upon
the record submitted by the attorney concerned pursuant to the
foregoing Subsection E(2) charges therefor to be allocated to the
budget of the department concerned unless otherwise determined
by council.
F. Nothing herein shall be construed to authorize or apply to any appeal to
be taken by or on behalf of the officer or employee concerned, and if an
appeal be taken against a trial judgment or verdict in favor of any such
officer or employee, such appeal shall be deemed to be the
commencement of a new action for purpose of compliance with this
section.
G. In any civil action in which the Township of Lawrence is the principal
defendant and individual officers or employees are either ex officio,
nominal or permissive parties defendant against whom no personal
liability is asserted, the Township or applicable Board Attorney shall
provide representation for all parties defendant unless the Township
Council determines otherwise either on its own initiative or on request
of any individual defendant.
H. In any action in which the Township of Lawrence is not a defendant but
in which more than one officer or employee are individual defendants,
they shall confer promptly in good faith on possible selection of a single
attorney mutually acceptable to all of them, failing which agreement
the Township Council, concurrently with an affirmative finding of
conditional obligation set forth in paragraph d. hereof, designate an
attorney by resolution in and binding insofar as the Township's financial
responsibility is concerned.
I. This section is to be deemed procedural except only for responsibility
for attorneys' fees and disbursements, and shall not be construed to
enlarge, diminish, alter, amend, or otherwise provide for the scope of
Township responsibility, if any, for court costs, compensatory or
punitive damages, penalties or fines, all of which shall be determined,
§ 10-35 LAWRENCE CODE § 10-35
1:44
§ 10-36. Eligibility for Defined Contribution Retirement Program.
[Added by Ord. No. 1989-08]
as may be applicable, in the manner provided by law, or, in the absence
of governing by law, by resolution.
A. Findings. The State Legislature recently adopted N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et
seq. to create the Defined Contribution Retirement Program to provide
retirement benefits to various county and municipal officials; and
N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2 requires the governing body of each county,
municipality, and other local entity to adopt, as appropriate, either a
resolution or ordinance to determine the positions that substantially
similar in nature to the advice and consent of the Senate for
appointments by the governor of the state, pursuant to guidelines or
policy that shall be established by the Local Finance Board in the
Department of Community Affairs, and for which officials appointed to
such positions shall be eligible for and shall participate in the Defined
Contribution Retirement Program, subject to the provisions of law. The
Mayor and Council of the Township of Lawrence has considered the
guidelines issued by the Local Finance Board.
B. Positions eligible for Defined Contribution Retirement Program.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 43:15C-2, the following positions are deemed to be
eligible for and shall participate in the Defined Contribution Retirement
Program:
(1) Municipal Manager.
(2) Municipal Engineer.
(3) Municipal Prosecutor.
(4) Municipal Court Judge.
C. Positions exempt from Defined Contribution Retirement Program.
Individuals serving in the following positions are exempt from Defined
Contribution Retirement Program membership, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
43:15C-2.
(1) Certified Health Officer.
(2) Tax Collector.
(3) Chief Financial Officer.
(4) Construction Code Official.
(5) Qualified Purchasing Agent.
(6) Tax Assessor.
(7) Municipal Planner.
(8) Registered Municipal Clerk.
§ 10-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-36
1:45
(9) Licensed Uniform Subcode Inspector.
(10) Principal Public Works Manager.
D. If an individual is appointed to one of the positions listed in Subsection
B and the individual is not serving in a position as described in
Subsection C above, the Pension Certifying Officer of the municipality
may determine that the individual is not required to join the Defined
Contribution Retirement Program if that individual: (1) was an active
participant in the Public Employee Retirement System on July 1, 2007,
and continuously since that time; or (2) has been appointed pursuant to
a valid promotional process; or (3) is appointed on a temporary, interim,
or "acting" basis to a position requiring state certification as set forth in
Subsection C herein, and is in pursuit of the required certification; or
(4) meets such other exceptions that may be approved by the Local
Finance Board or the Division of Pensions and Benefits.
E. Implementation of sections. This section shall be implemented,
construed and subject to the aforesaid Chapter 92 of the Laws of 2007
(N.J.S.A. 43:15C-1 et seq.) as amended from time to time, and any
regulations or guidance documents from the Local Finance Board or the
Division of Pensions and Benefits.
F. Filing of chapter required. A copy of this chapter shall be filed with the
Director of the Division of Pensions and Benefits of the New Jersey
Department of Treasury.
§ 10-36 LAWRENCE CODE § 10-36
1:46
ARTICLE VI
Officers and Employees
§ 10-37. Township Attorney.
A. Retainer. A Township Attorney shall be appointed and retained by the
Council within the limit of available appropriations.
B. Qualifications; term. The Township Attorney shall be a qualified
attorney of the State of New Jersey, and shall be appointed for a term of
one year. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
C. Duties.
(1) The Township Attorney shall represent the Township in all legal
matters, shall advise and assist the Council, the Manager and the
Departments as required in the administration of Township
Government. He shall attend meetings of the Council, draft
ordinances and resolutions and give opinions and rulings on
questions of law which may arise at Council meetings. He shall
prepare or approve all legal instruments relating to the business of
the Township. He shall represent the Township in any litigation,
and conduct trials, appeals and other proceedings affecting the
interest of the Township as he may in his discretion determine to be
necessary or desirable, subject to the approval of the Council.
(2) Additional duties. The Township Attorney shall also:
(a) Maintain records of all actions, suits, proceedings and matters
which relate to the Township's interest, and report thereon as
the Manager or Council may require.
(b) Have power to enter into any agreement, compromise or
settlement of any litigation in which the Township is involved,
subject to the approval of the Council.
(c) Upon the termination of his service with the Township, the
Attorney shall forthwith surrender to his successor all
Township property, papers and records, together with a written
consent to substitution of his successor in any pending actions
or proceedings.
(3) Special counsel. Whenever he deems the interests of the Township
so to require, the Township Attorney, with the approval of the
Council and within the limits of available appropriations, may
appoint special counsel to assist him in the preparation, trial or
argument of any issue, or in such other capacity as he may
determine. If the Township Attorney should be disqualified with
respect to any matter, the Council may appoint special counsel to
represent the Township for and with respect to such matter, within
the limits of available appropriations.
§ 10-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-38
1:47
§ 10-38. Municipal Clerk. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. Appointment; term; qualifications; tenure.
(1) Appointment; term. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133, the Council
shall appoint a Municipal Clerk for a three-year term.
(2) Qualifications. No person shall be appointed or reappointed Clerk
unless he shall have a registered Municipal Clerk Certificate issued
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 et seq. Prior to his appointment he
shall be qualified by training and experience to perform the duties
of the office.
(3) Tenure. Any person who shall hold the office of Municipal Clerk and
who shall obtain tenure pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 et seq. in
such office and shall not be removed from such office except for
good cause shown after a fair and impartial hearing as provided in
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-134.
B. Powers and duties.
(1) The Municipal Clerk shall serve as Clerk of the Council and shall
have such other functions, powers and duties as are provided by
this Code. As Clerk of the Council, the Municipal Clerk shall:
(a) Keep the minutes and records of the proceedings of the
Council, and of any Council committee, upon request of the
Chairman of the committee.
(b) Preserve and compile all ordinances and resolutions, and at the
close of each year, with the advice and assistance of the
Township Attorney, the Clerk shall compile, codify and bind all
the ordinances and resolutions then in effect, in conformity
with the plan and system of this Code, and the Clerk shall
properly index the record books, compilation or codification of
ordinances and resolution and provide for their publication.
(c) Have custody of the Township Seal, and affix it to such books,
papers and documents as may be authorized pursuant to law.
(d) Have and take custody of all official books, papers and
documents of the Township, for which no other repository is
provided by Charter or ordinance; and preserve and keep them
safely.
(e) Provide secretarial and clerical services for the Councilmen in
the discharge of their official duties.
(f) Perform all the functions required of Municipal Clerks by the
General Election Law, Title 19 of the New Jersey Statutes, and
any other state law or Township ordinance and receive for
Township use the fees prescribed therefor.
§ 10-38 LAWRENCE CODE § 10-38
1:48
§ 10-39. Township Historian.
(g) Perform such functions as are vested in the Municipal Clerk by
state law and ordinances relating to bingo and raffles
licensing.
(h) Administer the license and permit provisions of all regulatory
ordinances not expressly assigned by this Code or other
ordinance to any department and not required by statute to be
administered by another Township Officer.
(i) Issue certificates as to liability for assessment for municipal
improvements in accordance with provisions of N.J.S.A.
54:5-18.1 et seq. Prior to the issuance of any such certificates,
he shall secure from the Director of Public Works his countersignature,
which shall indicate that to the best of his
knowledge, information and belief, the certificate is correct.
(j) Have such other, different and additional functions, powers
and duties as may be prescribed by law or ordinance.
(2) There shall be a Deputy Municipal Clerk, who shall perform the
duties of the Municipal Clerk in the absence or upon the direction
of the Municipal Clerk, and who shall perform such other duties as
may be directed by the Manager.
A. Office. The Township Historian shall be appointed by the Council to
serve for a term of four years. The Historian shall serve without
compensation.
B. Duties.
(1) The Township Historian shall be the custodian of the "Lawrence
Township Historical Collection" and shall oversee such other
historic artifacts, documents and other property, whether owned,
leased by, or on loan to the municipality. Upon the approval of the
Municipal Manager, the Historian shall arrange for the storage
and/or maintenance of all such property in such manner as to
insure its proper and suitable preservation. The Township Historian
shall notify the Manager, Township Council, the State Archivist,
and the New Jersey Historical Commission of any historic artifacts
and documents not then owned but recommended for acquisition
and preservation.
(2) The Township Historian shall maintain proper receipts and
ownership documentation of all such historic artifacts, documents
and other property in a place of safekeeping in the Township
Municipal Building as required by the State "Guidelines for Local
Historians" unless permitted to be loaned or displayed elsewhere
on terms and conditions approved in advance by resolution of the
Township Council, indicating exactly what is being removed, to
which location and for how long. An itemized inventory of all such
§ 10-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-39
1:49
artifacts and documents, together with their respective location,
value, existing or recommended insurance coverage as applicable,
and a list of such items recommended for acquisition or historical
materials for publication shall be prepared by the Township
Historian initially as soon as practicable and thereafter annually as
of June 30 in each year and submitted to the Township Council for
their approval within one month, or not later than July 31 of that
same year, following which it shall be filed with the New Jersey
Historical Commission. To the extent such inventory is approved
by Council, the Manager shall be relieved of and exonerated from
the custodial responsibilities set forth in § 10-29A of the Lawrence
Township Code.
(3) The Township Historian shall, upon request, serve as a resource
person to the public in historic matters, without obligating the
Township of Lawrence in any manner until or unless first receiving
approval from the Township Council upon the prior favorable
recommendation of the Municipal Manager.
(4) The Township Historian shall prepare and submit an annual report
by March 31 of the next succeeding year to the Municipal Manager
and the Township Council stating all the work performed and
accomplished during the year. The Historian shall also transmit a
copy of such report to the New Jersey Historical Commission.
(5) The Township Historian shall assist in the planning and
implementation of historical programs, displays and events of
commemoration and otherwise.
(6) The Township Historian may prepare accounts, articles, records
and pamphlets on matters of past and current historic importance,
including, but not limited to, those relating to the activities of the
Township's government and its officials, organizations and
institutions.
(7) The Township Historian shall prepare for signature by the Mayor or
the Manager, with the approval of the Township Council, and file
thereafter such other reports and documents on behalf of the
Township with other laws or regulations imposed or provided by
the state and federal governments pertaining to historic matters.
(8) The Township Historian may assist the Historic Preservation
Advisory Committee, the Planning Board and the Zoning Board as
well as advise the Township Council concerning the acquisition,
administration, use and disposition of any landmark, or historic site
including such places on the New Jersey Register of Historic
Places.
C. Governing law. This section and the implementation thereof shall
conform in all respects to the Local Historians Enabling Act of New
Jersey (N.J.S.A. 40:10A-1 et seq.), as the same may be amended and
supplemented, and, where this section is inconsistent or conflicting
§ 10-39 LAWRENCE CODE § 10-39
1:50
§ 10-40. Animal Cruelty Investigator. [Added by Ord. No. 1998-09]
therewith, said Act and its lawful implementing regulations shall take
precedence and govern.
A. Position established; appointment, compensation. The position of
Animal Cruelty Investigator is hereby created, and employment of a
qualified person for that position is hereby authorized. The Animal
Cruelty Investigator shall be appointed by the Township Council and
shall receive such compensation as is provided by the ordinance or
resolution of the Township Council.
B. Qualifications. The Animal Cruelty Investigator shall be certified
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.16a.
C. Powers and duties. The Animal Cruelty Investigator shall have the
power and authority, within the jurisdiction of the Township of
Lawrence, to:
(1) Enforce all laws or ordinances enacted for the protection of
animals, including but not limited to, animal control, animal
welfare and animal cruelty laws of the state and ordinances of the
Township;
(2) Investigate and sign complaints concerning any violation of an
animal control, animal welfare or animal cruelty law of the state or
the Township Code; and
(3) Act as an officer for detection, apprehension and arrest of offenders
against the animal control, animal welfare and animal cruelty laws
of the state and the Township Code.
§ 10-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-40
1:51

ARTICLE VII
Municipal Court
§ 10-41. Established.
There shall be a Municipal Court for the Township of Lawrence, County of
Mercer and State of New Jersey pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:12-1 et seq.
§ 10-42. Name of the Court. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The name of the Court shall be the "Municipal Court of the Township of
Lawrence." The Municipal Court shall have a Seal which shall bear the
impress of the name of the Court.
§ 10-43. Municipal Judge; term. [Added at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
There shall be a Judge of the Municipal Court, who shall be appointed by the
Township Council, and who shall serve for a term of three years from the
date of his appointment and until his successor is appointed and qualified.
§ 10-44. Powers; duties; jurisdiction. [Added at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The Municipal Court and the Judge thereof shall have, possess and exercise
all the functions, powers, duties and jurisdiction conferred by the provisions
of N.J.S.A. 2B:12-16 et seq.
§ 10-45. Municipal Court Administrator. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. Established. There shall be a Court Administrator who shall perform
such functions and duties as shall be prescribed by law, the rules
applicable to Municipal Courts, and by the Judge of the Municipal
Court. In the event the Court Administrator is temporarily absent, the
Judge of the Municipal Court may designate someone to act in the
Municipal Court Administrator's place during such temporary absence.
B. Certification required. The Municipal Court Administrator shall be
certified pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2B:12-11.
C. Powers of municipal court administrator. Any process, order, warrant or
judgment issued by a Municipal Court may be signed by the Judge or be
attested in the Judge's name and signed by the Municipal Court
Administrator. The Municipal Court Administrator shall have the
authority granted by law and the Rules of Court to administrators and
clerks of courts of record.
§ 10-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-46
1:53
§ 10-46. Township Prosecutor.
Whenever required for the conduct of matters before the Municipal Court,
the Manager may appoint a Township Prosecutor and a court stenographer
within the limits of available appropriations.
§ 10-47. Municipal Public Defender. [Added by Ord. No. 1518-98]
A. There shall be a Municipal Public Defender who is an attorney at law of
the State of New Jersey in good standing, and shall serve for a term of
one year from the date of his appointment, and may continue to serve in
office pending reappointment or appointment of a successor.
B. It shall be the duty of the Municipal Public Defender to represent,
except in the case of temporary unavailability or conflict of interest, any
defendant charged with an offense in Municipal Court who is an
indigent municipal defendant entitled to representation pursuant to
this subsection. All necessary services and facilities of representation
pursuant to this subsection, including both expert and lay investigation
and testimony as well as other preparations, shall be provided in every
case. The Township shall be responsible for payment for services
pursuant to this section. The factors of need and real value to a
defendant may be weighed against the financial constraints of the
Township in determining the necessary services and facilities of
representation. The final determination as to necessity for services
required shall be made by the Court.
C. The Municipal Public Defender shall be responsible for handling all
phases of the defense, including, but not limited to, discovery, pre-trial
and post-trial hearings, motions, removals to Federal District Court and
other collateral reasonably related to the defense.
D. The Municipal Public Defender shall represent an indigent defendant
charged in Municipal Court with a crime as specified in N.J.S.A.
2B:12-18 or, if in the opinion of the Municipal Court, there is a
likelihood that the defendant, if convicted of any other offense will be
subject to imprisonment or other consequence of magnitude, the
Municipal Public Defender shall represent an indigent defendant.
E. If there is a vacancy in the office of Municipal Public Defender, if the
Municipal Public Defender is temporarily unavailable or if a finding of
conflict of interest precludes the Municipal Public Defender from
representing an indigent defendant, the Municipal Prosecutor may
prosecute the offense if the Municipal Court appoints a qualified
attorney to represent the indigent defendant.
F. Unless rates are otherwise established by the Township, the Attorney
shall be entitled to compensation at the same rate as attorneys hired by
the Office of the Public Defender in conflict cases, with payment to be
made within 30 days. Once appointed, the Attorney shall carry out all
§ 10-46 LAWRENCE CODE § 10-47
1:54
duties of the Municipal Public Defender in connection with the case that
is the subject of the appointment.
G. Eligibility for services of the Municipal Public Defender shall be
determined by the Municipal Court on the basis of the need of the
defendant. Need shall be measured according to N.J.S.A. 2A:158A-14
and guidelines promulgated by the New Jersey Supreme Court.
H. In the event that a determination of eligibility cannot be made before
the time when the first services are to be rendered, or if an initial
determination is found to be erroneous, the Municipal Court shall refer
the defendant to the Municipal Public Defender provisionally, and if
subsequently it is determined that the defendant is ineligible, the
Municipal Court shall inform the defendant, and the defendant shall be
obliged to engage his own counsel and to reimburse for the cost of the
services rendered to that time.
I. The Municipal Court shall make an investigation of the financial status
of each defendant seeking representation pursuant to this subsection
and shall have the authority to require a defendant to execute and
deliver written requests or authorizations required under applicable
law to provide the Court with access to records of public or private
sources otherwise confidential, as may be of aid in evaluating eligibility.
The Court is authorized to obtain information from any public record
office of the state or of any subdivision or agency thereof on request and
without payment of the fees ordinarily required by law.
J. Whenever a person entitled to representation by a Municipal Public
Defender pursuant to this subsection is under the age of 18 years, the
eligibility for services shall be determined on the basis of financial
circumstance of the individual and the financial circumstances of the
individual's parents or legal guardians. The Township shall be entitled
to recover the cost of legal services from the parent or legal guardians
as provided in this section in § 16 of the Act and the Municipal Court
shall have authority to require parents or legal guardians to execute
and deliver the written requests or authorization required under
applicable law in order to provide the Court with access to records of
public or private sources, otherwise confidential, as may be of aid to it
in evaluating eligibility.
K. If the defendant has or reasonably expects to have means to meet some
part, though not all, of the cost of the services rendered, the defendant
shall be required to reimburse the Township, either by a single payment
or in installments in such amounts as he can reasonably be expected to
pay; but no default or failure in making payments shall affect or reduce
the rendering of services.
L. The Township shall have a lien on any property to which the defendant
shall have or acquire an interest for an amount equal to the reasonable
value of the services rendered to a defendant pursuant to this act as
§ 10-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-47
1:55
calculated at the same rate as the Office of the Public Defender bills
clients at that time.
M. To effectuate such a lien for the Township, the Township Attorney shall
file a notice setting other services rendered to the defendant and the
reasonable value thereof with the Clerk of the Superior Court. The filing
of the notice with the Clerk of the Superior Court shall constitute a lien
on property for a period of 10 years from the date of filing, unless
discharged sooner, and, except for such time limitations, shall have the
force and effect of a judgment. Within 10 days of the filing of the notice,
the Municipal Attorney shall sent by certified mail, or serve personally,
a copy of the notice with a statement of the date of the filing to or upon
the defendant at the defendant's last known address. If the Municipal
Attorney shall fail to give notice the lien is void.
N. The Township shall require by ordinance a person applying for
representation by a Municipal Public Defender or Court-approved
Counsel to pay an application fee of not more than $200, but only in an
amount necessary to pay the costs of Municipal Public Defender
services. In accordance with guidelines promulgated by the Supreme
Court, the Municipal Court may waive any required application fee, in
whole or in part, only if the Court determines, in its discretion, upon a
clean and convincing showing by the applicant that the application fee
represents an unreasonable burden on the person seeking
representation. The Municipal Court may permit a person to pay the
application fee over a specific period of time not to exceed four months.
§ 10-47 LAWRENCE CODE § 10-47
1:56
ARTICLE VIII
Awarding Public Contracts to Certain Contributors
[Added 8-28-2018 by Ord. No. 2306-18]
§ 10-48. Restrictions.
A. Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
Municipality or any of its purchasing agents or agencies or those of its
independent authorities, as the case may be, shall not enter into an
agreement or otherwise contract to procure professional, banking,
insurance coverage services or any other no-bid consulting services,
from any professional business entity, if that entity has solicited or
made any contribution of money, or pledge of a contribution, including
in-kind contributions, to a campaign committee of any Lawrence
Township municipal candidate or holder of the public office having
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract, or to any
Lawrence Township or Mercer County party committee, or to any
political action committee (PAC) that is organized for the primary
purpose of promoting or supporting Lawrence Township municipal
candidates or municipal officeholders in excess of the thresholds
specified in Subsection C within one calendar year immediately
preceding the date of the contract or agreement.
B. No professional business entity which enters into negotiations for, or
agrees to, any contract or agreement with the Municipality or any
department or agency thereof or of its independent authorities for
rendition of professional, banking or insurance coverage services or
any other no-bid consulting services shall knowingly solicit or make any
reportable contribution of money, or pledge of a reportable
contribution, including in-kind contributions, to any Lawrence
Township candidate or holder of public office having ultimate
responsibility for the award of the contract, or to any Lawrence
Township or Mercer County party committee, or to any PAC that is
organized for the primary purpose of promoting or supporting
Lawrence Township municipal candidates or municipal officeholders
between the time of first communications between that business entity
and the Township regarding a specific professional services agreement
and the later of the termination of negotiations or the completion of the
contract or agreement. For the purposes of this subsection, "reportable
contribution" shall mean a campaign contribution or pledge of
contribution in excess of the thresholds specified in Subsection C below
within one calendar year immediately preceding the later of the date of
negotiations concluded or the date of the contract or agreement.
C. Contribution limits.
(1) Subject to the limitations in Subsection C(2), any entity meeting the
definition of "professional business entity" under this section may
annually contribute a maximum of $300 for any purpose to each
candidate, for Mayor or Council, and $300 to each Lawrence
§ 10-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-48
1:57
§ 10-49. Contributions made prior to the effective date.
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a professional business entity to any municipal
candidate for Mayor or Council, or municipal or county party committee or
PAC referenced in this article shall be deemed a violation of this section, nor
shall an agreement for property, goods, or services, of any king whatsoever,
be disqualified thereby, if that contribution was made by the professional
business entity prior to the effective date of this section.
§ 10-50. Contribution statement by professional business entity.
Township or Mercer County party committees, or to any PAC
referenced in this article, without violating Subsections A and B of
this section.
(2) However, any entity meeting the definition of "professional
business entity" under this section, including such principals,
partners, and officers of the entity in the aggregate, may not annual
contribute for any purpose in excess of a total of $2,500 to: all
Lawrence Township candidates and officeholders with ultimate
responsibility for an award of the contract and all Lawrence
Township or Mercer County political parties and PACs referenced
in this article combined, without violating Subsections A an B of
this section.
D. For purposes of this article, a "professional business entity" is any entity
seeking or performing a public contract for professional, banking or
insurance coverage services or any other no-bid consulting services and
which may be an individual including the individual's spouse, if any, and
any child living at home; a person; firm; corporation; professional
corporation; partnership; organization; or association. The definition of
a business entity includes all principals who own 10% or more of the
equity in the corporation or business trust, partners, and officers in the
aggregate employed by the entity as well as any subsidiaries directly
controlled by the business entity.
E. For purposes of this section, the office that is considered to have
ultimate responsibility for the award of the contract shall be the
Township of Lawrence Council, if the contract requires approval or
appropriation from the Council or a public office who is responsible for
the award of a contract if that public officer is appointed by the
Township of Lawrence Council.
A. Prior to awarding any contract or agreement to procure professional
services, or banking or insurance coverage services or any other no-bid
consulting services, with any professional business entity, the Township
or any of its purchasing agents or agencies, as the case may be, shall
receive a sworn statement from the professional business entity made
under penalty of perjury that the bidder or officer has not made a
contribution in violation of this article.
§ 10-48 LAWRENCE CODE § 10-50
1:58
§ 10-51. Return of excess contributions.
A professional business entity or Township candidate or officeholder or
municipal or county party committee or PAC referenced in this article may
cure a violation of this article if, within 30 days after the general election,
the professional business entity notifies the Township Council, in writing,
and seeks and receives reimbursement of a contribution from the Township
candidate or municipal or county political party or PAC referenced in this
article.
§ 10-52. Penalty.
§ 10-53. Severability and repealer.
B. The professional business entity shall have a continuing duty to report
any violations of this article that may occur during the negotiation or
duration of a contract. The certification required under this subsection
shall be made prior to entry into the contract or agreement with the
Township and shall be in addition to any other certifications that may be
required by any other provision of law.
A. All Lawrence Township agreements with professional business entities
shall provide that it shall be a material breach of the terms of the
government contract for a professional business entity as defined in
§ 10-48D to violate, or to aide or abet a violation, of § 10-48B or C or to
knowingly conceal or misrepresent contributions given or received, or
to make or solicit contributions through intermediaries for the purpose
of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the contribution.
B. Any professional business entity as defined in § 10-48C who knowingly
fails to reveal a contribution made in violation of this article, or who
knowingly makes or solicits contributions through intermediaries for
the purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution, shall be disqualified from eligibility for future Lawrence
Township contracts for a period of four calendar years from the date of
the violation.
A. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is
for any reason held to be unconstitutional, invalid, or unenforceable by
a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
remaining portions of this article. The drafters of this article and the
voters signing the initiative petition supporting the passage of this
article hereby declare that they would have signed the initiative
petition supporting the passage of this article and each section and
subsection thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the
sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases may be declared
unconstitutional, invalid, or unenforceable.
B. Ordinance No. 1778-04 is hereby repealed. And any ordinance
inconsistent with the terms of this article is hereby repealed to the
extent of such inconsistency.
§ 10-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-54
1:59
§ 10-54. Effective date.
This article shall become effective 20 days following the earlier of (a) final
adoption thereof by the Municipal Council of Lawrence Township or (b) the
date on which the passage of this article as a public question is certified
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 19:20-3 or other applicable law, and shall be published
as required by law.
§ 10-54 LAWRENCE CODE § 10-54
1:60
Chapter 15
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
§ 10-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 10-54
1:61

ARTICLE I
Growth and Redevelopment Advisory Committee
[Derived from § 2-95 of the 1971 Code; amended in its entirety
3-15-2011 by Ord. No. 2084-11]
§ 15-1. Purpose.
The Growth and Redevelopment Committee shall consult with and advise
the Council on matters pertaining to economic development and growth
management in the Township.
§ 15-2. Membership.
§ 15-3. Terms of office.
Class I and Class II members shall be appointed by the Chair of the
Committee they represent and shall serve one-year terms for the calendar
year in which they are appointed. Class III and Class IV members shall
serve three-year terms; all terms for Class III and Class IV members shall
be calendar-year terms. Class III members may designate an alternate who
may attend all sessions and participate in discussions but shall be entitled to
vote only in the absence of the appointed member. Class IV members shall
be appointed for a term of three years expiring on January 1.
§ 15-4. Organization and resources.
A. The Growth and Redevelopment Committee will consist of 16 members
of the following four classes:
(1) Class I: One member of the Planning Board and Zoning Board to be
appointed annually by the Chair of these Boards.
(2) Class II: A representative of the Greenway Committee, and the
Environmental Resources Committee, to be appointed annually by
the Chairs of these Boards.
(3) Class III: Three members of the private sector, who shall be
appointed by Township Council. Private sector membership may
include nonresidents representing a private sector interest based
in the Township or a long-standing member whose company is no
longer based in the Township but continues to do business in the
Township.
(4) Class IV: 12 at-large members who are residents of the Township
and who are appointed by Council.
B. Committee liaisons. One liaison from the Board of Education appointed
by the Board President and one Councilmember shall serve as nonvoting
members.
C. A quorum shall consist of seven voting members of the Committee.
§ 15-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-4
1:63
A. Chairman. A Chairman shall be appointed annually by the Committee
from among Class I, Class II, and Class IV members.
B. Township Council shall appoint a liaison to the Committee.
C. The Committee may invite additional members to serve on an interim
basis due to specialized knowledge or expertise.
D. The Committee shall meet at least once a year, and all meetings will be
open to the public.
E. The Department of Community Development shall provide the
Committee with the necessary staff support.
F. All Township Officials will be available to the Committee to provide
input and expertise as the Committee deems necessary.
G. The Committee shall be provided with the resources necessary to
secure staff support, including, but not limited to, secretarial support,
professional consultation, and other incidental expenses.
§ 15-4 LAWRENCE CODE § 15-4
1:64
ARTICLE II
Cable Communications Advisory Committee
[Derived from § 5AA-15 of the 1971 Code; amended by Ord. No.
1409-95; Ord. No. 1703-02]
§ 15-5. Membership.
The Cable Television Advisory Committee shall consist of seven members,
each with a term of four years. Terms shall be staggered with no more
than three terms ending in any year. Newly created positions shall be for
an initial term of three years where four-year terms interfere with the
requirement to stagger terms. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only
to complete an unexpired term.
§ 15-6. Duties.
The duties of the Cable Television Advisory Committee shall be as follows:
A. Monitor compliance with the chapter, together with all contractual
commitments undertaken, as a matter of law, by the company and
perform the annual operations review prescribed in subsection 32-2.4.
B. Perform such investigations as may appear appropriate with regard to
the level of service and efficiency of the company. In that respect, the
committee may hold such public hearings as may appear necessary to
obtain commentary from both citizens and the company.
C. Recommend to the Council and to the company suggested
improvements and modifications in performance.
D. Obtain information and report same to the council regarding rates and
other financial matters involving the company.
E. Recommend to the Council and the company a reporting format by
which the company shall provide such information as required by this
article and such reporting as may be agreed upon between the
Township and the company.
F. Recommend and implement, where appropriate, local origination and
institutional programming, which recommendation shall be made upon
consultation with the Lawrence Township Board of Education and other
local institutions.
G. Provide such other information as may be requested from time to time
by the Council with respect to the cable television franchise.
§ 15-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-6
1:65

ARTICLE III
Greenway Committee
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1346-93]
§ 15-7. Purpose.
The Greenway Committee shall advise and consult with the Council and
the Manager with respect to the implementation of the proposed Greenway
trail and bikeway loop in South Lawrence, including reviewing and making
recommendations with respect to Township acquisition and administration
of the project.
§ 15-8. Appointments.
The Greenway Committee shall consist of five members to be appointed
by Township Council. Each member shall serve for a term of three years.
The Committee shall organize and adopt rules to govern the conduct of its
business.
§ 15-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-8
1:67

ARTICLE IV
Shade Tree Advisory Committee
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1479-96; amended by Ord. No. 1617-00]
§ 15-9. Creation; membership; terms.
§ 15-10. Organization.
The Shade Tree Advisory Committee shall organize annually, adopt bylaws
for the conduct of its affairs and select its Chairman and other officers in
accordance with such bylaws.
§ 15-11. Functions and duties.
The Shade Tree Advisory Committee shall perform the following functions:
A. There is hereby created a Shade Tree Advisory Committee, which shall
consist of seven members to be appointed by the Township Council. The
members shall be appointed as follows: [Amended 3-15-2011 by Ord.
No. 2085-11; 3-19-2019 by Ord. No. 2322-19]
(1) One member of the Planning Board to be appointed for a one-year
term.
(2) Four citizen members to be appointed for terms of three years. Said
terms shall commence on January 1 and be overlapping with two
members appointed annually. Where possible, citizen members
shall be chosen based on experience or expertise in the area of
shade tree planting and maintenance.
(3) Two alternate members to be appointed for terms of three years.
Said terms shall commence on January 1 and be overlapping with
one member appointed annually.
B. One member of the Township Council shall act as liaison to the
Committee.
C. One member of the Planning Board shall act as liaison to the
committee.
A. Advise the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment on all applications
for site plan and subdivision applications as such applications may have
an effect upon or need for shade trees within existing or proposed
public or private rights-of-way.
B. Recommend to the Township Council programs of shade tree
improvement, planting and replacement along public rights-of-way
within the Township.
C. Recommend to the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment
standards, types and planting specifications for shade trees required in
accordance with subdivision and site plan review.
§ 15-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-11
1:69
§ 15-12. Gifts and donations; hiring of experts.
In performing its functions, the Shade Tree Advisory Committee may
receive grants-in-aid, gifts and donations and may hire experts to the extent
that this may be provided by the Township budget.
D. Advise the Township Council of shade tree concerns on public property
and along public rights-of-way.
§ 15-11 LAWRENCE CODE § 15-12
1:70
ARTICLE V
Municipal Alliance Committee on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1556-98]
§ 15-13. Purpose.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-9, the Municipal Alliance shall consult with and
advise the Township Council on matters pertaining to alcoholism and drug
abuse. It shall make recommendations on the use of funds from public and
private sources with the goal of reducing substance abuse. It will implement
the Alliance programs formulated by state law.
§ 15-14. Membership.
The Municipal Alliance Committee on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse shall be
composed of nine members representing three classes:
§ 15-15. General powers and duties.
A. Class I. The following or their designees shall serve as ex officio
members from the Township Administration: the Chief of Police, the
Health Officer, the Superintendent of Recreation.
B. Class II. The Superintendent of Lawrence Township Schools or
designee.
C. Class III. Five at-large members who are residents of the Township or
who represent organizations receiving funds for alcohol and drug abuse
education or prevention from the Township. Class III members shall be
appointed for two-year terms, staggered.
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:2BB-7, the Committee shall identify alcoholism
and drug abuse prevention, education and community needs in the
Township in consultation with the County Local Advisory Committee on
Alcoholism and Drug Abuse; implement programs established via the
County Annual Alliance Plan; and seek funds in conjunction with the
Lawrence Township Council from appropriate county and state
authorities in support of substance abuse programs.
B. B. The Committee may create bylaws, elect officers and hold meetings
in the furtherance of its charge.
§ 15-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-15
1:71

ARTICLE VI
Human Relations Committee
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1691-02]
§ 15-16. Membership.
The Human Relations Committee shall be composed of nine members who
shall serve for terms of three years. Except that of the initial appointments,
three members shall serve for a term of one year, three members shall serve
for a term of two years and three members shall serve for a term of three
years. Vacancies shall be filled for the balance of unexpired terms.
§ 15-17. Powers and duties.
A. The Human Services Committee shall be advisory to the Township
Council.
B. In its advisory role, the Committee shall recommend and evaluate
programs directed at increasing cultural awareness and celebrating
cultural diversity.
C. The Committee shall take such measures as are necessary to promote
cultural sensitivity within our community.
D. The Committee shall perform such other related tasks as are suggested
by Township Council.
§ 15-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-17
1:73

ARTICLE VII
Trails, Open Space and Stewardship Advisory Committee
[Adopted 1-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2146-13]
§ 15-18. Establishment.
The members of the Greenway Committee and the Open Space and
Stewardship Advisory Committee are combined to create a Trails, Open
Space and Stewardship Advisory Committee.
§ 15-19. Membership; terms.
§ 15-20. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Trails, Open Space and Stewardship Advisory
Committee shall be as follows:
A. The membership of the newly formed committee shall consist of nine
regular members for three-year terms and one representative as
indicated with said terms being as follows:
(1) One representative from the Recreation Advisory Committee
serving for a one-year period.
(2) Three-year terms ending 12-31-2012.
(3) Three-year terms ending 12-31-2013.
(4) Three-year terms ending 12-31-2014.
B. B. The initial membership shall consist of the two current members of
the Open Space and Stewardship Advisory Committee and the four
current members of the Greenway Advisory Committee at the time of
the effective date of this article.
C. C. Two members of this committee shall serve as liaisons to the
Environmental Resources Committee.
A. Advise and consult with the Council and the Municipal Manager with
respect to the implementation of the trails and bikeways throughout the
Township, including reviewing and making recommendations with
respect to Township acquisition and administration of the projects.
B. Make recommendations regarding property acquisition of
environmentally sensitive land and of land to be used for active and
passive recreation.
C. Make recommendations to the Environmental Resources and
Sustainability Green Advisory Committee regarding proposed trails and
desired land acquisition consistent with open space and trail expansion.
D. Make recommendations regarding the management of Township
parkland.
§ 15-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-20
1:75
E. Assist in the development of the Township’s Open Space Plan.
§ 15-20 LAWRENCE CODE § 15-20
1:76
ARTICLE VIII
Recreation Advisory Committee
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1956-07]
§ 15-21. Creation; membership; terms; organization.
Within the Department of Recreation there shall be a Recreation Advisory
Committee, which shall consist of 11 members to be appointed by the
Council. Each member shall serve for a term of three years. The Committee
shall organize annually, adopt bylaws for the conduct of its affairs and select
its Chairman and other officers to serve in accordance with such bylaws.
§ 15-22. Powers and duties.
The Committee shall:
A. Consult and advise with the Director at least once each month with
respect to public recreation policies, programs and activities within the
Township.
B. Review and evaluate from time to time the public recreation needs and
resources of the Township.
C. Make such periodic reports and recommendations to the Council and
the Manager as the Committee may deem advisable.
§ 15-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-22
1:77

ARTICLE IX
Public Safety Coordinating Committee
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1968-08]
§ 15-23. Committee established.
There shall be a Public Safety Coordinating Committee whose membership
shall consist, ex officio, of the Township Manager, Emergency Management
Director, Police Chief, Construction Official, Health Officer, each of the
Township’s Fire Chiefs and the Fire Marshal, all of whom may participate
directly or by alternate or designee. In addition, the membership shall
consist of six community representatives who shall be appointed by the
Council for terms of two years ending on the last day of any calendar year,
or until a replacement is appointed. The Township Council shall annually
designate a member of the Council to serve as liaison to the Committee.
§ 15-24. Duties of the Committee.
The duties of the Public Safety Coordinating Committee shall be:
A. Review and make recommendations on matters of public safety to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment and the Planning Board on all site plans
and subdivisions submitted to the Boards.
B. Review and make recommendations to the Manager and Council on all
capital expenditures, including equipment, related to emergency
services.
C. Review and make recommendations to the Manager and Council on all
ordinances related to public safety, including, but not limited to, Fire
Codes and Building Codes.
D. Consult and advise the Manager and Council with respect to public
safety policies, programs and procedures.
E. Make such periodic reports and recommendations to the Council and
Manager as the Committee may deem advisable.
F. Advise and assist the Council and the Manager with respect to traffic
safety questions and problems in the Township, and the adequacy of
Township policies and procedures related thereto.
§ 15-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-24
1:79

ARTICLE X
Environmental and Green Advisory Committee
[Adopted 1-8-2013 by Ord. No. 2145-13; amended 11-8-2018 by Ord.
No. 2315-18]
§ 15-25. Establishment.
The membership of both the Environmental Resources Committee and the
Green Team shall be combined into one committee to be known as the
Environmental Resources and Sustainability Green Advisory Committee.
§ 15-26. Membership.
§ 15-27. Powers and duties.
The powers and duties of the Environmental Resources and Sustainability
Advisory Committee shall be as follows:
A. The membership of the Committee shall consist of 10 members for fouryear
terms with said terms ending as follows:
(1) Two representatives from the Trails, Open Space and Stewardship
Advisory Committee for a one-year period.
(2) Five four-year terms ending December 31, 2013.
(3) Five four-year terms ending December 31, 2015.
B. The initial membership shall consist of the five current members of the
Environmental Resources Committee and the four current members of
the Green Team at the time of the effective date of this article.
A. Advise and consult with the Municipal Manager with respect to the
environmental needs and resources of the Township;
B. Study and develop proposals for the conservation and preservation of
natural features, Including landscaping of the Township and make
recommendations with respect thereto to the Council and Municipal
Manager;
C. Review and make recommendations to the Zoning Board of Adjustment
and the Planning Board on all site plans and subdivisions submitted to
said Boards;
D. Collaborate through the Municipal Manager with service providers and
other governmental agencies to share resource information and ideas
consistent with sustainability;
E. Encourage participation through the Municipal Manager to solicit ideas
on green initiatives to maintain Sustainable Jersey Certification;
F. Research and analyze green initiatives which make practical
environmental and financial sense; and
§ 15-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-27
1:81
G. Develop strategies for sustainable green initiatives in municipal
operations.
§ 15-27 LAWRENCE CODE § 15-27
1:82
Chapter 20
DEPARTMENTS
§ 15-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-27
1:83

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 20-1. Enumeration of departments. [Amended by Ord. No.
1316-93]
There shall be the following administrative departments among and within
which the Manager shall allocate and assign all administrative functions,
power and duties of the Township Government which are not allocated or
assigned to a particular department by the Charter or this Code:
§ 20-2. Powers and duties of department heads.
Each department head, under the direction and supervision of the Manager,
shall:
§ 20-3. Administrative rules and regulations.
No rule or regulation made by any department, officer, agency or authority
of the municipality, except such as relates to the organization or internal
management of the municipal government or a part thereof, shall take effect
A. Finance.
B. Public Safety.
C. Public Works.
D. Recreation.
E. Health.
F. Community Development.
A. Exercise and discharge such functions, powers and duties as may be
allocated and assigned to the department by or pursuant to the Charter
or any ordinance.
B. Direct and supervise the work of the department.
C. Organize the activities of the department and allocate and assign
functions to its employees.
D. Develop and administer employee safety and training programs.
E. Have such powers of appointment and removal of subordinates within
the department as may be delegated to him/her by the Manager
pursuant to the Charter and this Code.
F. Purchase and maintain equipment and supplies.
G. Budget and fiscal development and management.
H. Develop and administer departmental policies and procedures.
§ 20-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-3
1:85
until it is filed with the Municipal Clerk. The Clerk shall maintain a current
compilation of all such rules and regulations, which shall be available for
public inspection in his/her office during business hours.
§ 20-3 LAWRENCE CODE § 20-3
1:86
ARTICLE II
Department of Finance
§ 20-4. Department created; Chief Financial Officer to serve as
Director. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 20-5. Functions generally. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Subject to the supervision and direction of the Manager, the functions of the
Director of Finance/Treasurer shall be to:
§ 20-6. Division of Accounts and Control.
Under the direction and supervision of the Comptroller, who shall be the
division head, the division shall:
A. There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which shall be the
Director of Finance/Treasurer, who shall be the Chief Financial Officer.
Prior to appointment, the Director shall be qualified by education,
training and experience for the duties of the office.
B. The Chief Financial Officer shall be appointed by the governing body.
The term of office shall be four years, which shall run from January 1 in
the year in which the Chief Financial Officer is appointed. The
compensation for the Chief Financial Officer shall be separately set
forth in a municipal salary ordinance (N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.10). The Chief
Financial Officer shall hold a Municipal Finance Officer Certificate
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-140.13.
C. Within the department there shall be divisions of Accounts and
Controls, Assessments and Tax Collections.
A. Oversee, coordinate and supervise the Divisions of the Department.
B. Administer the centralized purchasing system required by this Code.
C. Prepare the annual budget.
D. Install and supervise such management procedures, reports and
controls as shall be approved by the Manager.
A. Maintain the Township's central bookkeeping and accounting records,
pre-audit and control all claims and demands against the Township, and
maintain an encumbrance system of budgetary control.
B. Have custody of the funds of the Township, and pay and disburse
therefrom upon approved vouchers and warrants of the Manager.
C. Make monthly reports to the Manager of all receipts, expenditures,
commitments and unexpended appropriations.
§ 20-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-6
1:87
§ 20-7. Division of Assessments.
§ 20-8. Division of Tax Collections.
D. Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the Township or
in possession of the Township in a fiduciary capacity except as
otherwise provided by law, and keep such investments and invested
funds safely invested with the approval of the Manager.
E. Have the safekeeping of all bonds and notes of the Township and the
receipt and delivery of all Township bonds and notes for transfer,
registration or exchange.
F. Administer municipal payroll.
G. Maintain accounting record for all grant funds, development escrow
funds and cash bonds.
H. Maintain fixed asset accounting as mandated by state law.
A. The Tax Assessor shall be the division head and have, perform and
discharge all the functions, powers and duties prescribed for Assessors
by the Charter and ordinances, N.J.S.A. Title 54 and shall also make
appraisals of property for any municipal purpose by approval of the
Director of Finance/Treasurer and/or the Manager.
B. Municipal Tax Assessor.
(1) Appointment; term; vacancies. The governing body shall appoint a
Municipal Tax Assessor pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-146 et seq. for a
term of four years. Vacancies in the office of the Tax Assessor shall
be filled by appointment for the unexpired term (N.J.S.A.
40A:9-148).
(2) Qualifications; duties. The Municipal Tax Assessor shall hold a Tax
Assessor Certificate as provided for in N.J.S.A. 54:1-35.25 et seq.
The Tax Assessor shall have the duty of assessing property for the
purpose of general taxation as provided by law (N.J.S.A.
40A:9-148.1).
C. There shall be a Deputy Tax Assessor, who shall generally assist the Tax
Assessor in the proper performance of all his duties. The Deputy Tax
Assessor shall have all the powers and perform all of the duties vested
in the Tax Assessor as such time as he shall be absent from the
Township or unable to serve by reason of disability or otherwise.
A. The Municipal Tax Collector shall be the division head.
B. Appointment. The Municipal Tax Collector shall be appointed to a term
of four years. Vacancies other than due to expiration of term shall be
filled by appointment for the unexpired term. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 20-6 LAWRENCE CODE § 20-8
1:88
C. Qualifications. No person shall be appointed or reappointed as
Municipal Tax Collector in any municipality of this state unless he shall
hold a Tax Collector Certificate issued pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:9-141,
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-145.2 and N.J.S.A. 40A:9-145.3. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
D. Duties.
(1) The Municipal Tax Collector shall have, perform and exercise all
the functions, powers and duties as are provided by the Charter
and municipal ordinances relating to Municipal Tax Collectors.
(2) The Municipal Tax Collector shall receive and collect all money
assessed or raised by taxation or assessment for any purpose.
(3) The Municipal Tax Collector shall keep proper records and shall
report to the director of the department at least monthly all
receipts and deposits made by him/her and shall in such report
account for all money for which he/she is responsible. He/she shall
keep a current record for all tax liens, advising the director
promptly as liens become subject to foreclosure under the law. He/
she shall enforce the payment of delinquent taxes by the means
provided by law as soon as the same become delinquent. He/she
shall also serve as Municipal Tax Search Officer and Collector of
Assessments.
(4) The Municipal Tax Collector shall bill and collect sewer rentals as
authorized by law and ordinance.
§ 20-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-8
1:89

ARTICLE III
Department of Public Safety
§ 20-9. Established; appointment of director. [Amended by Ord. No.
1316-92]
There shall be a Department of Public Safety, the head of which shall be the
Manager or his/her designee. The Department shall consist of the Division
of Police and the Division of Emergency Management.
§ 20-10. Division of Police. [Amended by Ord. No. 1794-04; at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. Creation; duties. [Amended by Ord. No. 1679-01; Ord. No.
1794-04]
(1) Creation; members. There is hereby created in and for the
Township of Lawrence, a Police Division within the Department of
Public Safety which shall consist of no more than one Chief of
Police, one Deputy Chief, two Captains, seven Lieutenants, 15
Sergeants and 85 Police Officers to be appointed to these positions
by the Township Manager.
(2) Duties. The Police Division shall preserve the public peace; protect
life and property; detect, arrest and prosecute offenders of the laws
of New Jersey and the ordinances of the Township of Lawrence;
direct and control traffic; provide attendance and protection during
emergencies; provide appearances in court; cooperate with all
other law enforcement agencies; and provide training for the
efficiency of its members and officers.
B. Appropriate authority designated. The Township Manager shall be
designated as the Appropriate Authority as provided in the New Jersey
Statutes. The Appropriate Authority shall be responsible for the overall
performance of the Police Division. The Appropriate Authority shall
adopt and promulgate Rules and Regulations for the government of the
Police Division and for the discipline of its members. [Amended by
Ord. No. 1794-04]
C. Chief of Police; head of Police Division. The Chief of Police shall be the
head of the Police Division and shall be directly responsible to the
appropriate authority for its efficiency and the day-to-day operations.
Pursuant to policies established by the appropriate authority, the Chief
of Police shall: [Amended by Ord. No. 1794-04]
(1) Administer and enforce the Rules and Regulations of the Police
Division and any special emergency directive for the disposition
and discipline of the Division and its members and officers;
(2) Have, exercise and discharge the functions, powers and duties of
the Police Division;
§ 20-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-10
1:91
(3) Prescribe the duties and assignments of all members and officers;
(4) Delegate such authority as may be deemed necessary for the
efficient operation of the Police Division to be exercised under the
Chief's direction and control; and
(5) Report at least monthly to the appropriate authority in such form as
shall be prescribed on the operation of the Police Division during
the preceding month and make such other reports as may be
requested by the appropriate authority.
D. Suspension or removal of officers. No member or officer of the Police
Division shall be suspended, removed, fined or reduced in rank for any
cause other than for incapacity, misconduct or disobedience as
provided in the New Jersey Statutes and the Police Division's Rules and
Regulations.
E. Appointments. No person shall be appointed to the Police Division who
is not qualified as provided in the New Jersey Statutes. The appropriate
authority may also require that an applicant for appointment to the
Police Division shall successfully complete a physical, mental and
psychological examination.
F. Functions of the Division. The Division of Police shall be responsible for
the proper and efficient conduct of all public safety functions of the
Township Government. It shall enforce within the Township all
applicable laws and ordinances pertaining to the safety of the public at
large. It shall provide such Police assistance as may be necessary to any
other department for its proper functioning. In particular, the Division
shall under the direction of the Chief: [Amended by Ord. No.
1316-92; Ord. No. 1928-07]
(1) Preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest
offenders against the penal laws and ordinances effective within
the Township.
(2) Administer and enforce laws and ordinances to regulate, direct,
control and restrict the movement of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, and the use of the streets by vehicles and persons generally.
(3) Remove all nuisances in the public streets, parks and public places;
inspect and observe all places of public amusement or assemblage
and all places of business requiring any State or municipal license
or permit and report thereon to the appropriate department.
(4) Operate a training program to maintain and improve the Police
efficiency of the members of the Division.
(5) Plan, manage and administer vehicular and pedestrian traffic
through the enforcement of laws and ordinances.
(6) Promote and preserve public peace through the enforcement of
federal, state and local laws and regulations.
§ 20-10 LAWRENCE CODE § 20-10
1:92
(7) Provide Police patrol coverage and the development and
implementation of crime prevention programs.
(8) Determine location and staff school traffic posts.
(9) Provide security to courtroom and personnel.
(10) Maintain and staff municipal detention facilities.
(11) Maintain and staff communication center for police, fire, rescue
and emergency medical services.
(12) Conduct investigations and detection of criminal offenses and
prosecution of offenders in the courts.
(13) Manage and supervise the emergency medical services (whether
paid and/or contracted) of Lawrence Township.
G. Organization. Subject to the supervision of the Manager, the Chief shall
organize and administer the work of the Division of Police through
divisions and bureaus authorized by ordinance, to the extent that any
such ordinance is not inconsistent with the Charter and this Code.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1316-92]
H. Manual of Police Discipline, Practices, etc. Subject to the approval of
the Manager, the Chief of Police shall promulgate, revise and enforce a
manual of Police discipline, practices and procedures for the better
administration of the work of the Division of Police and for the
discipline and efficiency of the Police Force. [Amended by Ord. No.
1316-92]
I. Special duty assignments for police officers. [Amended by Ord. No.
1805-04; Ord. No. 1814-04; 11-5-2015 by Ord. No. 2221-15;
12-5-2017 by Ord. No. 2281-17]
(1) Purpose. For the convenience of those persons and entities which
utilize the services of off-duty police officers and to authorize the
special duty employment of Township police while off-duty, the
Township hereby establishes a policy regarding the use of said
officers.
(a) Sworn officers of the Police Division shall be permitted to
accept police related employment for private employers only
during off-duty hours and at such times as will not interfere
with the efficient performance of regularly scheduled or
emergency duty for the Township.
(b) Any person or entity wishing to employ a special duty police
officer shall first obtain the approval of the Chief of Police (or
designee), which approval shall be granted if, in the opinion of
the Chief, such employment would not be inconsistent with the
efficient functioning and good reputation of the Police Division
§ 20-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-10
1:93
and would not unreasonably endanger or threaten the safety of
the employee or employees who are to perform the work.
(2) Escrow accounts.
(a) Any person or entity requesting the services of a special duty
police officer shall estimate the number of hours such services
are required, which estimate shall be approved by the Chief of
Police, and shall establish an escrow account with the Chief
Financial Officer of the Township by depositing an amount
sufficient to cover the rates of compensation and
administrative fees set forth in Subsection I(8) for the total
estimated hours of service.
(b) Prior to posting any request for services of special duty police
officers, the Chief of Police or his designee, shall verify that the
balance in the escrow account of the person or entity
requesting services is sufficient to cover the compensation and
fees for the number of hours specified in the request for
services. The Chief of Police shall not post nor offer a request
for services from any person or entity unless all fees and
compensation required in the manner described above have
been deposited with the Chief Financial Officer. No officer shall
provide any services for more hours than are specified in the
request for services.
(c) In the event the funds in said escrow account become depleted,
services of off-duty employees shall cease and requests for
further or future services shall not be performed or posted
until additional funds have been deposited in the escrow
account in the manner prescribed above.
(d) The person or entity requesting such services shall be
responsible for ensuring that sufficient funds remain in the
escrow account in order to avoid any interruption of services.
(e) Failure to pay. In the event the person or entity contracting for
such services should fail to pay any balance due for services
performed by the members of the Lawrence Township Police
Department, such failure shall be deemed a violation of this
section and subject the person or entity to the violations and
penalties set forth below.
(f) Exemption. All public utility companies that are under the
jurisdiction of and regulated by the New Jersey Board of Public
Utilities are exempt from the provisions set forth in this section
requiring advance payment to the escrow account; provided,
however, that there are no amounts previously due that are
outstanding prior to any officer engaging in any further special
duty assignments.
§ 20-10 LAWRENCE CODE § 20-10
1:94
(g) The Township may choose to utilize a secondary service to
administrate and perform the above actions related to the
special duty employment process. These actions include, but
are not limited to: communicating with said person or company
to schedule extra duty assignments, scheduling the officers for
the said assignments, invoicing person or entity and receiving
escrow and or payments from person or entity in a manner set
forth by the secondary service provider. The secondary service
provider may charge an additional fee for services that is
above and in addition to the fee structure stated above and
utilize business type collection rules as set forth in the
contract/agreement between the Township and the secondary
service provider.
(h) The secondary service provider will reimburse the Township
via ACH or other funds transfer methods, according to the fees
set forth in this section, due to the Township and Officer, in a
timely manner, usually coinciding with payroll periods for the
special duty assignment that the officers have performed or
were scheduled for in that period, in accordance with the
above listed rules of employment between the Township and
person(s) or entity seeking services.
(3) Requests for service. All requests to the Township for the services
of special duty police officers shall be forwarded to the Chief of
Police or the secondary service provider for posting at least 10 days
prior to the date that such services are required. Any employee
assigned and working pursuant to this regulation shall be treated
as an on-duty employee of the Township with the exception that
wages earned for outside employment shall not be applied toward
pension benefits, shall not be considered overtime and shall be paid
at a rate of pay as described in Subsection I(8).
(a) The Chief of Police will be responsible for scheduling
employees who will be assigned to special duty work as
described herein.
(b) The Chief of Police may establish a limit on assignments per
officer to ensure that special duty work does not impair an
officer's ability to perform during regularly scheduled tours of
duty.
(c) The Chief of Police shall determine if a Township vehicle is
required for the special duty assignment and shall assign a
vehicle in such cases as he deems necessary. A vehicle fee will
be charged to the person or entity for the use of such
vehicle(s). The vehicle fee will be charged at a rate as
described in Subsection I(8). No administrative fee will be
added to the hourly vehicle rate.
§ 20-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-10
1:95
(d) All police services within the Township shall be delivered by
officers from the Lawrence Township Police Department. If the
Chief of Police determines that the demand cannot be met by
the Lawrence Township Police Department, he may request
additional law enforcement officers from outside agencies.
(4) Special duty assignments voluntary.
(a) The work to be performed shall be considered a special duty
assignment from independent contractors and will not be
considered a direct assignment. The taking of any special duty
assignments shall be on a voluntary basis in accordance with a
fair and reasonable system established and administered by
the Chief of Police. Any employee of the Township assigned and
working pursuant to this regulation shall be treated as an onduty
employee of the Township with the exception that wages
earned for outside employment shall not be applied toward
pension benefits, shall not be considered overtime and shall be
paid at a rate of pay as described in Subsection I(8).
(b) The Township reserves the right to assign an on-duty employee
to fill a special duty assignment that cannot be filled in such
cases where the Chief of Police deems such action to be in the
best interest of the Township. In such cases, the Township shall
first have posted such assignment without attaining a qualified
employee. Should an employee be assigned on-duty, the
employee shall receive his/her regular rate of compensation for
the assignment. The Township shall retain the right to bill for
such an assignment.
(5) Cancellation of assignment. Any assignment which is canceled on
less than four hours' notice shall be charged against the party and
paid to the employee so assigned. Any other canceled assignment
shall not be billable to the party nor payable to the employee.
(6) Chief's order to vacate assignment. The Chief of Police has the
authority to order any employee to vacate or terminate any special
duty assignment in response to emergency situations or whenever
the assignment creates an unacceptable risk to health, safety and/
or welfare of the employee and/or the public in the sole
determination and discretion of the Chief of Police. The contractor
shall not be responsible for any compensation for the time that the
employee is away from the special duty assignment and shall have
no claim for costs or damages against the Township, the Chief or
the employee arising from the termination of special duty
assignment other than the prorated return of any costs prepaid to
the Township.
(7) Township to provide insurance coverage. The Township shall be
responsible to provide all necessary insurance coverage, as
required by law, including, but not limited to, workers
§ 20-10 LAWRENCE CODE § 20-10
1:96
compensation, public liability, and claims for damage, for personal
injury including death or damage to property which may arise as
a result of the Township's performance under the contract. The
Township may, however, discipline or remove any employee from
eligibility for special duty assignments if, in the opinion of the Chief
of Police, his/her job performance or actions place the Township in
a position that may result in a claim for liability.
(8) Rates of compensation; administrative fee; payment for services.
Rate of compensation for contracting the services of special duty
police officers shall be established as described herein:
Rates of Compensation; Administrative Fee; Payment for
Services
(hourly rates)
Type Rate
Special duty police officer road/utility/
construction
$75
Special duty supervisor security
assignment
$50
Special duty police officer security
assignment
$45
Emergent requests less than 48
hours' notice (additional)
$10 per hour
Emergent requests less than 4 hours'
notice (additional)
$25 per hour
Marked patrol vehicle $28
Administrative fee per officer hour $5
(9) Length of assignment. The minimum payment for any assignment
shall be four hours at the rates described above.
(10) Emergent circumstances. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit
special duty assignments where emergent conditions make
compliance with one or more provision of this section infeasible.
(a) Where emergent circumstances result in a request for a special
duty assignment, the Chief Financial Officer may waive the
requirement of an escrow deposit as provided for in Subsection
I(2), Escrow accounts.
(b) In emergent circumstances, the Chief of Police may authorize a
special assignment with less than the ten-day posting
requirement provided for in Subsection I(3), Requests for
service.
§ 20-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-10
1:97
(c) In emergent circumstances where a special duty assignment is
requested within 48 hours but more than four hours of the
special duty assignment, an additional cost of $10 per hour will
be added to the officer's rate. Requests within four hours of the
special duty assignment an additional cost of $25 per hour will
be added to the officer's rate. The additional cost will assist in
obtaining coverage during the late or emergent request for
police services.
(11) Violations and penalties. Unless another penalty is provided by
New Jersey Statute, every person, entity, contractor or utility
convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $250 or more than $1,000. This
fine is in addition to any outstanding funds owed to the Township or
secondary service provider regarding services performed by the
Lawrence Township Police Department.
J. Classifying qualified applicants for the position of Police Officer and
granting preference to qualified applicants who are residents.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1375-93]
(1) Findings. N.J.S.A. 40A:14-122.1 prohibits residency requirements
for municipal Police Officers, but N.J.S.A. 40A:14-123.1a authorizes
municipalities to classify qualified applicants by residence and to
appoint from the class of municipal residents before appointing
from other classes; and the Township desires to classify qualified
applicants for the position of Lawrence Township Police Officer and
to give appointment preference to Township residents.
(2) Classification.
(a) All duly qualified applicants for the position of Lawrence
Township Police Officer shall be classified in the following
classes:
[1] Residents of Lawrence Township.
[2] Other residents of Mercer County.
[3] Other residents of the State of New Jersey.
[4] All other qualified applicants.
(b) All appointments to the position of Lawrence Township Police
Officer shall be made in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40A:14-123.1a, with all those in Class I to be appointed first
and then those in each succeeding class in the order above
listed.
(c) All applicants classified Class I must be residents of Lawrence
Township as of the announced closing date of the Civil Service
examination for the position and must maintain such residency
continuously up to and including the date of appointment.
§ 20-10 LAWRENCE CODE § 20-10
1:98
(d) A copy of this subsection shall be forwarded to the New Jersey
Department of Personnel.
K. Duty hours. The hours of employment of uniformed members of the
Police Department shall not exceed eight consecutive hours in any one
day, nor 40 hours in any one week; provided that, in case of emergency,
the Township Manager, the Chief of Police, or anyone acting for the
Manager or the Chief of Police, shall have full authority to summon and
keep on duty any and all such members during the period of emergency.
L. Training prerequisite to permanent appointments.
(1) No person shall be given or accept a permanent appointment as a
Police Officer in the Township unless such person has successfully
completed a Police training course at a school approved and
authorized by the Police Training Commission in the Department of
Law and Public Safety of the state, pursuant to the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 52:17B-66 to N.J.S.A. 52:17B-71.
(2) This section shall not prohibit the giving or accepting of a
probationary or temporary appointment as a Police Officer for a
period not to exceed one year, to enable a person seeking a
permanent appointment to complete a Police training course as
prescribed by the Police Training Commission.
(3) No person shall be permitted to take a Police training course unless
he holds a probationary or temporary appointment as a Police
Officer in the Township, and such appointee shall be entitled to a
leave of absence with pay during the period of the Police training
course.
M. Special Law Enforcement Officers.
(1) Appointment. The Township Manager may by resolution appoint
Special Law Enforcement Officers pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:47-19,3
and the provisions of this section.
(2) Term of office. Appointment under this subsection shall be for a
term not exceeding one year, and shall be revocable by the
Township Manager with or without cause and without notice of
hearing or the filing of charges. Such Special Law Enforcement
Officers shall not be members of the Police Department and their
powers, rights and duties shall immediately cease at the expiration
of the term for which they were appointed or upon revocation of
their appointment, whichever is first.
(3) Investigation of qualifications of prospective appointee. Before any
appointment is made, the Chief of Police shall, upon request of the
Township Manager, ascertain whether the applicant for
appointment is qualified under the applicable laws of the state and
3. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:47-19 was repealed by L.1971, c. 197, eff. July 1, 1971.
§ 20-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-10
1:99
the provisions of this section, and shall report thereon to the
Township Manager within 30 days after such request, unless the
period of time is otherwise extended.
(4) Qualifications.
(a) No person shall be appointed as a Special Law Enforcement
Officer unless he meets the following qualifications. The
applicant shall:
[1] Be 21 years of age or over.
[2] Be physically and mentally fit in the opinion of the
Township Physician.
[3] Be a citizen of the United States and a resident of the
Township for two years next preceding the date of
appointment, unless waived by the Township Manager.
[4] Be able to read, write and speak the English language
fluently.
[5] Not have been convicted of any crime.
[6] At the time of the appointment hold an appointment as a
Civil Defense Auxiliary Police Officer and have completed
the training required for such appointment by the County
Civil Defense and Disaster Control organization.
[7] Be of good moral character.
(b) The requirements of subparagraph 2. may be waived by the
Township Manager if it appears that the duties to be performed
by the applicant as a Special Law Enforcement Officer are not
such as to require appointment or training by the civil defense
authorities.
(5) Supervision and direction. Such Special Law Enforcement Officers
shall be under the supervision and direction of the Chief of Police
and shall abide by the Rules and Regulations of the Police
Department as now or hereafter adopted insofar as they are
applicable to the duties and responsibilities of Special Law
Enforcement Officers.
(6) Powers and duties. In addition, such Special Law Enforcement
Officers shall:
(a) Report to and obtain permission from the Chief of Police prior
to performing any Police duties, giving the nature, time and
place and date of such duties.
(b) Report for Police Duty to the Chief of Police whenever ordered
to do so in the event of any emergency or disaster; or when
§ 20-10 LAWRENCE CODE § 20-10
1:100
§ 20-11. Fire Division. [Added 4-21-2010 by Ord. No. 2049-10]
otherwise, in the opinion of the Chief of Police, such duty is
required to protect the public safety.
(c) Dress in Special Law Enforcement Officer regulation uniforms
when on duty whether for public or private purposes, as may
be determined by the Chief of Police.
(d) Perform Police duty only in the Township, except when in fresh
pursuit of any person pursuant to Chapter 156 of Title 2A of the
Statutes of New Jersey, or as otherwise may be authorized or
required by law.
(7) Carrying of weapons. No Special Law Enforcement Officer shall
carry a revolver or other weapon when off duty, nor carry such
firearms when on duty except when necessary and then only upon
the express direction of and prior approval by the Chief of Police.
(8) Fingerprints. Special Law Enforcement Officers shall be
fingerprinted and the fingerprints shall be filed with the Division of
State Police and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
(9) Badges. Special Law Enforcement Officers shall be furnished a
badge upon their appointment and shall deposit with the Police
Department the sum of $10 upon receipt of such badge, which sum
shall be refunded upon the return of the badge and which badge in
any event shall be returned at the expiration of the appointed term
or any renewal thereof.
N. Disciplinary hearings. Whenever the Chief of Police is serving as
Director of the division, the Township Manager shall have power to
hear and determine any charge or charges filed against a member of
the Police Force pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:47-1 et seq.4
O. Physician-Police Surgeon. There shall be a Township Physician-Police
Surgeon, who shall be appointed by the Manager. The Physician-Police
Surgeon shall be called whenever the attendance of a physician is
required by the Police Force. He shall also provide such other services,
within the limits of available appropriations, as may be required for
routine examinations under Township personnel regulations and other
official purposes.
A. There shall be a Lawrence Township Fire Division (hereby referred to
as Division of Fire) in Lawrence Township with three separate
firefighting stations.
(1) The fire stations shall consist of Slackwood Volunteer Fire
Company (Station 21), the Lawrence Road Volunteer Fire Company
4. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:47-1 to N.J.S.A. 40:47-4.5, N.J.S.A. 40:47-5 to N.J.S.A. 40:47-11,
and N.J.S.A. 40:47-12.1 to N.J.S.A. 40:47-14 were repealed by L.1971, c. 197, eff. July 1,
1971.
§ 20-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-11
1:101
(Station 22), and the Lawrenceville Volunteer Fire Company
(Station 23).
B. The Fire Chief shall be the ranking officer of each fire company.
(1) The Fire Chief shall in all cases where fire threatens life or damage
or destruction of property within the Township take prompt and
efficient measures and use the means of their station to extinguish
the fire and shall at such times and occasions have the sole and
absolute control and command over all the fire apparatus and all
members of their respective station.
C. The Division of Fire is hereby created and shall be a division under the
Department of Public Safety within the Township of Lawrence.
(1) The Fire Chief shall consult and cooperate with the Division of Fire
administrator for the conduct, efficiency and management of each
station and for the enforcement of the rules and regulations
governing the same. In the absence of the Fire Chief at any
emergency or nonemergency activity in which the fire station is
operating, the chain of command shall move to the next ranking
officer of each fire station.
D. The Director of Public Safety shall appoint a person to be the
administrator of the Division of Fire. The administrator of the division
shall be the executive head and charge thereof, and shall be responsible
to and under the supervision of the Director of Public Safety. The
administrator of the Division of Fire shall have the required firefighting
training and command experience for the position.
(1) The Division of Fire shall consist of any and all paid firefighters of
the Township together with any volunteer fire station operating
within the Township. The personnel of the paid firefighters and
such volunteer fire companies shall constitute the Division of Fire
in Lawrence Township.
(2) Each fire station shall elect its own Fire Chief and fire line officers,
as well as its own administrative officers separate and distinct of
the Township of Lawrence, Department of Public Safety, Division of
Fire.
(3) There shall be within the Division of Fire any number of volunteer
districts as established by the Division of Fire administrator.
E. It shall be the responsibility of the Division of Fire administrator in
conjunction with the Fire Chief of each station, under the authority of
the Director of Public Safety to:
(1) Establish policy, procedures and orders for the efficient operation
of the Division and ensure compliance with same.
§ 20-11 LAWRENCE CODE § 20-11
1:102
§ 20-12. Division of Code Enforcement. [Added 4-21-2010 by Ord.
No. 2049-10]
(2) Establish orders for the efficient operation of fire ground
operations, in conjunction with the Fire Chiefs of each district and
to also establish a chain of command for fire ground operations.
(3) Ensure the proper training of all members of the Fire Division.
(4) Provide adequate equipment and materials in order for the Division
to operate, including purchasing and procurement of equipment
and services.
(5) Preparation of annual operating and capital budgets, as provided
by the Fire Chief of each fire company.
(6) Responsibility for preventative maintenance and repairs of fire
apparatus and equipment.
(7) Manage the general buildings and facilities of the fire companies,
including cleaning, repairs and renovations.
(8) Provide coordination of firefighting activities and training exercises
between the three fire companies.
(9) Ensure compliance with state laws and local ordinances with
regards to the operations of the Division.
(10) Prepare monthly operational reports on the activities of the
Lawrence Township Fire Division, including state NFIRS reporting.
(11) Develop and manage a system of recordkeeping for all fire
department administrative and personnel functions, including, but
not limited to, individual member training requirements, training
programs, equipment inventories, budget and purchasing and any
other required reporting that is required or requested.
(12) Identify and apply for grant and other funding opportunities
related to Fire Division activities.
(13) Responsibility for the oversight and development of a volunteer
recruitment program for the fire companies.
(14) Coordinate box alarm plans with each Fire Chief for approval of the
Director of Public Safety.
(15) Complete any other duties as designated by the Director of Public
Safety.
A. There shall be a Division of Code Enforcement under the Department of
Public Safety with the Fire Marshall as the division administrator.
B. The Fire Marshall shall:
§ 20-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-12
1:103
§ 20-13. Division of Emergency Management. [Amended by Ord. No.
1316-92; Ord. No. 1928-07; 4-21-2010 by Ord. No. 2049-10]
(1) Enforce and ensure compliance with the Uniform Fire Code, NFPA,
International Building Code, International Fire Code, both New
Jersey editions, local municipal ordinances and other related codes.
(2) Review construction plans under the Uniform Construction Code as
it relates to the Planning Board and Zoning Board for exterior fire
safety issues and recommendations.
(3) Issue permits under the Uniform Fire Code.
(4) Respond to and conduct investigation of all fires.
(5) Develop and conduct fire prevention programs, including
education, training and demonstrations.
(6) Respond to emergency calls for service for fire and/or emergency
medical service under the authority of the Director of Public Safety
at any time.
(7) Provide assistance to the Fire Chief in any manner possible on any
fire service operation at any time the fire service or emergency
medical services is in operation.
(8) Coordinate safety and training programs for Township employees.
(9) Ensure compliance with Right to Know and PEOSHA regulations.
(10) Participate as a member of the Public Safety Committee.
(11) Complete any other duties as designated by the Director of Public
Safety.
A. There shall be a Division of Emergency Management under the
Department of Public Safety with an Emergency Management Director
as the division administrator.
B. The Emergency Management Director shall:
(1) Maintain a comprehensive emergency management plan. In the
preparation of this plan as it pertains to the Township of Lawrence
organization it is the intent that the services, equipment, facilities
and personnel of all existing departments, agencies, boards and
committees, including volunteer fire companies and emergency
medical services, shall be utilized to the fullest extent to protect the
peace, health and safety of citizens. When the plan is approved, it
shall be the duty of all municipal departments to perform the
functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion of the
plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The basic plan shall
be considered supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of
§ 20-12 LAWRENCE CODE § 20-13
1:104
law whenever a disaster has been proclaimed. The plan shall be
compatible with county and state plans.
(2) Provide communications during emergencies.
(3) Provide preparedness for and coordination during times of
declared emergencies.
(4) Participate as a member of the Public Safety Committee.
(5) Enforce local Township ordinances and other related codes.
(6) Abide by all federal and state laws regarding the position of
Emergency Management Director.
(7) Respond to emergency calls for service for fire and/or emergency
medical services under the authority of the Director of Public
Safety at any time.
(8) Provide assistance to the Fire Chief in any manner possible on any
fire service operation at any time the fire service or emergency
medical services is in operation.
(9) Identify and apply for grant and other funding opportunities related
to Fire Division activities.
(10) Management and administration of the Lawrence Township
Emergency Medical Services.
(11) Complete any other duties as designated by the Director of Public
Safety.
C. The Director of Public Safety shall promulgate rules, regulations,
policies and procedures to effectively operate all three divisions.
In the event no ranking member of any fire station is available to
command the scene of an emergency or other non-emergency that the
fire company has been assigned, the Division of Fire Administrator, the
Fire Marshall or the Director of Emergency Management shall assume
command of the scene until that time that a fire station officer so
relieves them.
D. The Division of Fire Administrator, the Fire Marshall and the
Emergency Management Director shall, for the purposes of table of
organization and chain of command issues, be equal in rank to a
command level officer in the fire service.
E. No fire apparatus of any kind belonging to the Township shall be taken
beyond the Township limits without the express authority of the
Director of Public Safety unless in response to a request for mutual aid
from another municipality. In any case fire apparatus is sent beyond the
Township limits, enough apparatus and staffing must be left within the
Township to adequately protect the municipality.
§ 20-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-13
1:105
F. The Director of Public Safety may assign the duties of each division to
any Township employee or volunteer as he sees fit for the efficient
operation of the department. Additionally, the Director of Public Safety
shall set up a chain-of-command structure for any division
administrator as he believes will successfully fulfill the intent of this
article.
G. The Department of Public Safety shall operate under the Incident
Command System.
§ 20-13 LAWRENCE CODE § 20-13
1:106
ARTICLE IV
Department of Public Works
§ 20-14. Created; Director.
There shall be a Department of Public Works, the head of which shall be the
Director. Prior to appointment, the Director shall be qualified by education,
training and experience for the duties of the office. Within the Department,
there shall be Divisions of Building and Grounds, Street Services, Motor
Pool and such other divisions as the Manager may prescribe.
§ 20-15. Powers and duties of Director.
Under the supervision and direction of the Manager, the Director shall:
§ 20-16. Division of Buildings and Grounds.
Within the Department of Public Works there shall be a Division of Buildings
and Grounds. The division, under the direction and supervision of the
Municipal Park Superintendent/Superintendent of Public Property, who
shall be the division head and shall:
§ 20-17. Division of Street Services.
Within the Department of Public Works there shall be a Division of Street
Services. The division, under the direction and supervision of the general
supervisor, streets, who shall be the division head, and shall:
A. Administer the work of the department.
B. Supervise or maintain departmental records, and collect and record
data for payroll and inventory controls and cost analyses.
C. Enforce standards and procedures for the control, use and care of all
Township-owned equipment, materials and supplies in the custody of
the department, including acquisition of Township vehicles/equipment.
D. Supervise leaf collection and snow removal from all dedicated Township
roadways, municipal owned walkways, parking areas, etc.
E. Administer contractual services for garbage collection, shade tree
maintenance and various building maintenance service contracts.
F. Coordinate disposition of surplus municipal property.
G. Participate in Employee Safety Committee meeting.
A. Operate and maintain public buildings owned by the Township.
B. Develop, improve and maintain such parks, playgrounds, open space
areas, and community facilities as the Township may have or acquire for
the purposes of public recreation or conservation.
§ 20-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-17
1:107
§ 20-18. Division of Motor Pool.
Within the Department of Public Works there shall be a Division of Motor
Pool. The division, under the direction and supervision of the Supervisor of
Motor Pool, who shall be the division head, shall:
A. Maintain and repair all Township streets, bridges, culverts, storm
sewers and drains.
B. Undertake and administer Township road construction projects, and
road surfacing and resurfacing projects which are to be performed by
the department on force account.
C. Maintain all Township streets in a clean and safe condition for travel,
free of obstructions and hazards, and remove snow and ice therefrom as
required.
D. Install, repair and maintain street traffic signs, lines and markers.
A. Maintain and service all Township-owned vehicles.
B. Maintain and service all Township-owned service equipment.
§ 20-17 LAWRENCE CODE § 20-18
1:108
ARTICLE V
Department of Recreation
§ 20-19. Created; qualifications of Superintendent.
There shall be a Department of Recreation, the head of which shall be
the Superintendent. Within the department, there shall be the Division
of Recreation and the Office on Aging. Prior to appointment, the
Superintendent shall be qualified by education, training and experience in
public recreation functions.
§ 20-20. Powers, duties and functions of Superintendent. [Amended
by Ord. No. 1335-92; Ord. No. 1379-94; Ord. No. 1445-96]
The Superintendent, subject to the direction and supervision of the
Manager, shall administer the work of the department. He/she shall be the
Head of the Division of Recreation and shall:
§ 20-21. Admission fees.
The Department of Recreation may sponsor, arrange and provide for the
giving of indoor and outdoor exhibitions, concerts, games and contests and
may use and employ public property for such purposes. The Department
may recommend, charge and collect for the use of the Township a
reasonable admission fee for each person entering or using facilities,
A. Administer, operate and maintain athletic, sports, and leisure time
programs and activities of recreation interest for children and adults.
B. Prepare and maintain a roster of qualified seasonal and part-time
recreation program employees.
C. In cooperation with the Public Works Director, plan for new and
improved recreation areas and facilities.
D. Cooperate and participate with other municipal, school, county, state
and federal agencies in the development, administration, financing, and
operation of recreation programs, including applications for loans and
grants for the use and benefit of Township residents.
E. Develop and prepare long-term open space acquisition for recreation
and park development plan.
F. Conduct training and safety orientation programs for coaches as
required by law.
G. Help senior citizens maintain their pride and independence as long as
possible.
H. Develop community awareness of senior citizen needs and senior
citizen awareness of community needs. Educate the community about
the aging and aging process. Encourage interaction between senior
citizens and other residents of the Township.
§ 20-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-21
1:109
exhibitions, concerts, games or contests provided under this division,
except as the Council may otherwise provide by resolution. Such fees may
be found in Chapter 156 of this Code.
§ 20-22. Rules and regulations.
§ 20-23. Office on Aging. [Amended by Ord. No. 1445-96]
Within the Recreation Department, there shall be an Office on Aging, the
head of which shall be the Director. The Director shall report to the
Superintendent of Recreation and shall:
A. The Department of Recreation may adopt reasonable rules, regulations
and bylaws for the conduct of all persons while on or using such public
property devoted to park or recreational uses. Any person who shall
violate any such rules, regulations or bylaws shall be adjudged to be a
disorderly person.
B. The custodians, supervisors and assistants appointed for the
department shall, while on duty and for the purpose of preserving order
and the observance of the rules, regulations and bylaws of the
department, have the power and authority of Special Law Enforcement
Officers of the Township.
A. Create and develop all programs for Lawrence residents 60 years of age
or older, including, but not limited to, education, recreation, health,
exercise, support and transportation.
B. Provide direct counseling to both senior citizens and concerning family
members upon request, referring them to appropriate public agencies
and private sector advisors as necessary.
C. Handle senior citizen social service problems and aid in the settlement
of such matters as landlord/tenant relationships, housing, Medicare,
etc., enabling the person involved to reach a satisfactory solution.
D. Make senior citizens aware of services and programs available to them
and help them participate where applicable. Provide a comprehensive
information and referral system. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
E. Act as chief Township representative in all matters concerned with
sponsorship of Lawrence Township senior clubs.
F. Assist in the development of plans and programs for the Lawrence
Township Senior Citizen Center. Administer the Center with the
assistance of a Senior Center Executive Committee. The Committee
shall be an Advisory Committee to the Office on Aging in the operation
of the Senior Center. The Senior Center Executive Committee shall
consist of 13 senior citizen members appointed by the Mayor and
Council. The members shall serve terms of four years, beginning
January 1 of the year of appointment, except that there shall be initial
§ 20-21 LAWRENCE CODE § 20-23
1:110
terms of one, two, three and four years, respectively, for the four
newly created positions. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired
term only and members shall serve until their respective successors are
appointed and shall receive no compensation for their services.
§ 20-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-23
1:111

ARTICLE VI
Department of Health
§ 20-24. Created; qualifications of Director.
There shall be a Department of Health, the head of which shall be the
Director. Prior to his/her appointment, the Director shall be qualified by
education, training and experience in the field of public health.
§ 20-25. Division of Health. [Amended by Ord. No. 1341-93]
Within the Department there shall be a Division of Health, the head of
which shall be the Health Officer licensed as Health Officer by the New
Jersey Department of Health. Under the supervision of the Health Officer,
the division shall:
A. Have all of the functions, powers and duties of a local Board of Health
under Title 26 of the New Jersey Statutes, except that as required by
the Charter, the Council shall have and exercise all local legislative
powers under that Title.
B. Plan and administer a comprehensive public health program, including,
without limitation thereto, environmental sanitation, communicable
disease control, child and adult health and health education, laboratory
services, prevention and control of drug and narcotics abuse and other
services as may be authorized by the Charter or ordinance.
C. Administer and enforce the local health ordinances in accordance with
Public Statute Chapter 329 minimum standards of performance for
local Boards of Health promulgated by State Law, New Jersey
Administrative Code (Title 8 - Chapter 52) pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3A2-1
et seq.
D. Administer animal control operations.
E. Conduct health screenings, cholesterol, glaucoma, and blood pressure
tests for immunizations, rabies, vaccinations.
F. Review site plan and subdivision applications.
G. Implement investigative procedures and possible litigations of
hazardous waste incidents.
H. Implement and administer workers' Right to Know legislation.
I. Conduct inspections and, with recommendation of the Municipal
Engineer, approve or deny necessary permits in accordance with New
Jersey State Sanitary Code (N.J.S.A. 26:1A-9).
J. Enforce applicable New Jersey Department of Environmental
Protection rules and regulations as they pertain to individual
subsurface disposal systems, air and water quality and noise pollution.
§ 20-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-25
1:113
§ 20-26. Health Advisory Board. [Amended by Ord. No. 1141-93;
Ord. No. 1446-96; Ord. No. 1979-08]
Within the Department, there shall be a Health Advisory Board. The Board
shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the Council, at least one
of whom shall be either a registered nurse or a physician. Each member
shall serve for a term of three years. Vacancies shall be filled by the Council
for the remainder of the unexpired term. The Board shall adopt bylaws for
the conduct of its affairs, organize annually, and select its Chairman and
other officers in accordance with such bylaws. The Board shall:
K. Conduct epidemiological investigation of all reportable communicable
diseases.
A. Advise and consult with the Health Officer with respect to the public
health needs and programs of the Township.
B. Review and make recommendations to the Health Officer with respect
to public health hazards, including drug and narcotics abuse, in and
about the Township.
C. Study and report on proposed health ordinances to the Health Officer,
the Manager and the Council, and make such other reports as it may
from time to time deem necessary or desirable with respect to public
health matters.
D. The Health Officer shall serve as secretary of the Health Advisory
Board.
§ 20-25 LAWRENCE CODE § 20-26
1:114
ARTICLE VII
Department of Community Development
§ 20-27. Established; appointment of Director. [Amended by Ord.
No. 1316-92; Ord. No. 1362-93; Ord. No. 1979-05]
There shall be a Department of Community Development, the head of
which shall be the Director. The Department shall consist of the Division
of Planning and Redevelopment, Engineering, and Construction Code
Enforcement.
§ 20-28. Division of Planning and Redevelopment. [Amended by
Ord. No. 1362-93]
The Division of Planning and Redevelopment, the head of which shall report
to the Municipal Manager, shall:
A. Provide administrative coordination and implementation of the initial
applicant filings, processes, procedures, determinations, payment of
fees and costs, issuance of permits, compliance and enforcement
activity of all boards, officers and agencies of the Township having
jurisdiction over land use and development.
B. Conduct continuous studies and collect statistical and other data to
serve as the basis for planning recommendations.
C. Develop and administer programs and activities for the rehabilitation of
housing and the conservation of neighborhoods.
D. Develop and promote the means and techniques for producing
affordable housing construction and promote and facilitate the
production of such housing.
E. Provide assistance to nonprofit and private sector organizations
involved in low- and moderate-income housing.
F. Monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of ongoing low- and moderateincome
housing programs.
G. Provide outreach mechanisms for citizen involvement and participation
in Township housing programs.
H. Identify appropriate further sites for low- and moderate-income
housing, including senior citizen housing.
I. Maintain an updated informational file on development statistics which
could be used in master plan updating, determining the adequacy and/
or need for community facilities and services, and aid in the process of
growth management planning.
J. Create and maintain a system of application and development
processing administration as it relates to bonding, inspections,
payment of fees and filing of maps, deeds, and other records.
§ 20-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-28
1:115
K. Review all site plan and subdivision applications and all applications for
variances from the zoning ordinance and all supporting documents and
shall submit reports of these reviews to the appropriate board.
L. Grantmanship and planning. At the request of the Township Manager,
prepare and submit applications for federal, state and county grant
programs. Research and develop strategies to maintain and improve
the housing stock of the Township, conduct research in the field of
affordable housing, recommend methods and techniques for generating
and preserving low- and moderate-income housing and examine means
for financing same and prepare applications for the funding and
financing of housing and development projects and related
improvements. To this end, this Office shall:
(1) Upon request, prepare a comprehensive housing plan for the
Township to serve as a basis for the housing element in the
Township Master Plan and, at the request of the Director of
Community Development, prepare such plans, studies, analyses,
surveys and reports which may, from time to time, be necessary to
implement the comprehensive housing plan or to guide
governmental policy in order to assure the orderly and coordinated
development of housing in the Township and the preservation of its
existing housing resources.
(2) Establish liaison with neighborhood groups and organizations on
matters related to housing.
M. Housing operations. The Office shall operate all neighborhood
preservation, property rehabilitation, and new low/moderate-income
housing development programs designed to increase the availability of
affordable housing to these target populations. To this end, this Office
shall:
(1) Operate the Township's Neighborhood Preservation Program and
any garden apartment set-aside or purchase write down program,
and initiate low-cost home improvement projects using government
assistance.
(2) Operate, assist, and coordinate all appropriate rehabilitation
programs related to low- and moderate-income housing. This
includes the rental rehabilitation program and federal grant and
loan programs, and other programs if such programs become
operational and all other local low/moderate-income housing
initiatives. In the conduct of its work, this office shall maintain
appropriate records and files on all programs under its jurisdiction
and prepare regular status reports of its activities.
(3) Operate the Township small cities community development block
grant programs.
(4) Assist housing conservation and accessory apartment
developments designed to provide affordable housing.
§ 20-28 LAWRENCE CODE § 20-28
1:116
(5) Counsel tenants and homeowners requiring assistance in a referral
capacity on matters relating to low- and moderate-income housing.
(6) Provide relocation assistance when brought about by operations
related to the activities of the Office of Housing and
Redevelopment.
N. Mount Laurel. Administer the Township's Mount Laurel II compliance
program requirements for advertising of housing units, tenants, or
owner selection for advertising of housing units, tenants, or owner
selection procedures, and priorities, including re-rental and resale
procedures, and established detailed price, rent, unit size and other
criteria for low- and moderate-income housing unit, pursuant to
standards established by such ordinance or ordinances adopted from
time to time by the Township Council. Approve applications submitted
for the sale, resale, rental or re-rental of Mount Laurel units.
O. Provide proper administrative coordination and implementation of all
Township land use and development activities, including:
(1) Preparation of written agendas, time schedules and enforcement
and compliance checklists, responsibility assignments, and
administrative procedures for all Township boards, officers and
agencies concerned, for the purpose of providing maximum
administrative coordination and efficiency between their respective
functions.
(2) Request, prepare, coordinate and disseminate reports so that all
interested Township boards, officers and agencies may be apprised
on a continuing basis of the status of all land use, development, and
housing and redevelopment activities.
(3) Provide the Township Council and Manager, together with all
interested boards, officers and agencies with continuing
recommendations for modification to Township ordinances and
regulations as may be deemed necessary to ensure proper
administrative coordination and implementation of all land use and
development activities and their planning.
(4) Investigate, coordinate and prepare reports and recommendations
on site plan and subdivision applications and on such other matters
as may be requested by the Planning Board.
(5) Attend meetings of all Township boards and agencies having
jurisdiction over land use and development, as such may be
necessary to facilitate and implement administrative coordination
of their respective activities.
(6) Prepare, maintain and make recommendations respecting the
Township's capital improvement program to ensure its consistency
with the Master Plan and pending or projected land use and
development projects.
§ 20-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-29
1:117
§ 20-29. Division of Engineering.
The Division of Engineering, the head of which shall be the Township
Engineer, shall:
§ 20-30. Division of Code Enforcement. [Amended by Ord. No. 1316]
A. Prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and specifications for public
works and improvements undertaken by the Township, either on force
account or by public contract.
B. Supervise the performance of contracts for public works and certify the
amounts due and payable thereunder.
C. Provide and maintain surveys, maps, plans, specifications and
operating standards with respect to public works and facilities owned
or operated by the Township.
D. Provide technical and engineering advice and assistance to all
Township boards, officers, agencies and departments, as such may be
requested.
E. Maintain a registry and standardized filing, retention and retrieval
system for all engineering, planning and construction applications,
plans, specifications and documents, to the extent not inconsistent with
the duties prescribed by law or ordinance for the Clerks of the various
Boards receiving such documents as well as the Construction Official.
F. Evaluate all site plan, subdivision and other land use development plans
and specifications in accordance with criteria for accepted standard
engineering practice and standards prescribed by law and ordinance.
G. Assist in the preparation and maintenance of an Official Map of the
Township, as such may be directed by the Township Council.
H. Administer and coordinate required inspection programs to ensure that
all land use development adheres to the engineering requirements of
their respective approved site or subdivision plans and other applicable
engineering requirements of laws and ordinances.
A. The division shall consist of the Construction Official and any
Construction Subcode Officials as deemed necessary and appropriate
by the Manager. The Construction Code Official and all Construction
Subcode Officials shall be duly licensed by the State of New Jersey prior
to and during the term of office. The division shall also consist of the
Housing Inspector(s). Fire Inspector(s), and the Township Safety
Officer.
B. The division shall:
(1) Conduct and administer such inspections and enforcement
proceedings as are authorized by the ordinances and laws under its
jurisdiction.
§ 20-29 LAWRENCE CODE § 20-30
1:118
(2) Coordinate and consolidate, if necessary, all regulatory inspections
relating to the construction, maintenance, use and occupancy of
buildings and structures.
(3) Administer and enforce the Township zoning ordinance, subject to
the provisions of law.
(4) Issue all permits and licenses required by law and maintain records
of all permits and applications with applicable special conditions, if
any.
(5) Record, report on and retain on file records of all inspections, as
well as all violation notices, orders and enforcement proceedings.
(6) Subject to budget limitations and approval by the Manager, obtain
special consultant services for inspections or technical advice not
available from the Township Engineer.
(7) Review all building construction plans and specifications to insure
compliance with state and local laws and ordinances.
(8) Enforce and ensure compliance with Uniform Fire Code, Uniform
Construction Code, NFPA and BOCA Building Codes, local
municipal ordinances and other related codes.
(9) Issue permits under the Uniform Fire Code.
(10) Enforce and ensure compliance with housing standards prescribed
by Township Code.
(11) Develop and conduct fire prevention programs including
education, training and demonstrations.
(12) Respond to and conduct investigation of all fires.
(13) Coordinate safety and training programs for Township employees.
(14) Ensure compliance with Right to Know and PEOSHA regulations.
§ 20-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 20-30
1:119
Chapter 26
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 26-1. Definitions.
As used in this section:
PUBLIC EMERGENCY — Any unusual incident or condition caused by civil
disturbance which endangers or imperils the public safety and which is
or may become too large in scope or unusual in type to be handled in its
entirety by municipal personnel acting during the hours of their ordinary
duty.
§ 26-2. Proclamation of emergency — authority of Mayor.
Whenever the Mayor, or in the event or his unavailability or inability to act,
the person assuming the duties of the office of the Mayor, shall determine
that a public emergency exists, or will exist, he shall have the power
and authority to issue a proclamation declaring the existence of a public
emergency.
§ 26-3. When effective.
The proclamation of public emergency shall become effective upon its
issuance and dissemination to the public.
§ 26-4. Duration; extension.
Any proclamation of public emergency and the emergency measures
proclaimed therein shall remain in full force and effect for a period not to
exceed 24 hours or until earlier amended or terminated by proclamation;
provided that any proclamation of public emergency can be extended,
by proclamation, either in its original form or in an amended form, for
additional successive periods not to exceed 24 hours each.
§ 26-5. Sale of firearms; ammunition, etc., prohibited.
During the period when a proclamation of public emergency is in effect
pursuant to § 26-2:
§ 26-6. Special powers of the Mayor during emergencies.
During the period when a proclamation is in effect pursuant to § 26-3, the
Mayor, or in the event of his unavailability to act, the person assuming
the duties of the office of the Mayor, is authorized and empowered to
A. The sale, offer to sell, purchase, lease or loan of any ammunition, guns
and other firearms of any size or description is prohibited.
B. The display by or in any store or shop of any ammunition, guns or other
firearms of any size or description is prohibited.
§ 20-30 LAWRENCE CODE § 26-6
1:120
institute by proclamation any or all of the following emergency measures
for the entire Township, or for such portion or portions thereof as may
be designated therein, and for such time or times as may be designated
therein:
§ 26-7. Powers in addition to those granted by state law.
The powers granted by this section shall be in addition to and supplemental
to the authority given to the Municipal Disaster Control Officer pursuant
to App.A:9-40.5 of the New Jersey Statues and to any other emergency
authority granted by statute.
Chapter 32
FINANCE
A. The prohibition of the use of all vehicular and pedestrian traffic except
for the provision of essential services, including, but not limited to, fire,
police and hospital services, including the transportation of patients
thereof, utility emergency repairs and emergency calls by physicians.
B. The establishment of curfew.
C. The prohibition of the sale of any alcoholic beverages as defined by or
pursuant to Title 33 of the New Jersey Statutes or its successor. This
power is in addition to the powers conferred by the State Division of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
D. The closing of theatres and other places normally used for public
entertainment and recreation.
§ 26-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-7
1:121

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Derived from Ch. 7, Art. I, of the 1971 Code]
§ 32-1. Fiscal year.
The fiscal year of the Township shall begin on the first day of January and
end on the 31st day of December in each year, as provided by law.
§ 32-2. Contracts — authorized generally; purchase orders.
Within the limits of available appropriations, the Township Manager is
authorized to negotiate contracts and other legally binding obligations of
the Township upon approval of the Council. Any such document shall be
signed by the Mayor and Manager, attested by the Clerk or Deputy Clerk
and approved by the Township Attorney for legal form and sufficiency.
Purchase orders, for which a formal contract is not required by the charter,
may be executed by the Manager or Purchasing Agent without further
approval.
§ 32-3. Award of contracts.
Where contracts are let by competitive bidding pursuant to the Charter, the
Council may award the contract in the manner prescribed by law.
§ 32-4. Bond issues and notes.
§ 32-5. Monthly reports of financial transactions.
The Manager shall present to the Council once each month a summary of
the financial transactions of the Township since the next preceding report.
A. Except as may otherwise be provided by resolution adopted pursuant to
the Local Bond Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:2-1 et seq., the Manager is designated
as the Financial Officer to sell and award bonds in accordance with the
advertised terms of public sale. He shall report in writing to the Council
at the next meeting thereof as to the principal amount, interest rate and
maturities of the bonds sold, the price obtained and the name of the
purchaser.
B. Tax and bond anticipation notes may be issued and sold in accordance
with the Local Bond Law; provided, that the Manager shall solicit and
record as a permanent record in his office at least three informal bids
on the interest rate before any such sale, and the notes shall be issued
and sold to the lowest bidder wherever practical.
C. The comptroller shall administer the municipal debt and the receipt and
delivery of bonds and notes for transfer, registration or exchange,
subject to the provisions of the Local Bond Law.
§ 32-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-6
1:123
§ 32-6. Bills, claims or demands; contents; form; certification.
No bill or claim shall be paid unless it contains a detailed statement of the
items or demand, specifying particularly how the bill or demand is made
up and a certification of the party claiming payment that it is correct; nor
shall any bill, claim or demand be paid unless the voucher on which it
is presented carries a certification of a Department Head, or of his duly
designated representative, having personal knowledge of the facts that the
goods have been received by, or the services rendered to, the Township.
§ 32-7. Audit, warrant and payment of bills and claims.
A. All bills, claims and demands against the Township shall be deemed
approved or disapproved by the Council in accordance with the action
under this section. A voucher on a form prescribed or approved by the
Manager shall be presented for each bill, claim or demand, and shall be
paid only upon the audit and approval of the Treasurer. Disbursement
shall be made by a combination warrant-bank check or draft warranted
and signed by the Manager and countersigned by the Treasurer;
except, that payroll checks may be signed by the Treasurer alone upon
warrant of the Manager for a total payroll.
B. The Treasurer shall prepare for each regular meeting of Council, for
presentation by the Manager, a list of all bills, claims and vouchers
which have been paid through the close of business on the day
preceding the meeting and since the last list was compiled. A copy of
such lists shall be furnished to each Councilman and filed with the Clerk
as public record open to inspection.
§ 32-6 LAWRENCE CODE § 32-7
1:124
ARTICLE II
Budgets
[Derived from Ch. 7, Art. II, of the 1971 Code]
§ 32-8. Preparation generally.
§ 32-9. Capital program and capital budget; preparation.
§ 32-10. Form and contents of capital program.
A. The Township budget shall be prepared by the Manager. All
Department Heads shall submit to the Manager's requests for
appropriations for the next ensuing budget year, at such times and in
such form and detail as the Manager shall prescribe. Each Department
Head shall appear before the Manager at public hearings, which shall
be held during the month of November in each year, for the purpose of
justifying the various requests.
B. The manager shall review and analyze all budget requests and the
hearings thereon, and shall prepare his recommended budget in
consultation with Council. So far as practicable, the Manager shall
develop and present his budget with reference to the relationships of
planning, programming and budgeting.
A. The Manager shall annually prepare for consideration by the Township
Planning Board:
(1) A capital program, to consist of proposed and projected capital
outlays by the Township during the ensuing six years.
(2) A capital budget, to consist of capital projects and outlays selected
from the capital program and proposed or projected for
appropriations in the ensuing fiscal year.
B. The Manager shall provide the Planning Board with such information,
working papers and evaluation of each capital project as it may require.
C. At such time annually as shall conform with the requirements of the
State Division of Local Finance, the Township Planning Board shall
prepare and submit to the Council and Manager a proposed capital
program for at least the ensuing six fiscal years, and a proposed capital
budget for the ensuing fiscal year.
A. The capital program proposed by the Planning Board shall be in such
form and contents as may be required pursuant to law, and, without
limitation thereto, shall include:
(1) A clear summary of its contents.
(2) A list of all capital improvements which are proposed to be
undertaken during the six fiscal years next ensuing, with
§ 32-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-10
1:125
§ 32-11. Submission to Township Council.
On or before the 15th day of January in each year, the Manager shall submit
to the Council his recommended budget together with such explanatory
comment or statement as the Manager may deem desirable. It shall include
a current operating section and a capital section, and shall be in such form
as required by law for municipal budgets.
§ 32-12. Council action.
The Township Council will consider and act upon the Manager's
recommended budget in accordance with the requirements of the Local
Budget Law.
§ 32-13. Budget operation.
Budget appropriations shall be controlled by an encumbrance system which
shall be prescribed or approved by the Manager. In consultation with the
Council, the Manager shall establish quarterly or such other periodic
allotments of appropriations as he may deem desirable. Each Department
shall plan and administer its work program within the limits of such
allotments, and no commitments shall be incurred in excess of any such
allotment except upon written authorization of the Manager.
appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such
improvements.
(3) Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time
schedules for each such improvement.
(4) The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the
facilities to be constructed or acquired.
B. The above information may be revised and extended each year with
regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of
construction or acquisition.
A. In the capital section of the recommended budget, the Manager shall
include such capital projects and outlays as he may select from the
capital program together with the relevant explanation and
justification.
B. The budget document shall also include detailed analyses of the various
items of expenditure and revenue, and, to the extent feasible,
appropriate statements of the cost of performance of functional
programs and activities in terms of quantitative, countable units of
work for operating and capital expenditures.
§ 32-10 LAWRENCE CODE § 32-13
1:126
ARTICLE III
Purchasing
[Derived from Ch. 7, Art. III, of the 1971 Code]
§ 32-14. Procedure generally.
§ 32-15. Emergency purchases.
The Manager shall establish a procedure for the purchase of any item
required for the immediate protection of the public health, safety, morals
or welfare, which will permit such emergency purchases to be made for
specific purposes in a manner other than that prescribed by this section.
§ 32-16. Purchases by quotation.
Where purchases in excess of $50 are made without competitive bidding,
the Purchasing Officer shall obtain, wherever possible, at least three
informal price quotations for the items to be purchased, and shall record
and maintain such quotations in his office as public record. Wherever
circumstances permit, the purchase shall be made from the lowest of such
quotations received from a responsible bidder.
A. All purchases of any supplies, materials or equipment or contractual
services, other than professional services, for any department shall be
made by the Department of Finance, pursuant to a written requisition
from the head of the department whose appropriation will be charged,
and the certification of the comptroller that a sufficient unencumbered
balance of appropriation is available to pay therefor. All such purchase
contracts shall conform with applicable requirements of state statutes
for competitive bidding. Wherever economies can be effected, the
Manager may purchase materials, supplies or equipment pursuant to a
contract entered into on behalf of the state or of one or more
municipalities by the State Division of Purchase and Property, as
authorized by law.
B. The director of each department shall designate by writing filed with
the Manager the names of employees in the department authorized to
receive supplies, materials and equipment. The persons so designated
shall accept deliveries, and sign for them, only where the goods are in
exact conformity with the order. Should there be any doubt as to
quantity or quality, the receiving employee shall immediately notify the
department head for appropriate action. If any supplies, materials or
equipment are rejected, the department head shall immediately notify
the Manager.
C. Except as the Manager may authorize in case of emergency, no
purchase shall be made and no bill, claim or voucher shall be approved
unless the procedures prescribed by or pursuant to this section have
been followed.
§ 32-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-17
1:127
§ 32-17. Standards and tests.
The Manager shall establish or approve uniform standards for requisitions
and purchases. The Department of Finance shall control the delivery of all
supplies, materials and equipment and other items purchased, and shall
make or cause to be made proper test checks and inspections thereof.
The department shall ascertain whether the supplies, materials, equipment
and other items purchased comply with the specifications, and shall cause
laboratory or other tests to be made whenever in the opinion of the
department head it is necessary to determine whether the materials,
supplies or equipment furnished are of the quality and standard required.
§ 32-17 LAWRENCE CODE § 32-17
1:128
ARTICLE IV
Municipal Improvement Reserve Fund
[Derived from Ch. 7, Art. IV, of the 1971 Code]
§ 32-18. Capital fund reserve created. [Amended by Ord. No.
1459-96]
There is hereby created a capital fund reserve to be known as the reserve
for municipal improvements, to be maintained in any bank or trust company
lawfully doing business in the state and approved as a legal depository of
funds under the custody of the Treasurer of the Township.
§ 32-19. Expenditures.
Expenditures from the reserve for municipal improvements shall be made
only for such capital improvements as the Township Council shall authorize
by resolution as being in the public interest, to include expenditures for any
and all educational, recreational or any other public purpose, benefit or use
permitted by law; such resolution shall be finally adopted by a majority vote
of all the members of the Township Council.
§ 32-20. Investments. [Amended by Ord. No. 1459-96]
The Chief Financial Officer may invest and reinvest all or part of the reserve
funds in the following types of securities:
§ 32-21. Contributions.
A. Securities as authorized in N.J.S.A. 40A:5-15.1 of the Local Fiscal Affairs
Law.
A. Contributions to the capital fund reserve shall be exclusively by
voluntary donation, but when so made or promised, shall be by
agreement with the Planning Board of the Township made at or before
granting of final approval of the application for any subdivision by the
donor; and, when so agreed upon, shall be made or promised in
consideration of such similar voluntary contributions made or to be
made by other subdividers of land within the Township, and thereupon
shall become and remain binding upon the donor upon execution of
such agreement, notwithstanding lack of any change of financial
position by the Township in reliance on any promissory contribution.
B. Payment of such contributions shall be upon such terms and conditions
as may be approved by the Planning Board, including a requirement
that a sufficient bond be secured through a surety duly authorized to
transact business in the state, guaranteeing payment of any promissory
contribution to the Township.
§ 32-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-21
1:129

ARTICLE V
Insurance Trust Fund
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1431-95]
§ 32-22. Findings.
The governing body of any local unit may establish an insurance fund for
protection against loss or damage, however, cause to any property, motor
vehicles, equipment or apparatus, other liabilities which may develop such
as workers' compensation, negligent suits or health benefits.
§ 32-23. Appropriations; procedure.
§ 32-24. Personal injury benefits. [Amended by Ord. No. 1819-04]
A. The governing body may make direct budget appropriations to the
insurance trust funds in accordance with the Local Budget Law, N.J.S.A.
40A:4-1 et seq. ,and may apply insurance reimbursements or
settlements to said trust fund for insurance protection.
B. It has been determined that an appropriation will be made available in
the 1996 municipal budget or from prior year insurance refunds to
establish the principal insurance fund in accordance with the conditions
established through this section.
C. The primary purpose of this trust is to establish a fund to permit the
governing body or fund Commissioners to secure insurance protection
for the local unit.
D. Investment of funds shall be under the direction of the Chief Financial
Officer in accordance with the Local Fiscal Affairs Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:5-1
et seq., which provides rules and regulations for the control, investment
and disbursement of said funds.
E. If the governing body at some future date determines that conditions
permit a reduction of the principal amount appropriated to the trust
fund, they may cancel a portion of the funds for use in the current
operating budget by not less than 2/3 vote of the full governing body.
A. This section adopts and incorporates herein the definitions as set forth
in N.J.S.A. 39:6A-2 and the no-fault benefits provisions as set forth in
N.J.S.A. 39:6A-4.
B. Under the provisions of the New Jersey Automobile Reparation Reform
Act, commonly known as the "No-Fault Act," N.J.S.A. 39:6A-1 et seq., the
Township of Lawrence self-insurance program's personal injury
protection benefits shall be as follows:
(1) Limited to the "medical benefits only" option as authorized and
described in N.J.S.A. 39:6A-4.3, Subdivision (e), with a limit of
$15,000 per person per accident, and shall exclude the benefits
described in N.J.S.A. 39:6A-4, Subdivisions (b) (income
§ 32-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-24
1:131
§ 32-25. Election of tort option. [Amended by Ord. No. 1819-04]
The Township of Lawrence elects the basic tort option specified under
N.J.S.A. 39:6A-8, Subdivision a.
§ 32-26. Exclusions from personal injury benefits. [Amended by Ord.
No. 1819-04]
§ 32-27. Uninsured/underinsured motorist coverage. [Amended by
Ord. No. 1819-04]
This section adopts and incorporates herein the definitions and provisions
as contained in N.J.S.A. 17:28-1 et seq., modified by the limitations as
follows:
§ 32-28. Use of fund. [Amended by Ord. No. 1819-04]
The fund has been created for the purpose of meeting losses or damages
occasioned by fire, or otherwise and for, liability claims or workers
continuation), c (essential services), d (death) and e (funeral
expenses).
(2) Medical expense benefits shall be subject to a deductible of $2,500
for one accident as authorized and described under N.J.S.A.
39:6A-4.3, Subdivision (a).
(3) Medical expense benefits shall be subject to a copayment of 20% in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 39:6A-4.3, Subdivision (d).
A. Any person who suffered personal injuries or death as a result of the
following conduct.
(1) While committing a high misdemeanor or felony or seeking to avoid
lawful apprehension or arrest by a Police Officer.
(2) Was occupying or operating an automobile without the permission
of the owner or other named insured.
A. The Township of Lawrence self-insurance program (the uninsured
motorists coverage) shall be in the amounts of the statutory minimums
of $15,000, exclusive of interest and costs, on account of injury to or
death of one person in any one accident and of $30,000, exclusive of
interest and costs, on account of injury to or death of more than one
person in any one accident.
B. The Township of Lawrence self-insurance program (the underinsured
motorists coverage) shall be limited to the amount of $15,000, exclusive
of interest and costs, on account of injury to or death of one person in
any one accident and shall be limited to $30,000, exclusive of interest
and costs, on account of injury to or death of more than one person in
any one accident.
§ 32-24 LAWRENCE CODE § 32-28
1:132
compensation claims, employer's liability claims (other than motor vehicle),
property damages claims (including automobile physical damage), and
automobile liability claims. This fund will be used when all funds have been
exhausted in the insurance appropriation in the Municipal Budget.
§ 32-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 32-28
1:133
Chapter 38
FIRE COMPANIES
§ 38-1. Classes of membership in fire companies.
Each fire company shall have active members who actually respond to
alarms and fight fires, and may have junior members and such other classes
of membership as they may by their rules and bylaws provide.
§ 38-2. Qualifications for membership in a fire company.
No person shall become an active member of a fire company unless that
person is 18 years of age or older, and unless he shall be physically fit to
perform the duties of a firefighter, as evidenced by a certificate to that effect
by a practicing physician of the state, after physical examination for that
purpose.
§ 38-3. Classification of applicants for the position of firefighter.
[Added by Ord. No. 1376-93]
§ 38-4. Junior firefighters. [Amended by Ord. No. 1441-01]
A. All duly qualified applicants for the position of Lawrence Township
firefighter shall be classified in the following classes:
(1) Residents of Lawrence Township.
(2) Other residents of Mercer County.
(3) Other residents of the State of New Jersey.
(4) All other qualified applicants.
B. All appointments to the position of Lawrence Township firefighter shall
be made in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-10.1a, with all those in
Class I to be appointed first and then those in each succeeding class in
the order above listed.
C. All applicants classified Class I must be residents of Lawrence Township
as of the announced closing date of the Civil Service examination for
the position and must maintain such residency continuously up to and
including the date of appointment.
A. Junior firefighters, ages 14 through 17, are permitted in each volunteer
fire company by virtue of the establishment for each such company of a
junior firefighter's auxiliary pursuant to state law.
B. The following rules and regulations shall govern junior firefighters:
(1) Each junior firefighter shall have parental permission, in writing
and proved, as set forth in statute.
§ 32-28 LAWRENCE CODE § 38-4
1:134
§ 38-5. Procedure for joining; badges.
Every person seeking to become an active or junior member of a Fire
Company shall make application, and upon his election to membership
by the members. Each Company may establish its own procedures,
qualifications and probation period, provided the same are reasonably
related to the applicant's capability to respond to alarms and fight fires, are
not contrary to this section or any state law, and provided that the decision
is made by at least a majority of the membership present and voting. After
approval of membership, and confirmation by the Township governing body,
the new member's name shall be entered on a roll of firefighters kept by the
Municipal Clerk, and he shall be entitled to such badges of membership as
are used by that particular fire company.
§ 38-6. Composition.
The Fire Department consists of three volunteer fire companies as at
present organized in the Township and recognized as doing public fire duty.
§ 38-7. Pension for Survivors of Volunteer Firefighters and First Aid
Squad members.
(2) Each junior firefighter must present evidence of a satisfactory
physical examination by a licensed physician.
(3) Junior firefighters must maintain grades of "C" or better in each
subject in each marking period. Report cards must be submitted to
Fire Chief each marking period for confirmation of compliance.
(4) A junior firefighter, age 16 or 17, may participate in activities until
10:00 p.m. on any night when school is in session the following day
and until 11:00 p.m. on all other nights.
(5) A junior firefighter, age 14 or 15, may participate in activities until
9:00 p.m. on any night.
(6) A junior firefighter, age 14 or 15, may participate in drilling and
training but may only observe other fire activities. Junior
firefighters of this age may not respond to emergency calls either
on Fire Company apparatus or by any other means. Junior
firefighters of this age may ride on Fire Company apparatus in
nonemergency activities only.
(7) Each fire company may promulgate such rules and regulations
pertaining to its junior members as necessary. Said rules and
regulations may not be inconsistent with Township ordinance or
statute.
A. The widow or minor children of any volunteer firefighter or member of
the Township First Aid Squad who shall hereafter be killed or die as the
result of injuries sustained in the course of performance of duty as a
§ 38-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-7
1:135
§ 38-8. Length of Service Awards Program. [Added by Ord. No.
1626-00; amended by Ord. No. 1727-02]
member of a volunteer Fire Company or First Aid Squad regularly
serving the residents of the Township shall be paid a pension.
B. Such pension shall be the sum of $5,000 per annum, to be appropriated
annually in the Township budget, and paid in the same manner as
municipal employees are paid.
C. Eligibility for such pension shall continue in the case of a widow only as
long as the status of widowhood continues, and the pension shall be
paid to the widow, or to the minor child or children of such deceased
volunteer Firefighter or First Aid Squad member, if he leaves no widow
surviving him, or to such minor child or children after the death of such
widow.
D. This section is passed pursuant to and in accordance with the authority
granted in Chapter 168, Laws of 1957, Laws of New Jersey, as amended
and supplemented.
A. Established.
(1) A Length of Service Awards Program is herewith created in
accordance with Chapter 388 of the Laws of 1997 to reward
members of the Slackwood Volunteer Fire Company, Lawrenceville
Volunteer Fire Company, Lawrence Road Volunteer Fire Company
and the Lawrence Township Emergency First Aid Squad, for their
loyal, diligent and devoted services to the residents of Lawrence
Township, effective January 1, 2001.
(2) The LOSAP shall provide for fixed annual contributions to a
deferred income account for each volunteer member who meets
the criteria set forth below; that such contributions shall be made
in accordance with a plan that shall be established by the Township
Council pursuant to P.L. 1997, c. 338 (N.J.S.A. 40A:14-183 et seq.);
and that such plan shall be administered in accordance with the
laws of the State of New Jersey, the United States Internal Revenue
Code, and this section.
(3) The LOSAP shall provide for annual contributions as credit to each
eligible member who meets the criteria as follows:
(a) Number of points required per year for firefighters to qualify:
125.
(b) Number of points required per year for first aid organization
members to qualify: 100.
(c) Volunteer has fulfilled all training requirements of the
Township of Lawrence.
(d) For regular annual service: $500.
§ 38-7 LAWRENCE CODE § 38-8
1:136
B. Program costs.
(1) The annual estimated cost of the program is as follows:
(a) Fire companies for regular annual services: $40,000.
(b) First aid squad for regular annual services: $19,000.
C. Program points.
(1) Each volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services provided to the Slackwood Volunteer Fire Company,
Lawrenceville Volunteer Fire Company and Lawrence Road
Volunteer Fire Company, as provided below:
LOSAP Point System
Point
Entitlement
Maximum
Point
Entitlement
Participation in emergency
responses
1 115
Training drills 1 12
Attendance at meetings 1 12
Special events assignment 1 12
Total points 151
Other points entitlement
elected or appointed positions
(only one entitlement of 25
points can be attained)
25 25
Chairman appointed to
committees (only one
entitlement of 10 points can be
attained)
10 10
(2) Each volunteer member shall be credited with points for volunteer
services provided to the Lawrence Township Emergency First Aid
Squad, as provided below:
LOSAP Points System — 100 Points Per Year Required
Point Requirements Maximum Point Entitlement
Chief 25
President 25
All other line or elected officers 20
Trustee 5
Duty night 2 points per night
Call responses 1 point per call
§ 38-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 38-8
1:137
Chapter 44
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
LOSAP Points System — 100 Points Per Year Required
Point Requirements Maximum Point Entitlement
Courses 1 point per CEU
Teaching (volunteer) (20 points
maximum)
1 point per hour
Meetings 2 points per meeting
Drills 2 points per drill
Special assignments (stand-by,
cleanup squad room,
landscaping, vehicles,
community education)
5 points per assignment (30
points maximum)
D. Vesting members.
(1) A member shall vest in 100% of his or her accumulated
contributions and earnings after five years of eligible service.
§ 38-8 LAWRENCE CODE § 38-8
1:138
ARTICLE I
Cooperative Pricing Agreement
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1337-92]
§ 44-1. Findings.
§ 44-2. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the Cooperative Pricing
Ordinance of the Township of Lawrence.
§ 44-3. Authority.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5), the Municipal Manager
is hereby authorized to enter into a Cooperative Pricing Agreement with the
Lead Agency.
§ 44-4. Contracting unit.
The Lead Agency entering into contract on behalf of the Township of
Lawrence shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of the
Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A. 11-1 et seq.) and all other provisions of
the Revised Statutes of the State of New Jersey.
A. N.J.S.A. 40A:11-11(5) authorizes contracting units to enter into
cooperative pricing agreements; and the County of Mercer, hereinafter
referred to as the "Lead Agency," has offered voluntary participation in
a cooperative pricing system for the purchase of work, materials and
supplies.
B. The Township of Lawrence, County of Mercer, State of New Jersey,
desires to participate in the Mercer County Cooperative Pricing
System.
§ 44-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-4
1:139

ARTICLE II
Health-Related Services Interlocal Agreement
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1451-96]
§ 44-5. Authorization. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
This article authorizes the entry into a contract pursuant to the Interlocal
Services Act, N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq.,5 between the Township of Lawrence
and the Township of Hamilton in the County of Mercer for the provision by
the said Township of Hamilton to the Township of Lawrence of those certain
health services relating to a sexually transmitted disease (STD) clinic at a
cost to the Township of Lawrence of $25 per patient visit, according to the
terms of an agreement, three copies of which are on file in the Lawrence
Township Clerk's office available for inspection during normal and usual
business hours, be and the same is hereby authorized and approved and the
Mayor and Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to execute the said
agreement after review by the Township Attorney.
5. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq. was repealed by L.2007, C. 63, § 35, eff. Nov. 1, 2007.
§ 44-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-5
1:141

ARTICLE III
Lead Paint Analyzer Interlocal Services Contract
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1462-96]
§ 44-6. Authorization.
This section authorizes the entry into a contract pursuant to the Interlocal
Services Act, N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq.,6 between the Township of Lawrence
and the Township of Hamilton, Township of East Windsor, Township of
Princeton, Township of West Windsor, Township of Ewing and Township of
Hopewell for the purchase and utilization of an XK-3 Lead Paint Analyzer at
a cost to the Township of Lawrence of $1,500, according to the terms of an
agreement, copy of which is on file in the Lawrence Township Clerk's Office
and is available for inspection during normal and usual business hours,
be and the same is hereby authorized and approved and the Mayor and
Municipal Clerk are hereby authorized and directed to execute the same
agreement after review by the Township Attorney.
6. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 40:8A-1 et seq. was repealed by L.2007, C. 63, § 35, eff. Nov. 1, 2007.
§ 44-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-6
1:143

ARTICLE IV
Mutual Aid Agreement for Emergency Police Services
[Adopted 7-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2216-15]
§ 44-7. Agreements established.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156, N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156.1 et. seq., there are
hereby established mutual aid agreements among and between this
municipality and each of the aforementioned municipalities in the County
of Mercer, New Jersey, which shall become effective upon the adoption
by one or more of the reciprocal ordinances to provide mutual aid in
police services in case of emergency. This agreement shall apply whenever
this municipality may have an emergency within its boundaries requiring
additional police assistance to protect life and property, and whenever any
of the aforementioned municipalities may experience a similar emergency.
§ 44-8. Emergency defined; S.O.P.
For purposes of this article, the term "emergency" shall be defined to
include situations in which the number of available police officers in a
participating municipality is insufficient to meet the public need in a
particular situation and situations where police aid involving special
expertise, training or equipment is required in order to protect public
safety, life, and property or to assist in suppressing a riot or disorder. No
formal declaration of emergency is required to implement the provisions of
the Mutual Aid Agreement.
§ 44-9. Requests for assistance.
The Chief, Police Director, or acting head of the Police Department or
Mayor, or Chief Executive Officer of a participating municipality, is hereby
authorized to request assistance from the Chief or other head of the Police
Department of any other participating municipality to provide aid in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156 et. seq.
§ 44-10. Provision of assistance.
A participating municipality shall provide police assistance when a valid
request in accordance with the Agreement to supply personnel is made,
to the extent possible without endangering persons or property within the
confines of the providing municipality.
§ 44-11. Powers, rights, immunities.
The members of the providing municipality's Police Department supplying
aid shall have the same powers, authorities, rights, and immunities as the
members of the police force of the requesting municipality when aid is being
rendered therein. Said members shall also have, while so acting, such rights
and immunities as they may otherwise enjoy in the performance of their
normal duties in the municipality rendering such assistance.
§ 44-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-12
1:145
§ 44-12. County Critical Incident Management Plan.
These mutual aid agreements established herein by and between the
aforementioned municipalities in the County of Mercer shall further
authorize mutual police aid and assistance under the County Critical
Incident Management Plan as established by the Mercer County Prosecutor
as the Chief Law Enforcement Official in the county. The plan provides
for a response by specially trained regional Emergency Response/Special
Weapons and Tactics Team in the event of certain hostage, barricade,
sniper, high risk armed apprehensions, terrorist, or similar situations
occurring within a municipality within the County of Mercer.
§ 44-13. Benefits, injury, death.
Members of the police force of the providing municipality suffering injury, or
their legal representatives, if death results while rendering assistance in the
requesting municipality, shall be entitled to all such salary, pension rights,
Workers' Compensation, or other benefits, as they would have accrued if
such injury or death had occurred in the performance of duties in their own
municipality, with such benefits to be the responsibility of the providing
municipality.
§ 44-14. Reimbursement.
§ 44-15. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
reimbursement.
The municipality receiving emergency police aid (hereinafter referred to
as "Receiving Entity") may seek reimbursement from FEMA for the cost of
the services rendered by the municipality providing the emergency police
aid (hereinafter referred to as "Providing Entity"). Reimbursement paid by
FEMA shall not be contingent on the declaration of an emergency, major
disaster, or fire by the Federal government. Reimbursement provided by
FEMA is subject to the following conditions:
A. A municipality receiving police assistance hereunder pursuant to the
terms of the County Critical Incident Management Plan shall not be
required to directly reimburse the regional team for services so
provided. The member municipalities shall, however, otherwise support
the function of the respective regional response teams by providing the
necessary manpower, equipment, and supplies on an ongoing annual
basis pursuant to the terms of the County Critical Incident Management
Plan.
B. Where emergency police aid is otherwise provided under
circumstances outside of the County Critical Incident Management
Plan, reimbursement shall be pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:14-156, or such
other terms and conditions for reimbursement specifically agreed to
between specific municipalities.
§ 44-12 LAWRENCE CODE § 44-15
1:146
§ 44-16. When effective.
This article shall take effect upon final passage and publication according
to law. It shall become effective with respect to this municipality's activities
with another participating municipality, when such other participating
municipality has adopted an ordinance reciprocal to this one, and such
ordinance has become effective in that municipality.
§ 44-17. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, subsection, clause or provision of this chapter
shall be adjudged by the courts to be invalid, such adjudication shall apply
A. The Receiving Entity must request reimbursement from FEMA in
accordance with the provisions set forth in the FEMA Recovery Policy
RP9523.6, dated November 10, 2012, as may be amended from time to
time.
B. Reimbursement for "Emergency Work," as that phrase is referenced in
FEMA Recovery Policy RP9523.6, shall include, but is not limited to,
work necessary to meet immediate threats to life, public safety, and
situations described in § 44-8, Emergency defined; S.O.P., herein.
C. Only a Receiving Entity is eligible for FEMA reimbursement as
described herein. The Providing Entity may seek reimbursement from
the Receiving Entity.
D. The Receiving Entity shall provide FEMA with an executive summary of
the emergency police aid services requested and received, and the
associated costs (e.g., labor, equipment, materials, etc.). Both the
Receiving Entity and the Providing Entity shall keep and maintain
detailed records of the services requested and received. Such records
shall be maintained for at least three years after the emergency police
aid has been rendered.
E. A Receiving Entity shall submit a copy of this agreement to FEMA with
its reimbursement request.
F. A Receiving Entity shall submit a written and signed certification to
FEMA with its reimbursement request, which shall include:
(1) The type and extent of emergency police aid assistance requested
and received;
(2) The labor and equipment rates used to determine the cost of the
emergency police aid; and
(3) A statement that all of the emergency police aid rendered by the
Providing Entity was eligible under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster
Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 5121-5206) and
applicable FEMA regulations and polices.
§ 44-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-17
1:147
only to the section, paragraph, subsection, clause or provision so adjudged
and the remainder of the chapter shall be valid and enforceable.
§ 44-17 LAWRENCE CODE § 44-17
1:148
Chapter 57
SEWER AUTHORITY
§ 57-1. Created.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Sewerage Authorities Law of the State,
N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et seq., there is hereby created a public body corporate
and politic under the name and style of "The Ewing-Lawrence Sewerage
Authority."
§ 57-2. Powers and duties.
The Ewing-Lawrence Sewerage Authority herby created is a sewerage
authority as contemplated and provided for by the Sewerage Authorities
Law and shall have and exercise all of the powers, perform all of the duties
provided for by the Sewerage Authorities Law, N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et seq., and
any other statutes heretofore or hereafter enacted and applicable thereto.
§ 57-3. Composition; appointment.
The Ewing-Lawrence Sewerage Authority shall consist of six members, of
whom three members shall be appointed by the Township Council and three
members shall be appointed by the governing body of the Township of
Ewing, in accordance with the provisions of the Sewerage Authorities Law.
§ 57-4. Compensation. [Amended by Ord. No. 1407-94]
Members of the Ewing-Lawrence Sewerage Authority shall serve without
monetary compensation directly or indirectly including group health
insurance or other fringe benefits having an economic value.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 76
ALARMS
§ 44-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 57-4
1:149

ARTICLE I
Alarm Systems
[Derived from Ch. 2A of the 1971 Code]
§ 76-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide standards and regulations for
various types of intrusion, burglar, robbery, fire, medical and other
emergency alarm equipment which produce a visual or audible signal or
function by direct line, radio or telephone or which by any other means
require a response by the Department of Police, Fire Service, Emergency
Medical Service, or other municipal agency.
§ 76-2. Scope.
The provisions of this article shall apply to alarm businesses and to any
person who operates, maintains or owns an alarm device, dial alarm or local
alarm designed to produce a visual or audible signal of an emergency and
designed to summon or alert the police, fire service, emergency medical
service, or other municipal agency in response to any type of alarm signal.
§ 76-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM BUSINESS — The business, by an individual, partnership,
cooperation, or other entity, of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving, installing or causing to be sold,
leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved, or
installed, any alarm system in or on any building structure or facility.
ALARM SYSTEM — Equipment or device, or an assembly of equipment and
devices, to signal the presence of an emergency or hazard requiring urgent
attention and to which the Department of Police, Fire Service, Emergency
Medical Service, or other municipal agency may be expected to respond.
In this chapter, the term "alarm system" shall include the terms "alarm
device," "dial alarm" and "local alarm."
ALARM USER — The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or other organization of any kind in control of any building,
structure, or facility armed with alarm system.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of Police of the Township of Lawrence or
his designated representative.
CONSTRUCTION BOARD OF APPEALS — Shall be as defined in Chapter
130 of the Township Code and the State Uniform Construction Code
(N.J.A.C. 5:23A-1.1 et seq.).
DEPARTMENT OF POLICE — The Department of Police of the Township of
Lawrence.
§ 76-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-3
1:151
DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE — The designated representative of the
Chief of Police or the Fire Official who performs a function required or
permitted by this article under the supervision of the Chief of Police or the
Fire Official, respectively.
DIAL ALARM — Any type of alarm system using telephone lines to transmit
an alarm directly to the Police switchboard or any other agency providing
warning of intrusion, fire or other peril.
FALSE ALARM — Any alarm or signal of an alarm actuated by inadvertence,
negligence, or an intentional or unintentional act of a person other than an
intruder, including any alarm or signal of an alarm caused by mechanical
failure, malfunction or improper installation of the alarm system and related
equipment, thereby eliciting response by the Department of Police, Fire
Service, Emergency Medical Service, or other municipal agency, when a
situation requiring an emergency response by same does not in fact exist.
However, alarms or alarm signals are not included when caused by violent
conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably
subject to controls by the alarm business operator or alarm user.
FIRE ALARM EQUIPMENT — Includes the following:
FIRE OFFICIAL — A person certified by the Commissioner of the
Department of Community Affairs and appointed or designated by the
appointing authority of a local enforcing agency to direct the enforcement
of the Code. Also refers to any certified Fire Inspector working under the
direction of the Fire Official.
FIRE SERVICE — Authorized fire companies providing fire protection and
suppression within the Township of Lawrence.
LOCAL ALARM — Any alarm system which, when activated, produces a
signal not connected to any outside agency, or the police switchboard,
including, but not limited to, business burglar alarms actuating audible
devices providing warning of intrusion or other peril. The term "local alarm"
shall not include an alarm system solely connected to a registered motor
vehicle, nor shall the term include equipment designed to signal solely
within a building or series of buildings and which does not emit signals,
visible or audible, to persons outside such building or buildings.
MEDICAL SERVICE — Authorized medical service(s) providing medical
care within the Township of Lawrence.
MUNICIPAL COURT — The Lawrence Township Municipal Court.
PERMITTEE — Any person who owns an alarm device and has obtained a
registration permit according to the provisions of this chapter.
Devices which automatically detect heat, smoke or other products of
combustion.
A.
B. Manual systems which actuate a fire alarm signal.
Mechanical systems designated and equipped to detect fires, actuate
an alarm and suppress such fires.
C.
§ 76-3 LAWRENCE CODE § 76-3
1:152
PERSON — Any natural person or individual, firm, partnership, association,
limited partnership, proprietorship, corporation or any other business
entity.
WRITTEN NOTICE — Notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, or
hand delivered and signed for by the responsible party.
§ 76-4. Alarm business requirements.
§ 76-5. Alarm system installation permit.
§ 76-6. Alarm system registration permit. [Amended by Ord. No.
1807-04; at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
A. Every alarm business shall obtain a contractor's license from the
Construction Office prior to the installation or repair of an alarm
system, unless exempt by state law. Each license must bear the
signature of the Construction Official and shall remain bona fide for one
year. A copy of this license shall be in the possession of the alarm
business installers, repairmen, and salesmen and shall be available for
inspection by any Police, Fire or Construction Official of Lawrence
Township or any alarm user contracting service from the alarm
business.
B. Every alarm business providing monitoring services of fire alarm or
protection systems within the Township of Lawrence shall be subject to
approval by the Fire Official or Police Chief.
C. Every alarm business selling, leasing, or furnishing to any user an
alarm system which is installed on premises located in the area subject
to this section shall furnish the user with instructions that provide
information to enable the user to operate the alarm system properly
and to obtain service for the alarm system at any time.
A. An installation permit is required in accordance with the Uniform
Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.14 and 5:23-2.15).
B. Any alarm business which fails to obtain an application and pay the
appropriate fee prior to installing an alarm in Lawrence Township, as
described in this section, is subject to the penalties set forth in § 76-11
of this chapter, for each violation.
C. Any alarm business which installs any alarm equipment not in
compliance with this section, the Fire Prevention Code of this
jurisdiction, or the Uniform Construction Code of the State of New
Jersey, is subject to the penalties set forth in § 76-11 of this chapter, for
each violation.
A. No person shall install, operate or maintain any burglar or robbery
alarm system unless the system has been registered with and approved
by the Chief of Police. No person shall install, operate or maintain any
§ 76-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-6
1:153
§ 76-7. False alarms.
medical or fire alarm system unless the system has been registered and
approved by the Fire Official. No permit shall be issued prior to an
acceptance or satisfactory inspection of the alarm system by the Chief
of Police or Fire Official as appropriate, or their designees, except to
register a medical alarm system. The fee is contained in Chapter 156,
Fees.
B. All alarm systems, no matter what type, shall be registered with the
Chief of Police and the Fire Official on a form which shall include: name,
type, location and description of all of the alarm system equipment;
name, address and a twenty-four-hour telephone number of the alarm
service company or a person responsible for its maintenance; names,
addresses and twenty-four-hour telephone numbers of at least three
persons to be contacted in the event of an alarm; name of the person
responsible to remit any fees or fines assessed under this section; name
and address of the fire and/or theft insurance carrier; and all other
information as may be required by the Chief of Police or the Fire
Official.
C. Permits for alarm systems shall not be issued for buildings which are
not occupied by the applicant, until the Chief of Police or the Fire
Official receives satisfactory proof that the occupant of the building has
been notified of the intent to install an alarm system within that
building.
D. If a change occurs in the information previously submitted, it shall be
the duty of each permittee to notify the Chief of Police or the fire official
of any change in the registration information within 10 days of such
change. Failure to comply with these provisions will be deemed a
violation of this chapter and subject the violator to the penalties set
forth in § 76-11.
A. Investigations. In the case of false alarms which summon the Police
Department, Fire, or Medical Service to respond, the Chief of Police or
the Fire Official, as appropriate, shall initiate an investigation, and shall
keep a record of such false alarms on file.
B. In the event of the occurrence of three false alarms in a twelve-month
period, the permittee shall, within three working days after written
notice from the Chief of Police or the Fire Official, complete a written
report setting forth the cause or causes of the false alarms, the
corrective action taken, a statement as to whether or not the alarm
system has been inspected by an alarm service company, verification of
a copy sent to his appropriate insurance carrier, and such other
information as the Chief of Police or the Fire Official may reasonably
require. New installation of any alarm system shall be granted a sixtyday
grace period prior to monetary penalties being assessed.
C. Fines.
§ 76-6 LAWRENCE CODE § 76-7
1:154
§ 76-8. Testing of alarms.
Any person testing an alarm system covered by any provision of this chapter
shall notify Police Headquarters immediately prior to and immediately after
the testing is completed. Any alarm user or alarm business violating this
section shall be subject to a fine of $100 for the first offense and $200 for
every offense thereafter.
§ 76-9. General provisions.
(1) Upon the occurrence of a subsequent false alarm, after the third,
within the same twelve-month period, the following fines shall be
assessed:
(a) Fourth false alarm: $100.
(b) Fifth false alarm: $200.
(c) Sixth false alarm: $400.
(d) Seventh false alarm: $700.
(e) Eighth false alarm: $1,000.
(2) The fines shall be payable to the Township of Lawrence within 30
days of service of written notice of the fourth or subsequent false
alarm.
D. Failure to pay the assessed fines within the required time period shall
subject the permittee to additional penalties as prescribed in § 76-11.
A. Every permittee shall, by acceptance of a permit, be deemed to have
consented to inspection of the premises on which said alarm devices
are located, at reasonable hours, by the Chief of Police or the Fire
Official or their designated representatives.
B. Maintaining or installing unauthorized equipment shall be in violation
of this chapter, and the person responsible for same shall be subject to
the penalties set forth in § 76-11.
C. In the event that any person subject to the provisions of this chapter is
directed by the Chief of Police or the Fire Official to correct a defect in
an alarm system and fails to comply with such directive, written notice
shall be sent to the appropriate insurance carrier, and the permittee
shall be subject to the penalties set forth in § 76-11.
D. Any alarm, other than fire alarm systems, sounding an audible signal
shall have built into its mechanism a device that shall automatically
shut off the audible signal within 15 minutes.
E. Direct dial alarms must be equipped with a device that will prevent
more than two repeated transmissions of an alarm for the same
emergency, with each message being 25 seconds or less.
§ 76-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-9
1:155
§ 76-10. Authorization to promulgate rules and regulations.
The Chief of Police and the Fire Official, jointly, may promulgate rules and
regulations in furtherance of the administration of this article.
§ 76-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who fails to comply with any requirement of this article where
no specific penalty applies, or who intentionally causes or assists in causing
a false alarm or an emergency to be given in any manner shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable for the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Article III.
§ 76-12. Exceptions.
§ 76-13. Confidentiality.
All information submitted in compliance with this article shall be held in
the strictest confidence and shall be deemed a record exempt from public
disclosure pursuant to state statute. Any violation of confidentiality shall be
deemed a violation of this section.
F. By installing an alarm system and registering same with the Township
of Lawrence, each permittee agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the
Township of Lawrence, its agents, servants, and employees from and
against all claims, suits, damages, costs, losses and expenses and to
release the Township of Lawrence, its agents, servants, and employees
from any and all liability or damages resulting from or arising out of, or
connected with the installation, operation, or maintenance of the alarm
systems, or any act of omission connected therewith, and occurring on
the property on which the alarm system is installed; provided, however,
such indemnification, holding harmless and release by the permittee
under this section does not extend to acts of negligence on the part of
the Township, its agents, servants and employees.
G. Police or Fire Officials may enter into the premises of the permittee
with an alarm company representative, or any other person designated
by the permittee, when the alarm fails to reset and that alarm is
affecting the health, safety, or general welfare of other citizens. Any
expense incurred in deactivating a nuisance shall be the responsibility
of the permittee.
A. Any municipal, county state, or federal government agency or office
shall be exempt from the registration permit fee and/or any monetary
penalties that may be assessed by this chapter.
B. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the general alerting
alarms that may be used by fire companies, ambulance squads, or
emergency management agencies to summon response to their
members.
§ 76-9 LAWRENCE CODE § 76-13
1:156
Chapter 83
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND DRUGS
§ 76-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 76-13
1:157

ARTICLE I
Alcoholic Beverages
[Derived from Ch. 3 of the 1971 Code]
§ 83-1. Licenses.
§ 83-2. Purpose.
This chapter is enacted to regulate the sale and transportation of alcoholic
beverages in the Township of Lawrence in accordance with the provisions of
an Act of Legislature of the State of New Jersey entitled "An Act Concerning
Alcoholic Beverages" (Chapter 436 of the Laws of 1933), its supplements
and amendments, and also comprising N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Director of the Division of
Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 83-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the words and phrases herein shall have the
same meaning as in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq., and the rules and regulations of
the Director of the Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control and the following
meanings:
EMPLOYEE — A person paid wages by the licensee and who is listed on
the official list of employees of the licensed premises as required to be
maintained by N.J.A.C. 13:2-23.13 or any amendments thereto.
§ 83-4. License fees.
The license fees for the period from July 1 of each year to June 30 of the
year following, both inclusive, are hereby established and fixed and may be
found in Chapter 156 of this Code.
§ 83-5. Classes and maximum number of licenses. [Amended
4-21-2015 by Ord. No. 2213-15]
A. Laws applicable. All applications for license, all licenses issued, and all
proceedings under this chapter shall be in accordance with the Act,
rules and regulations referred to in § 83-2, and all other applicable laws
of the State of New Jersey or of the United States.
B. Issuing authority. All licenses required by this chapter shall be issued by
the Township Council, which shall also administer the provisions of this
article.
C. License required. No person shall sell or distribute alcoholic beverages
within the Township without having obtained a license in accordance
with the Act referred to in § 83-2 and the provisions of this chapter,
except in those cases provided by law where the licenses in question
are issued by the Director of the State Division of Alcoholic Beverage
Control.
§ 83-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-5
1:159
§ 83-6. Revocation or suspension of license.
§ 83-7. Sale on premises with other mercantile business.
A. The classes and maximum number of licenses to be issued by the
Township are hereby fixed as follows and the annual fees of licenses for
the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages in the Township shall be
as follows:
Class of License Number of Licenses
Plenary retail consumption
licenses
15
Plenary retail distribution licenses 4
Seasonal retail distribution 2
Club licenses 6
B. The provisions of this subsection with respect to the limitation on the
number of licenses shall not apply to the renewal or transfer of licenses
presently issued.
C. Not more than 15 plenary retail consumption licenses shall be granted
or outstanding at the same time, provided, however, that nothing in this
section, however, shall prevent the issuance of a new license to an
applicant, otherwise qualified, who operates a hotel or motel in the
Township containing 100 or more sleeping rooms, or such other
minimum number of sleeping rooms as may hereafter be provided by
law, or who may hereafter construct and establish a new hotel or motel
containing at least 100 sleeping rooms or such other minimum number
of sleeping rooms as may hereafter be provided by law.
A. Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or any provision of any
applicable statute or any of the rules or regulations of the State
Director of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
B. Proceedings for suspension or revocation shall be in accordance with
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 33:1-31 by service of a five-day notice of
charges preferred against the licensee and affording a reasonable
opportunity for hearing.
C. Suspension or revocation of a license shall be in addition to any other
penalty which may be imposed for a violation of this chapter.
A. No plenary retail distribution license for the sale of alcoholic beverages
shall be granted in the Township to permit the sale of alcoholic
beverages in or upon any premises in the Township in which any other
mercantile business is carried on.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any premises licensed for the sale at
retail of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption in the
§ 83-5 LAWRENCE CODE § 83-7
1:160
§ 83-8. Regulations of licenses.
§ 83-9. Compliance with laws and regulations.
Nothing herein shall be construed to permit the sale, service, distribution,
delivery or consumption of alcoholic beverages at any time or times
prohibited by any law of the State of New Jersey or any rules or regulations
of the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
§ 83-10. Sales to certain persons.
No licensee or employee of a licensee shall sell, serve or deliver, directly
or indirectly, any alcoholic beverages to any intoxicated person or person
under the legal age, or permit the consumption of alcoholic beverages on
any licensed premises by any of the above-named persons.
§ 83-11. Unlawful acts by persons under legal age for purchase of
alcoholic beverages; disorderly persons. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Township shall be permitted to engage, upon the licensed premises,
in the business of the sale or rental of items commonly used upon or
in conjunction with the opening, preparing and serving of alcoholic
beverages, including, but without limitation as to generality, openers,
shakers, glassware, ice, mixers, packaged hors d'oeuvres and similar
bar accessories and supplies.
A. Hours of sale - on premises consumption. No alcoholic beverages shall
be sold, delivered or served to or consumed in any licensed premises on
any day between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. except New
Year's Day each year as hereinafter provided.
B. Sundays - on premises consumption. No alcoholic beverage shall be
sold at any time on the first day of the week, commonly called Sunday,
except between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 12:00 midnight and between
12:00 midnight Saturday and 2:00 a.m. Sunday.
C. New Year's Day - on premises consumption. The provisions of
Subsection A shall not apply on New Year's Day. On New Year's Day,
alcoholic beverages may be sold, served, delivered or consumed in the
licensed premises between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. except
that when the morning of January 1 falls on a Sunday, in which case
such beverages may be sold between 12:00 midnight Saturday and 5:00
a.m. Sunday.
A. It shall be unlawful for:
(1) A person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages to
enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of alcoholic
beverages for the purpose of purchasing, or having served or
delivered to him or her any alcoholic beverage; or
§ 83-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-11
1:161
§ 83-12. Purchase of alcoholic beverages by underaged person(s).
No underaged person shall purchase or attempt to purchase or have
another purchase for them any alcoholic beverage on any premises licensed
for the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages.
§ 83-13. Purchase of alcoholic beverages for underaged person(s).
No person shall purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic beverages for
an underaged person(s). It shall be unlawful for any person to induce or
attempt to induce any licensee or employee of any licensee to sell, serve or
deliver alcoholic beverages to an underaged person(s).
§ 83-14. Presumption.
Any parent or guardian of an underaged person(s) who accompanies such
underaged person(s) into a premises where alcoholic beverages are served
and who permits the underaged person(s) to possess or consume alcoholic
beverages shall be presumed to have misrepresented the age of the
underaged person(s).
§ 83-15. Possession.
No person under the legal age shall possess, serve, sell or consume any
alcoholic beverage in any public place within the Township.
(2) A person under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages to
consume any alcoholic beverage on premises licensed for the retail
sale of alcoholic beverages, or to purchase, attempt to purchase or
have another purchase for him any alcoholic beverage; or
(3) Any person to enter any premises licensed for the retail sale of
alcoholic beverages for the purpose of purchasing, or to purchase
alcoholic beverages, for another person who does not because of
his age have the right to purchase and consume alcoholic
beverages.
B. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this subsection
shall be deemed and adjudged to be a disorderly person, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500. In
addition, the court shall suspend the person's license to operate a motor
vehicle for six months or prohibit the person from obtaining a license to
operate a motor vehicle in this state for six months beginning on the
date he becomes eligible to obtain a license or on the date of conviction,
whichever is later. In addition to the general penalty prescribed for an
offense, the court may require any person under the legal age to
purchase alcoholic beverages who violates this act to participate in an
alcohol education or treatment program authorized by the Department
of Health for a period not to exceed the maximum period of confinement
prescribed by law for the offense for which the individual has been
convicted.
§ 83-11 LAWRENCE CODE § 83-16
1:162
§ 83-16. Misstating age.
No person shall misrepresent his age or the age of another person for the
purpose of inducing any licensee or their employee to sell, serve or deliver
any alcoholic beverage to a person under the legal age for purchasing
beverages or to permit a person under the legal age for purchasing
alcoholic beverages to remain on any premises in violation of this section.
§ 83-17. Attendance by parents at hearings on violations.
A parent or guardian of any minor charged with a violation of any of
the provisions of sections shall be required to attend the hearing of the
complaint. For the purpose of compelling such attendance the Judge of
the Municipal Court is hereby authorized and directed to cause a parent
or guardian of the minor to attend the hearing by issuing appropriate
subpoenas to compel such attendance. It shall be sufficient compliance with
the provisions hereof if one of the parents or one of the guardians attend
the hearing.
§ 83-18. Age requirement for performers, entertainers, etc.
No person under the age of 21 years shall be permitted to sing, dance,
perform, act, play in an orchestra or in any manner exhibit himself in any
performance or entertainment held, given, offered or conducted on the
licensed premises.
§ 83-19. Closing of premises during prohibited hours of sale;
exceptions.
A. During the hours when sales of alcoholic beverages are prohibited, the
entire licensed premises shall be closed and no person shall be
admitted or permitted to remain thereon except the licensee or bona
fide employees of the licensee; provided, however, that such
requirement for the closing of the premises shall not apply to bona fide
hotels or restaurants as defined in N.J.S.A. 33:1-1(t) and to clubs eligible
for a club license under N.J.S.A. 33:1-12(5) and to other establishments
where the principal business is other than the sale of alcoholic
beverages.
B. Hotels; restaurants; clubs and bowling alleys. In hotels, bowling alleys
and restaurants and in clubs entitled to club licenses under the law and
state rules and regulations, the room in which alcoholic beverages are
kept for sale, commonly known as the barroom, must be kept closed and
securely locked during the prohibited time and the licensee and any of
his employees or any other person shall not enter or be allowed to enter
therein. In a restaurant having no room commonly known as a barroom
but having a bar located within the room in which the food is served,
the bar, during such prohibited time, must be completely screened by
an open grill of not more than three-inch mesh or open ironwork
approved by the license committee to a height of not less than four feet
above the level of the bar, and all approaches to the bar must be
§ 83-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-19
1:163
§ 83-20. Closing provisions.
During the hours that the sale of alcoholic beverages are prohibited, the
entire licensed premises, except restaurants and hotels, shall be closed and
no person shall be admitted or permitted to remain thereon except the
licensee or bona fide employees of the licensee.
§ 83-21. Display of license.
All licensees shall expose conspicuously in the place of business the license
issued by the Township of Lawrence.
securely locked. A "restaurant" shall be defined as an establishment
regularly and principally used for the purpose of providing meals to
the public, having an adequate kitchen and dining room kept for the
purpose of preparing, cooking and serving food and in which dining
room food is served at tables by waiters who are other than the person
known as the bartender.
§ 83-19 LAWRENCE CODE § 83-21
1:164
ARTICLE II
Underage Drinking on Private Property
[Adopted 4-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2089-11]
§ 83-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GUARDIAN — A person who has qualified as a guardian of the underage
person pursuant to testamentary or court appointment.
RELATIVE — The underage person's grandparent, aunt, uncle, sibling or
any other person related by blood or affinity.
SCHOOL — Is defined as any public or private Institution of learning or any
post-secondary college or university.
SCHOOL PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY — Is defined as any public or private
agency that provides security and/or first responder medical treatment to
students of a school.
§ 83-23. Possession and consumption prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person who is under the legal age to purchase
alcoholic beverages to knowingly possess without legal authority or
knowingly consume any alcoholic beverage on private property.
§ 83-24. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted or adjudicated for violating the terms of this article
shall be subject to the following fines:
A. First offense: $250.
B. Second or subsequent offenses: $350.
C. In addition, the court may, upon a finding of guilty, in addition to the fine
authorized for this offense, suspend or postpone for six months the
driving privileges of the defendant. Upon conviction of any person and
the suspension or postponement of that person's driver's license, the
court shall forward a report to the Division of Motor Vehicles stating the
first and last day of the suspension or postponement period imposed by
the court pursuant to this section. If a person at the time of the
imposition of a sentence is less than 17 years of age, the period of
license postponement, including a suspension or postponement of the
privilege of operating a motorized bicycle, shall commence on the day
the sentence is imposed and shall run for a period of six months after
the person reaches the age of 17 years. If the defendant at the time of
the imposition of the sentence has a valid driver's license issued, the
court shall immediately collect the license and forward it to the Division
of Motor Vehicles along with the report. If for any reason the license
cannot be collected, the court shall include in the report the complete
§ 83-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-24
1:165
§ 83-25. Exceptions.
name, address, date of birth, eye color, and sex of the person as well as
the first and last date of the license suspension period imposed by the
court.
D. The court shall inform the person orally and in writing that if the person
is convicted of operating a motor vehicle during the period of
suspension or postponement, the person shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in N.J.S.A. 39:3-40. The defendant shall be required
to acknowledge in writing the receipt of the written notice in writing.
Failure to receive a written notice or failure to acknowledge in writing
the receipt of the written notice shall not be a defense to a subsequent
charge of a violation of N.J.S.A. 39:3-40.
E. If the person convicted under this article is not a New Jersey resident,
the court shall suspend or postpone, as appropriate, the nonresident
driving privilege of the person based on the age of the person and
submit to the Division of Motor Vehicles the required report. The court
shall not collect the license of a nonresident convicted under this
article. Upon receipt of a report by the court, the Division of Motor
Vehicles shall notify the appropriate officials in the licensing
jurisdiction of the suspension or postponement.
A. Beverage consumption in connection with a religious observance,
ceremony or rite or consuming or possessing an alcoholic beverage in
the presence of and with the permission of a parent, guardian or
relative who has attained the legal age to purchase and consume
alcoholic beverages.
B. This article shall not prohibit the possession of alcoholic beverages by
any underage person while actually engaged in the performance of
employment by a person who was licensed under Title 33 of the revised
statutes or while actively engaged in the preparation of food while
enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel management program at (a county
vocational school or post-secondary educational institution); a school of
any type. However, this article shall not be construed to preclude the
imposition of a penalty under this section, N.J.S.A. 33:1-81, or any other
section of the law against a person who is convicted of unlawful
alcoholic beverage activity on or at premises licensed for the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
C. Lifeline exemption.
(1) An underage person and one or two other persons shall be immune
from prosecution under this article if:
(a) One of the underage persons called 9-1-1 or a School Public
Safety Agency and reported that another underage person was
in need of medical assistance due to alcohol consumption; and
§ 83-24 LAWRENCE CODE § 83-25
1:166
(b) The underage person who called 9-1-1 or a School Public
Safety Agency and, if applicable, one or two other persons
acting in concert with the underage person who called 9-1-1 or
a School Public Safety Agency and provided each of their
names to the 9-1-1 operator or School Public Safety Agency;
and
(c) The underage person was the first person to make the 9-1-1
report or report to the School Public Safety Agency; and
(d) The underage person and, if applicable, one or two other
persons acting in concert with the underage person who made
the 9-1-1 call or call to a School Public Safety Agency and
remained on the scene with the person under the legal age in
need of medical assistance until assistance arrived and
cooperated with medical assistance and law enforcement
personnel on the scene.
(2) The underage person who received medical assistance shall also be
immune from prosecution under this article.
§ 83-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-25
1:167

ARTICLE III
Operating Vehicle While Under the Influence of Alcohol or Drugs
[Derived from Ord. No. 1634-00]
§ 83-26. Person arrested for violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-50 to be held
in protective custody. [Amended by Ord. No. 1783-04]
A person who has been arrested for operating a motor vehicle under the
influence of an alcoholic beverage, any chemical substance, and/or any
controlled dangerous substance in violation of N.J.S.A. 39:4-50 shall be held
in protective custody by the Lawrence Township Police Department until
such time as the person is no longer a danger to himself or others.
§ 83-27. Location for protective custody.
§ 83-28. Release from protective custody.
§ 83-29. Exceptions.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, a person being held in
protective custody pursuant to § 83-26 may, because of age, health or their
own safety, be released pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-50.22
et seq., or be provided with a reasonable alternative to protective custody
provided that the Police Department determines that the person's release
would not be a detriment to public safety.
A. Any person placed in protective custody pursuant to § 83-26 shall be
held in the Lawrence Township municipal lockup or other facility where
the person's condition may be monitored until a determination is made
that the person is no longer a danger to himself or others.
B. For the purposes of this section, the term "other facility" shall mean a
medical facility where the person may be detained in a medically
acceptable manner and their condition monitored by Police and/or
medical personnel.
A. A person arrested for violating N.J.S.A. 39:4-50 may be released from
protective custody at such time as they are no longer a danger to
himself or others.
B. A person will be deemed to be no longer a danger to himself or others
when their blood alcohol concentration is less than 0.05% and is no
longer under the influence of any intoxicating liquor or narcotic or
hallucinogenic or habit-forming drug to the extent their facilities are no
longer impaired.
C. In no event shall a person being held in protective custody pursuant to
§ 83-26 be held for longer than eight hours without an appropriate
hearing before a Municipal Court Judge.
§ 83-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-29
1:169

ARTICLE IV
Possession and/or Consumption in Public
[Adopted 9-17-2013 by Ord. No. 2164-13]
§ 83-30. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any fluid or solid capable of being converted
into a fluid, suitable for human consumption, and having an alcohol content
of more than 1/2% of 1% by volume, including alcohol, beer, lager beer,
ale, porter, naturally fermented wine, treated wine, blended wine, fortified
wine, sparkling wine, distilled liquors, blended distilled liquors and any
brewed, fermented or distilled liquors fit for use for beverage purposes or
any mixture of the same, and fruit juices.
§ 83-31. Prohibition.
§ 83-32. Exceptions.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit:
A. No person of legal age shall consume or possess in any open container
any alcoholic beverage in or upon any public or quasi-public place,
including, but not limited to, any public street, alley, sidewalk, mall,
park, playground, public conveyance, parking facility or in or around
any public building. For the purposes of this section, a quasi-public area
shall be defined as that portion of private land which has been made
open to the public for their use and enjoyment by the owners of said
lands in connection with zoning approvals, dedication of said lands or
similar means, and where the Township Council, upon written
application from the owner of said lands, determined that the provision
of this section be made applicable thereto.
B. No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage in or upon any private
vehicle while it is parked upon any such public or quasi-public place.
C. No underage person, which shall be defined as a person being under
the age of 21, shall possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in or
upon any private property located within the boundaries of the
Township.
A. The possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages within or upon
premises duly licensed for the consumption of alcoholic beverages;
B. The possession, distribution or consumption of alcoholic beverages in
any public park, recreation area, public building, or other public area in
connection with any organized function or social affair for which
express prior permission has been received in writing from the
Township Council upon prior notice and subject to any terms and
§ 83-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-32
1:171
§ 83-33. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for the first violation of this article shall be a fine not to exceed
$2,000 and/or a period of community service not to exceed 30 days; for a
subsequent offense within a one-year period from the initial violation, the
penalty shall be a fine not to exceed $2,000 and/or a period of community
service not to exceed 60 days.
restrictions relating to the public safety and the general welfare of the
Township;
C. The possession or consumption of alcoholic beverage by underage
persons in connection with a religious observance, ceremony or rite;
D. The possession of an alcoholic beverage by underage persons in the
preparation of food while enrolled in a culinary arts or hotel
management program at a county vocational school or post-secondary
educational institution;
E. The possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by underage
persons in the presence of and with the permission of a parent,
guardian or relative who has attained the legal age, which shall be
defined as any person 21 years of age or older, to purchase and
consume alcoholic beverages.
§ 83-32 LAWRENCE CODE § 83-33
1:172
Chapter 89
ANIMALS
§ 83-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 83-33
1:173

ARTICLE I
Running at Large
§ 89-1. Animals running at large prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit, either willfully or negligently,
any horse, cattle, swine, goats, sheep, mules or like animals to run at large
in the Township.
§ 89-2. Poultry running at large prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit chickens, ducks, geese and
other poultry to run at large in the Township.
§ 89-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-2
1:175

ARTICLE II
Control of Dogs
§ 89-3. Running at large prohibited; exceptions. [Amended by Ord.
No. 1534-98]
§ 89-4. Removal of dog feces required; penalty. [Amended by Ord.
No. 1392-94]
§ 89-5. Township dog run. [Amended by Ord. No. 1534-95]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, keeps or harbors a dog or
dogs to permit the same to run at large or be upon the streets, highways
or other public places, or upon private property other than that of the
owner or designated by the Township as a dog run, in the Township,
unless accompanied by a responsible individual and controlled by a
leash, not to exceed six feet in length, securely fastened to the dog's
collar or harness. This chapter shall not be considered as prohibiting
the exercising or training of dogs as permitted by N.J.S.A. 23:4-25, nor
to hunting dogs lawfully used during hunting seasons while under the
control of the owner, lessee or custodian. [Amended 7-15-2014 by
Ord. No. 2189-14]
B. Violations and penalties.
(1) Dogs allowed to run at large, penalty.
(a) First offense, minimum $50.
(b) Second offense, minimum penalty: $100.
(c) Third offense for allowing dog to run at large: court action to
have dog impounded for a period of 15 days at the owner's
expense, a minimum $500 fine, or 30 days imprisonment, or
both, in addition to court costs.
A. Any person other than a visually handicapped handler of a guide dog
who has charge of a dog shall be responsible for the prompt and
efficient removal and sanitary disposition of the feces of the dog from
any public place or any private place unless otherwise expressly
permitted by the owner. Where the violation shall occur in the absence
of an identifiable handler, each person who shall be an owner of the dog
shall be deemed to be in violation of this subsection.
B. Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this subsection shall
be prosecuted upon the complaint timely filed by any person or by any
officer or employee of the Township and shall subject the violator, upon
conviction, to the fines and penalties prescribed for under Chapter 1,
Article III, of the Township Code.
§ 89-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-5
1:177
A. Use regulations. It shall be the obligation of the handler of a dog when
utilizing a Township designated dog run to comply with the following
regulations:
(1) All dogs shall be licensed, vaccinated, healthy (have no contagious
condition or disease), and parasite-free (both internally and
externally).
(2) Puppies under four months of age are prohibited.
(3) Handlers are responsible for the actions of their dog(s) and shall
remain inside the exercise area.
(4) Dogs in season are prohibited.
(5) A handler may not have more than three dogs at a time in the run.
(6) Handlers shall clean up after their dog(s).
(7) Handlers shall stop their dog(s) from digging and fill any holes
created by their dog(s).
(8) Aggressive dogs are not permitted.
(9) Should a dog act aggressively, the handler shall remove it
immediately.
(10) Children under the age of 12 are prohibited in the exercise area.
(11) Food is prohibited in the exercise area.
(12) Dogs shall be leashed when not in the dog run.
(13) All pinch (prong) and spike collars are prohibited.
B. Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this subsection shall
be prosecuted upon the complaint timely filed by any person or by an
officer or employee of the Township and shall subject the violator, upon
conviction, to the fines and penalties prescribed for violations under
Chapter 1, Article III, of the Township Code.
§ 89-5 LAWRENCE CODE § 89-5
1:178
ARTICLE III
Licensing of Dogs
§ 89-6. Definitions. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DOG — Any dog, bitch or spayed bitch.
DOG OF LICENSING AGE — Any dog which has attained the age of seven
months or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, shall include every
person having a right of property in that dog and every person who has
that dog in his keeping, and when applied to the proprietorship of any other
animal, including, but not limited to, a cat, shall include every person having
a right of property in that animal and every person who has that animal in
his keeping.
§ 89-7. License required; fees.
§ 89-8. Time for application; expiration. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 89-9. Dogs subject to licensing requirements. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Licenses shall be required for the following dogs of licensing age:
A. Every dog shall be duly licensed in accordance with N.J.S.A. 4:19-15 et
seq. and shall bear evidence of such license at all times. The annual fees
for such licenses shall be found in Chapter 156, Fees, § 156-4A(1).
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:19-16 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 4:19-31, the annual
license fee for a potentially dangerous dog shall be found in Chapter
156, Fees, § 156-4A(2).
A. Application for licenses for dogs which are required to be licensed shall
be made before the last day of January of each year. In all other cases,
the application for a license shall be made within 10 days of the date
upon which the dog in question first becomes subject to the provision of
this section.
B. The license and registrations shall expire on January 31 of the year
following the year in which it was issued.
A. Dogs owned and kept within the Borough on the first day of January of
any calendar year.
B. Any dog acquired by any person during the course of any calendar year
and kept within the Borough for more than 10 days after acquisition.
§ 89-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-9
1:179
§ 89-10. Dogs licensed in other New Jersey municipalities.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
Only one license and registration tag shall be required in any licensing
year for any dog owned in New Jersey, and the license and tag issued by
any other municipality of this state shall be accepted by the Borough as
evidence of compliance with this section.
§ 89-11. Seeing Eye dogs and service dogs. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as "Seeing
Eye" dogs, dogs used to assist handicapped persons and commonly known
as "service dogs," or dogs used to assist deaf persons and commonly known
as "hearing ear" dogs shall be licensed and registered as other dogs
hereinabove provided for, except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall
not be required to pay any fee therefor.
§ 89-12. Certificate of vaccination against rabies required.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
No Municipal Clerk or other official designated by the governing body
shall grant any such license and official metal registration tag for any dog
unless the owner thereof provides evidence that the dog to be licensed and
registered has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved by
and administered in accordance with the recommendations of the United
States Department of Agriculture and the United States Department of
Health, Education, and Welfare, or has been certified exempt as provided
by regulations of the State Department of Health. Such vaccination shall be
repeated at intervals as provided by regulations of the State Department of
Health, and shall be administered by a duly licensed veterinarian or by such
other veterinarian permitted by law to do the same. The State Department
of Health shall promulgate regulations providing for the recognized
duration of immunity, interval of inoculation, certificate of vaccination,
certificate of exemption, and such other matters related to this act.
§ 89-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
C. Any dog attaining licensing age during the course of the calendar year.
D. Any unlicensed dog brought into the Borough by any person and kept
within the Borough for more than 10 days.
E. Any dog licensed by another state, brought into the Borough by any
person and kept within the Borough for more than 90 days.
A. Any person who violates or who fails or refuses to comply with N.J.S.A.
4:19-15.2, Dogs; license and metal registration tag required; placing
§ 89-9 LAWRENCE CODE § 89-13
1:180
tag on dogs; guide dogs or service dogs, N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.4, Time for
applying for license; N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.6, Dogs brought into State;
N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.7, Removing tag from dog without owner's consent;
attaching tag to another dog; N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.8, License for kennel, pet
shop, shelter or pound; N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.10, Kennels, pet shops, shelters
or pounds; permitting dogs to go off premises; and N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.18,
Interfering with persons performing duties under Act, or the rules and
regulations promulgated by the State Department of Health pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.14, shall be liable to a penalty of $50 for each offense.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section for which no other
penalty is established shall be liable, upon conviction, to the penalty
established in Chapter I, Article III.
§ 89-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-13
1:181

ARTICLE IV
Animal Bites
§ 89-14. Confinement of animal which has bitten a person.
Any person who owns a dog, cat or other animal susceptible to rabies which
has bitten a person, is to confine the animal as hereinafter provided for a
period of not less than 10 days from the day of the bite.
§ 89-15. Notice to owner.
The Township Health Officer shall serve notice upon the owner or person
in charge of such animal the provisions of this section and any other
applicable ordinance or law. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be
served personally, or, if personal service cannot be accomplished, by mail
addressed to the owner or person in charge of such animal. If such owner
or person is not known, the notice shall be effective if addressed to the
occupant of the premises upon which the animal is located.
§ 89-16. Animal to be confined on owner's property; exception.
The animal is to be confined upon the premises of the owner or person in
charge. In the event the animal is found off the premises during the period
of confinement, or in the event the animal has previously been confined
pursuant to this section or any previous ordinance or regulation relating
to bites by the animal, then the animal is to be confined at the expense of
the owner or person in charge thereof at a place designated by the Health
Officer for the full period of confinement or the balance thereof.
§ 89-17. Release certificate.
An animal confined pursuant hereto is not to be released from confinement
until a certificate of release is issued by the Health Officer.
§ 89-18. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be liable to
penalties as provided for pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 26:4-94.
§ 89-19. Effect on other laws and ordinances.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or restrict the provisions
of the laws of the state applicable to animal bites and rabies control, or any
supplemental ordinances or resolutions adopted by the Township.
§ 89-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-19
1:183

ARTICLE V
Impoundment; Animals Taken into Custody
[Amended by Ord. No. 1545-98]
§ 89-20. Authorization for impoundment.
§ 89-21. Notice of impoundment.
If any animal taken into custody wears a collar or harness having attached
thereto the name and address of any person or license tag, or if the owner
or person keeping or harboring the animal is known, the Animal Control
Officer or any person authorized by the Municipal Manager shall notify the
person whose address is given on the collar or harness or if known, the
person keeping or harboring the animal, that the animal has been taken
into custody and will be liable to be disposed of or destroyed if not claimed
within one week after giving notice. Such notice shall be given verbally or
in writing.
§ 89-22. Redemption.
Any person who is entitled to redeem an animal may redeem such animal
within one week after notice is given and if notice is not required to be
given hereunder, any person claiming the animal shall be entitled to redeem
the animal within one week after being taken into custody, upon producing
a current rabies vaccination certificate and a current license and tag for
the animal, if the animal was unlicensed and untagged at the time of its
A. Dogs running at large. Any dog running at large in violation of this
chapter shall, for the purposes hereof, be considered a stray dog and
the Animal Control Officer or any person appointed by the Township
Manager for the purpose shall take or cause to be taken into custody
and impound any dog found running at large.
B. Animals. The Animal Control Officer or any person authorized by the
Municipal Manager is authorized to take into custody any animal which
is:
(1) Without a current license tag on its collar or harness as required by
Township Code;
(2) In such circumstances as would constitute violation of any
provision of the Lawrence Township Code, Chapter 15 entitled
"Animal Control";
(3) Behaving in such a manner as to constitute a public health
nuisance;
(4) Any animal so taken into custody shall be delivered to a licensed
veterinarian having facilities for its detention or to a licensed
kennel;
§ 89-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-22
1:185
seizure and upon paying the Township Clerk a redemption fee of $25 and all
expenses incurred by reason of the animal's detention.
§ 89-22 LAWRENCE CODE § 89-22
1:186
ARTICLE VI
Annual Dog Canvass
§ 89-23. Dog canvass.
The Chief of Police or any person appointed by the Municipal Manager for
the purpose shall annually cause a canvass to be made of all dogs owned,
kept or harbored within the Township and shall cause a report of the result
thereof to be filed with the Township Clerk in the manner and form required
by N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.15.7
§ 89-24. Enforcement of state law.
The Chief of Police or any person appointed by the Municipal Manager for
the purpose shall cause the provisions of state law relative to dogs to be
enforced.
7. Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.15 was repealed by L.2015, c. 95, § 47, eff. Aug. 10, 2015.
§ 89-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-24
1:187

ARTICLE VII
Cats
§ 89-25. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CONTROL AUTHORITY — Any person or agency designated or
certified by the State of New Jersey to enforce the provisions of this section.
CAT — Any member of the domestic feline species; male, female, or altered.
CAT OF LICENSING AGE — Any cat which has attained the age of seven
months, or which possesses a set of permanent teeth.
CATTERY — Any room or group of rooms, cage, or exhibition pen, not part
of a kennel, wherein cats for sale are kept or displayed.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The agency or department of the Township
of Lawrence or any designated representative thereof charged with
administering the issuance and/or revocation of permits and licenses under
the provisions of this section.
OWNER — When applied to the proprietorship of a cat, shall mean and
include every person having a right of property (or custody) in such cat
and every person who has such cat in his/her keeping, or who harbors
or maintains a cat or knowingly permits a cat to remain on or about any
premises occupied by that person.
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization, or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
§ 89-26. Provisions relating to rabies vaccination of cats.
A. Vaccination and license requirements. No person shall own, keep,
harbor, or maintain any cat over seven months of age within the
Township unless the cat is vaccinated and licensed. The provisions of
this section do not apply to cats held in a cattery, or those held by a
state or federal licensed research facility, or a veterinary establishment
where cats are received or kept for diagnostic, medical, surgical, or
other treatments, or licensed animal shelters, pounds, kennels, or pet
shops.
B. Vaccination. All cats shall be vaccinated against rabies by a licensed
veterinarian in accordance with the latest "Compendium of Animal
Rabies Vaccines and Recommendations for Immunization" published by
the National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians, except as
provided for in Subsection D.
C. Vaccination certificate. A certificate of vaccination shall be issued to the
owner of each animal vaccinated on a form recommended by the state.
D. Exemptions. Any cat may be exempted from the requirements of such
vaccination for a specified period of time by the Division of Health, upon
§ 89-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-26
1:189
§ 89-27. Licensing requirements.
presentation of a veterinarian's certificate stating that because of an
infirmity or other physical condition, or regimen of therapy, the
inoculation of such cat shall be deemed inadvisable.
A. Cats must have license number displayed. Any person who owns, keeps,
or harbors a cat of licensing age shall annually apply for and procure
from the Township Clerk or other official designated by the governing
body to license cats in the Township, a license and official registration
tag with license number or a registration sleeve for each cat so owned,
kept, or harbored, and shall place upon such cat a collar, or other device
with the license number securely fastened or displayed thereto.
Acceptable methods of displaying license number shall include, but are
not limited to, break-away or elastic collars. License tags or sleeves are
not transferable.
B. Time for applying for license. The owner of any newly acquired cat of
licensing age, or of any cat which attains licensing age, shall make
application for license tag or sleeve for such cat within 20 days after
such acquisition or age attainment. This requirement will not apply to a
nonresident keeping a cat within the Township of Lawrence for no
longer than 90 days.
C. Cats brought into the Township of Lawrence.
(1) Any person who shall bring, or cause to be brought into the
Township of Lawrence any cat licensed in another state for the
current year, and bearing registration tag or sleeve, shall keep the
same or permit the same to be kept within the Township for a
period of no more than 90 days. A Lawrence Township license shall
be applied for within the ninety-day period.
(2) Any person who brings or causes to be brought into the Township
any unlicensed cat, and shall keep the same or permit the same to
be kept within the Township of Lawrence for a period of more than
20 days, shall immediately apply for a license and registration tag
or sleeve for each such cat.
D. Application, contents, preservation of information. The application shall
state the breed, sex, age, color and markings of the cat for which
license and registration are sought, and whether it is of a long or short
haired variety; also, the name, street, and post office address of the
owner, and the person who shall keep or harbor such cat. The
information on the application and the registration number issued for
the cat shall be preserved for a period of three years by the Clerk or
other official designated to license cats in the Township.
E. License forms and tags. License forms and official tags or sleeves shall
be furnished by the Township and shall be numbered serially, and shall
bear the year of issuance and the name of the municipality.
§ 89-26 LAWRENCE CODE § 89-27
1:190
F. Evidence of inoculation with rabies vaccine or certificate of exemption;
requirement for license. The Township Clerk or other official
designated by the Township Committee to license cats shall not grant
any license and official registration tag or sleeve for any cat, unless the
owner thereof provides evidence that the cat to be licensed and
registered has been inoculated with a rabies vaccine of a type approved
by and administered in accordance with the recommendations of the
United States Department of Agriculture and the United States
Department of Humane Services, or has been certified exempt as
provided by § 89-26. The rabies inoculation shall be administered by a
licensed veterinarian, or by such other veterinarian permitted by law to
do the same.
G. License fee schedule. See Chapter 156, Fees.
H. Fees, renewals, expiration date of license.
(1) License from another municipality shall be accepted. The person
applying for the license and registration tag and/or sleeve shall pay
the fee fixed or authorized. The fee for the renewal of license and
registration tag or sleeve shall be the same as for the original, and
the license, registration tag or sleeve and renewal thereof shall
expire on September 30 in the following year.
(2) Only one license and registration tag or sleeve shall be required in
the licensing year for any cat in this Township. Any valid New
Jersey license tag or sleeve issued by a New Jersey municipality
shall be accepted by this Township as evidence of compliance.
I. Loss of license. If a license tag or sleeve has been misplaced or lost, the
Township Clerk may issue a duplicate license and/or registration sleeve
for that particular cat at a fee of $1.
J. Proof of licensing. Proof of licensing shall be produced by any person
owning, keeping, maintaining, or harboring a cat, upon the request of
any Health Official, Police Officer, Animal Control Officer, or other
authorized person.
K. Interfering with persons performing duties under this section. No
person shall hinder, molest, or interfere with anyone authorized or
empowered to perform any duty under this section.
L. Disposition of fees collected. License fees and other monies collected or
received under the provisions of this section, shall be forwarded to the
Treasurer of the Township, and shall be placed in a special account
separate from any of the other accounts of the Township and shall be
used for the following purposes only: collecting, keeping, and disposing
of cats liable to seizure, for local prevention and control of rabies,
providing anti-rabies treatment under the direction of the Division of
Health for any person known or suspected to have been exposed to
rabies, and for administering the provisions of this section. Any
unexpected balance remaining in such special accounts shall be
§ 89-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-27
1:191
§ 89-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No. 1444-96]
Violations; penalty. Except as otherwise provided in this section, any person
who violates, or who fails, or refuses to comply with this section, shall
be liable to a penalty of not less than $50, nor more than $100, for each
offense, to be recovered by and in the name of the Division of Health or by
and in the name of the Township the following penalty fees:
retained until the end of the third fiscal year following, and may be used
for any of the purposes set forth in this paragraph. At the end of the
third fiscal year following, and at the end of each fiscal year thereafter,
there shall be transferred from the special account to the general funds
of the Township any amount then in such account which is in excess of
the total amount paid into the special account during the last two fiscal
years next preceding.
A. First offense, minimum penalty: $30.
B. Second offense, minimum penalty: $60, plus court costs. Court
appearance required.
C. Third offense, minimum penalty: $300, plus court costs. Court
appearance required.
§ 89-27 LAWRENCE CODE § 89-28
1:192
ARTICLE VIII
Kennels, Pet Shops, Shelters and Pounds
§ 89-29. Application.
Any person who keeps or operates or proposes to establish a kennel, pet
shop, shelter or a pound, shall apply to the Township Clerk for a license
entitling him to keep or operate such establishment. Such application shall
describe the premises upon which the establishment is located, or is
proposed to be located, the purpose for which it is to be maintained and
shall be accompanied by the written approval of the Health Officer of the
Township showing compliance with the local and state rules and regulations
governing the location of and sanitation at such establishment.
§ 89-30. Contents; expiration; revocation.
All licenses issued for a kennel, pet shop or shelter shall state the purpose
for which the establishment is maintained. All such licenses shall expire
on the last day of January annually and be subject to revocation by the
Township on recommendation of the State Department of Health or Health
Officer of the Township for failure to comply with the rules and regulations
of the State Department or the Division of Health, of the Township, after
recommendation of the State Department of Health or Township Health
Officer for failure to comply with the rules and regulations of the State
Department or the Division of Health of the Township, after the owner has
been afforded a hearing by either the State Department or local Division of
Health.
§ 89-31. Fees.
The annual license fee for a kennel or pet shop may be found in Chapter 156
of this Code. No fee shall be charged for a shelter.
§ 89-32. Disposition of fees.
License fees collected or received under the provisions of this section,
except registration tag fees, shall be received and disposed of in the manner
provided in state law.
§ 89-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-32
1:193

ARTICLE IX
Feeding of Waterfowl
[Added by Ord. No. 1584-99]
§ 89-33. Findings.
§ 89-34. Prohibition; notice.
The feeding of waterfowl on municipal parkland is hereby prohibited; and
notice of this prohibition and notice of this prohibition shall be prominently
placed in appropriate locations on park property.
§ 89-35. Violations and penalties.
Violators of this section shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
A. In recent years there has been a proliferation in the waterfowl
population in the Northeast; and waterfowl, and in particular geese,
carry several types of bacteria which can prove harmful to humans and
to fish populations. Several states, including Pennsylvania, have
enacted statutes prohibiting the feeding of ducks and geese on state
property due to health concerns.
B. The Lawrence Township Council seeks ways in which to reduce the
waterfowl population in municipal parks, most particularly in Colonial
Lake Park where the goose population is a considerable problem.
§ 89-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-35
1:195

ARTICLE X
Swine
§ 89-36. Adoption of Code by reference.
A Code regulating premises on which swine are maintained; establishing
minimum standards governing the location and maintenance of such
premises; authorizing inspections of such premises; declaring and defining
certain acts or conditions on such premises as nuisances; declaring and
fixing penalties for violations thereof is hereby adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A.
26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6.
§ 89-37. Title of Code.
§ 89-38. Permit required.
No person shall maintain swine, as defined in such Code, on premises within
the boundaries of this Township, until a valid permit therefor shall have
been issued by the Township Clerk.
§ 89-39. Denial; suspension; hearings.
Permits required by this section may be denied or suspended by the Health
Officer for failure to comply with this section. The Township Council acting
as the Board of Health shall afford the person whose permit to maintain
swine on premises has been denied or suspended an opportunity to be
heard in public hearing; and following this to be informed of the decision
within two weeks thereafter.
§ 89-40. Fee.
The fee for a permit to maintain swine on premises shall be found in Chapter
156, Fees, of this Code.
§ 89-41. Expiration; renewal.
Permits issued for the maintenance of swine on premises shall expire
annually on June 30 of each year and application for renewal thereof shall
be submitted together with the required fee prior to June 15 of each year.
A. The Code established and adopted by this article is described and
commonly known as "Maintenance of Swine Code of New Jersey
(1957)."
B. Three copies of the Maintenance of Swine Code of New Jersey (1957)
have been placed on file in the Township Clerk's office for the use and
examination of the public.
§ 89-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-41
1:197

ARTICLE XI
Puppy Mills and Kitten Mills
[Added 2-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2287-18]
§ 89-42. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ANIMAL CARE FACILITY — An animal control center or animal shelter,
maintained by or under contract with any state, county, or municipality,
whose mission and practice is, in whole, or significant part, the rescue and
placement of animals in permanent homes or rescue organizations.
ANIMAL RESCUE ORGANIZATION — Any not-for-profit organization which
has tax-exempt status under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal
Revenue Code whose mission and practice is, in whole or in significant part,
the rescue and placement of animals in permanent homes.
CAT — A member of the species of domestic cat, Felis catus.
DOG — A member of the species of domestic dog, Canis familiaris.
OFFER FOR SALE — To sell, offer for sale or adoption, advertise for the sale
of, barter, auction, give away or otherwise dispose of a dog or cat.
PET SHOP — A retail establishment where dogs and cats are sold,
exchanged, bartered or offered for sale as pet animals to the general public
at retail. Such definition shall not include an animal care facility or animal
rescue organization, as defined.
§ 89-43. Restrictions on the sale of animals.
§ 89-44. Recordkeeping and disclosure.
A pet shop shall maintain records stating the name and address of the
animal care facility or animal rescue organization that each cat or dog was
obtained from for at least two years following the date of acquisition. Such
records shall be made available, immediately upon request, to Township
Police, Health Officer, Animal Control Officer or their agent, and no later
than June 1 of each year, to the Municipal Clerk's Office. Each pet shop shall
display on each cage a label stating the name and address of the animal
care facility or animal rescue organization of each animal kept in the cage.
A. A pet shop may offer for sale only those dogs and cats that the pet shop
has obtained from or displays in cooperation with:
(1) An animal care facility; or
(2) An animal rescue organization.
B. A pet shop shall not offer for sale a dog or cat that is younger than eight
weeks old.
§ 89-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 89-45
1:199
§ 89-45. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of this article which shall continue in
full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of this article are hereby
declared to be severable.
§ 89-45 LAWRENCE CODE § 89-45
1:200
Chapter 95
BACKGROUND CHECKS
§ 95-1. Findings.
The Township Council wishes to ensure that the Township is providing the
safest possible recreational programs for its youths, recently enacted State
Law, N.J.S.A. 125A:3A-1 et seq., permits the Township to request that the
Attorney General's Office conduct a criminal history record background
check on each prospective and current person with unsupervised direct
access to minors participating in any Township sponsored or co-sponsored
program in connection with the Lawrence Township Recreation
Department. The Superintendent of Recreation recommends that all such
current and prospective persons with unsupervised direct access to minors
involved with such youth programs be required to submit to such criminal
history record background checks. The Township desires that all youth
recreation programs using Township facilities and/or which are funded by
the Township in whole or in part, such as Little League, Youth Football,
Youth Basketball, Soccer, and the like, be required to perform criminal
background checks on any person with unsupervised direct access to
minors, as a condition of using the Township facilities.
§ 95-2. Criminal background checks required.
Criminal history background checks of persons with unsupervised direct
access to minors of youth serving recreation organization are required.
§ 95-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CO-SPONSORED — Township provision of funding or facilities, including
maintenance of facilities.
CRIMINAL HISTORY RECORD BACKGROUND CHECK — A determination
of whether a person has a criminal record by cross-referencing that
person's name and fingerprints with those on file with the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, Identification Division and the State Bureau of Identification
in the Division of State Police.
DEPARTMENT — The Lawrence Township Police Division.
REVIEW COMMITTEE or COMMITTEE — A three member Committee
consisting of the Superintendent of Recreation, Chief of Police and the
Municipal Manager or his/her designee. The Committee shall be charged
with the review of all appeals by any employee or volunteer whose criminal
history background check reveals a disqualifying criminal conviction.
§ 89-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-3
1:201
SPONSORED — Recreation run directly by the Lawrence Township
Recreation Department, including oversight, control and/or fiscal
contribution.
SUPERVISED — To have the direction and oversight of the performance of
others.
UNSUPERVISED — Not supervised or under constant observation.
VOLUNTEER — Any person involved with a Lawrence Township sponsored
or co-sponsored sports program or league who has regular unsupervised
direct access to minors as a result of their involvement with the
organization.
YOUTH SERVING RECREATION ORGANIZATION or ORGANIZATION —
A corporation, association or other organization, including those with
nonprofit status and which provides recreational related activities or
services for persons younger than 18 years of age, in connection with
Lawrence Township sponsored or co-sponsored sports programs or leagues.
§ 95-4. Requests for criminal background checks; costs.
A. The Township of Lawrence requires that all employees and volunteers
of a youth serving recreation organization request through the
Lawrence Township Police Division that the State Bureau of
Identification in the Division of State Police conduct a criminal history
record background check on each prospective and current employee or
volunteer of the organization. There shall be a thirty-day grace period
for each new employee or volunteer of the youth serving organization to
make application for this criminal history record background check. All
coaches must have their fingerprinting and applications completed by
the end of the thirty-day grace period.
B. The Township shall conduct a criminal history record background check
only upon receipt of the written consent for the check from the
prospective or current person with direct unsupervised access to
minors.
C. The organization shall bear the costs associated with conducting a
criminal history background check in accordance with the fees
established by the State Bureau of Identification in the Division of State
Police and in accordance with N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-2d.
D. The Division of State Police shall inform the Lawrence Township Police
Division whether the person's criminal history record background
check reveals a conviction of a disqualifying crime or offense specified
in § 95-5. Any information received by the Lawrence Township Police
Division shall be confidential.
E. Any person who, by virtue of their occupation, is required by statute to
undergo a federal and state criminal history record background check
similar in nature to the requirements contained herein, and who can
provide proof of the results of such background check, is exempt from
§ 95-3 LAWRENCE CODE § 95-4
1:202
§ 95-5. Conditions under which a person is disqualified from
service.
§ 95-6. Submission, exchange of background information.
the requirement hereunder until three years has elapsed since the most
current background check.
A. A person may be disqualified from serving as an employee or volunteer
of a youth serving recreation organization if that person's criminal
history record background check reveals a record of conviction of any
of the following crimes and offenses:
(1) In New Jersey, any crime of disorderly persons offense:
(a) Involving danger to the person, meaning those crimes and
disorderly persons offenses as set forth in N.J.S.A. 2C:11-1 et
seq., such as criminal homicide; N.J.S.A. 2C:12-1 et seq., such
as assault, reckless endangerment, threats, stalking; N.J.S.A.
2C:13-1 et seq., such as kidnapping; N.J.S.A. 2C:14-1 et seq.,
such as sexual assault; or N.J.S.A. 2C:15-1 et seq., such as
robbery;
(b) Against the family, children or incompetents, meaning those
crimes and disorderly persons offenses set forth in N.J.S.A.
2C:24-1 et seq., such as endangering the welfare of a child;
(c) Involving theft as set forth in Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New
Jersey Statutes;
(d) Involving any controlled dangerous substance or controlled
substance analog as set forth in Chapter 25 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes except Subdivision (a)(4) of N.J.S.A.
2C:35-10.
(2) In any other state or jurisdiction, conduct which, if committed in
New Jersey, would constitute any of the crimes or disorderly
persons offenses described in this section.
A. Prospective or current employees or volunteers of youth serving
recreation organizations shall submit their names, address, fingerprints
and written consent to the organization for the criminal history record
background check to be performed. The organization shall submit this
documentation to the Police Division through the Chief of Police who
shall coordinate the background check and refer the information to the
State Police and FBI for the initial check. Thereafter, all subsequent
background checks shall be submitted to the Lawrence Township Chief
of Police, who shall coordinate a background check every three years
after the date of the initial check.
B. The Lawrence Township Police Division shall act as a clearinghouse for
the collection and dissemination of information obtained as a result of
§ 95-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-6
1:203
§ 95-7. Limitations on access and use of criminal history record
information.
§ 95-8. Challenge of accuracy of report.
conducting criminal history record background checks pursuant to this
chapter.
A. Access to criminal history record information for non-criminal justice
purposes, including licensing and employment, is restricted to the
members of the Review Committee, as authorized by federal or state
statute, rule or regulation executive order, administrative code, local
ordinance or resolution regarding obtaining and disseminating of
criminal history record information obtained under this section.
B. The Review Committee shall limit their use of criminal history record
information solely to the authorized person for which it was obtained
and criminal history record information furnished shall not be
disseminated to persons or organizations not authorized to receive the
records for authorized purposes. Use of this record shall be limited
solely to the authorized purpose for which it was given and it shall not
be disseminated to any unauthorized persons. Any person violating
federal or state regulations governing access to criminal history record
information may be subject to criminal and/or civil penalties.
A. If a criminal history record may disqualify an employee or volunteer for
any purpose, the Review Committee's determination shall be provided
to the employee or volunteer with an opportunity to complete and
challenge the accuracy of the information contained in the criminal
history record. The employee or volunteer shall be afforded a
reasonable period of time to correct and complete this record. A person
is not presumed guilty of any charges or arrests for which there are no
final dispositions indicated on the record. The New Jersey State Police
shall make the initial recommendation, based solely on the New Jersey
State Statutes, to the Police Department who shall provide the
information to the Review Committee. They shall advise the Review
Committee whether or not the volunteer is being recommended. The
Review Committee will receive a pre-printed form on each individual
submitted to the State Police for a background check. One form will be
for recommendation and the other will be for rejection. If there is a
rejection, the Review Committee may still allow the employee or
volunteer to participate. The New Jersey State Police will make a
recommendation based on the record only. It is within the Review
Committee's discretion to overturn the decision of New Jersey State
Police recommendation.
B. The Review Committee shall promptly notify a prospective or current
employee or volunteer whose criminal history background check
reveals a disqualifying conviction. The person shall have 30 days from
§ 95-6 LAWRENCE CODE § 95-8
1:204
the receipt of that notice to petition the Review Committee for a review
and cite reasons substantiating the review.
C. Notwithstanding the provision of § 95-5, no person shall be disqualified
from serving as an employee or volunteer of a nonprofit youth serving
organization on the basis of any conviction disclosed by a criminal
history record background check, if the person can affirmatively
demonstrate rehabilitation to the Review Committee. In determining
whether a person has affirmatively demonstrated rehabilitation, the
Review Committee shall consider the following factors:
(1) The nature and responsibility of the position which the convicted
person would hold or has held, as the case may be;
(2) The nature and seriousness of the offense;
(3) The circumstances under which the offense occurred;
(4) The date of the offense;
(5) The age of the person when the offense was committed;
(6) Whether the offense was an isolated or repeated incident;
(7) Any social conditions which may have contributed to the offense;
and
(8) Any evidence of rehabilitation, including good conduct in prison or
the community, counseling or psychiatric treatment received,
acquisition of additional academic or vocational schooling,
successful participation in correctional work-release programs, or
the recommendation of those who have had the person under their
supervision.
D. The Review Committee shall promptly advise the organization, in
writing, if a current or prospective employee or volunteer whose
criminal history record background check reveals a disqualifying
offense has affirmatively demonstrated rehabilitation under this
section.
E. This section shall not apply to persons who have been convicted,
adjudicated delinquent or acquitted by reason of insanity of aggravated
sexual assault; sexual assault; aggravated criminal sexual contact;
kidnapping pursuant to Subdivision C(2) of N.J.S.A. 2C:13-1;
endangering the welfare of a child by engaging in sexual conduct which
would impair or debauch the morals of the child pursuant to
Subdivision (a) of N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4; endangering the welfare of a child
pursuant to Subdivision (b)(4) of N.J.S.A. 2C:24-4; luring or enticing
pursuant to section 1 of P.L. 1993, c. 291 (N.J.S.A. 2C:13-6); criminal
sexual contact pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:14-3b, if the victim is a minor;
kidnapping pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:13-2, or false imprisonment
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:13-3 if the victim is a minor and the offender is
not the parent of the victim; knowingly promoting prostitution of a child
§ 95-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 95-8
1:205
§ 95-9. Violations and penalties.
Failure to comply with this section may result in the Township withholding
funding for the program or league, prohibiting the use of facilities, and/or
prohibiting the use of facility maintenance.
Chapter 101
BARBERSHOPS AND BARBER SCHOOLS
pursuant to Subdivision (b)(3) and (b)(4) of N.J.S.A. 2C:34-1; or an
attempt to commit any of these enumerated offenses.
F. When the Review Committee received written notification from the
Police Division stating whether the criminal history record background
check of a current or prospective employee or volunteer performed
pursuant to the provision of N.J.S.A. 15A:3A-4 reveals a disqualifying
offense or stating that the person has affirmatively demonstrated
rehabilitation under this act, the organization or Review Committee
may file that written notification with the Police Division.
G. The Police Division shall keep the written notification on file for three
years from the date it was issued.
H. The Review Committee may request the Police Division to review its
files to determine if there is written notification on file stating whether
a criminal history record background check of a current or prospective
employee or volunteer revealed a disqualifying offense or stating that
the person has affirmatively demonstrated rehabilitation under this act.
A current or prospective employee or volunteer shall not be required to
submit to another criminal history record background check if such
written notification was issued within the past three years.
I. No person or entity shall be held liable in any civil or criminal action
brought by any party based on any written notification on file with the
Police Division pursuant to the provisions of this section.
§ 95-8 LAWRENCE CODE § 95-9
1:206
ARTICLE I
Hours of Operation
[Derived from § 15-1 of the 1971 Code]
§ 101-1. Hours of operation.
A. No barbershop, barber school or barber college wherein the business of
shaving and hair cutting is carried on in the Township shall open before
8:00 a.m. or close after 8:00 p.m. on any weekday, except those
barbershops which operate on the premises of religious, charitable or
educational institutions for the purpose of serving only the bona fide
residents and staff thereof. The barbershops, barber schools and barber
colleges shall remain closed and transact no business on the following
days:
Sunday.
New Year's Day.
Decoration Day.
Fourth of July.
Labor Day.
Thanksgiving Day.
Christmas Day.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to remain open for the purposes of
carrying on such business aforesaid except as above specified.
§ 101-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 101-1
1:207
Chapter 112
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
§ 112-1. East-west base line.
The base line running substantially east and west through the Township
shall be as follows: Beginning at a point in the Great Road at the Princeton
Township line on the eastern border of such Township, and extending down
the middle of Great Road westerly to Harney's Corner; thence continuing in
a substantially westerly direction, through the middle of Princeton Avenue
westerly to the line of the City of Trenton; which base line shall be the line
of division of streets northerly and southerly in the Township; and the base
line for streets running in a substantially easterly and westerly direction
shall be the line separating such Township from the City of Trenton and
the Township of Ewing on the westerly side or boundary of the Township of
Lawrence.
§ 112-2. Designation of streets by "North," "South," etc.
In every case in which any street does or shall intersect either of the base
lines, the parts of the street situate on opposite sides of the base line so
intersected, shall be designated by the terms "North," "South," "East" or
"West" as the case may be.
§ 112-3. Numbering of buildings from base line.
The buildings situated or fronting on any street which does or shall intersect
either of the base lines shall be numbered in each direction from the base
line as a starting point, the first building on either side of the line being
numbered one or two as the case may be; and the buildings situated or
fronting on any street, which does or shall terminate at either of the base
lines, shall be numbered from the last named base line as a starting point in
the manner above stated.
§ 112-4. Streets not intersecting base lines.
In case of any street which does not or shall not intersect or terminate
at either of the base lines, if its direction is more nearly eastward and
westward than northward and southward, the buildings thereon shall be
numbered from its eastward terminus if the terminus is west of the north
and south base line, and from its westward terminus if the last-named
terminus is east of the north and south base line; if the direction of the
street is more nearly northward and southward than eastward and
westward, then the buildings thereon shall be numbered from its northward
terminus if the terminus is south of the east and west base line, and from its
southward terminus if the last-named terminus is north of the east and west
base line.
§ 101-1 LAWRENCE CODE § 112-5
1:208
§ 112-5. Continuation of street under different name.
In all cases in which streets do or shall form an immediate junction which
each other, so that the one is but a continuation of the other under a
different name, the buildings thereon shall be numbered continuously from
the proper base lines as hereinbefore provided.
§ 112-6. Odd and even numbers.
When any street does or shall run in a direction more nearly eastward and
westward than northward and southward, the buildings on the north side
thereof shall be numbered with the even numbers and those on the south
side thereof, with the odd numbers and when any street does or shall run
in a direction more nearly northward and southward than eastward and
westward, the buildings on the east side thereof shall be numbered with the
even numbers, and those on the west side thereof with the odd numbers.
§ 112-7. Vacant lots.
In all cases where vacant lots do or shall intervene between buildings one
number shall be allowed for every 12.5 feet or fraction thereof, being 10
feet or more.
§ 112-8. Correction of improper numbers.
It shall be the duty of the Township Engineer whenever he shall discover
that any building in the Township is not numbered according to the plan
hereinbefore set forth, to serve upon the owner thereof a written or printed
notice of the proper number of such building, which notice may be delivered
personally, or left at the building with any person there residing or
employed, over the age of 14 years; and the owner of such building, within
one month from the date of such service, shall cause the number contained
in the notice so served to be affixed to or upon such building in a durable
manner, in some conspicuous place, and in default thereof, shall forfeit
and pay a fine of $5; provided, that no number upon any building shall be
required to be changed merely to give effect to the next preceding section,
until, by the erection of a building or buildings upon any vacant lots, a
change shall be necessary to prevent the duplication of numbers.
§ 112-9. Apartments; private streets.
A. Where any building is or shall be so constructed that different
apartments on the ground floor thereof shall front on any street and be
so arranged as to show an intention that the same shall be occupied by
different families, or used in carrying on of different trades, each
apartment shall be considered as a building, which shall be designated
by a separate number.
B. The term "street" as used in this section relating to the numbering of
buildings, shall be understood to include all private streets and all
private and public alleys.
§ 112-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-10
1:209
§ 112-10. Streets continuing from Trenton or Ewing.
In the case of all streets and highways of the Township which are
substantially continuations of streets in the City of Trenton or of the
Township of Ewing, the system of numbering in the City of Trenton or in the
Township of Ewing shall be continued from the same base line as used in the
municipalities and beginning with the next series of numbers, but avoiding
any duplications thereof.
§ 112-11. Resolution required prior to assigning; interpretation of
section.
The Township Engineer shall not assign any numbers to any street or
section thereof without authority by resolution of the Township Council,
which shall designate the street or portion thereof for which numbers shall
be assigned. In case of any difficulty in assigning the base line or beginning
point for numbers, the Township Council shall interpret this section and fix
the base line to be used by the Township Engineer in case of uncertainty
thereof.
Chapter 118
BUILDINGS, UNFIT
§ 118-1. Appointment of Public Officers.
The Township Council shall, by resolution, appoint five persons, who are
residents of the Township, who shall be designated as the Public Officers to
exercise the powers prescribed by this section. Approval of at least three of
such persons shall be required in any actions taken under this section.
§ 118-2. Powers and duties of Public Officers generally.
In addition to the powers and duties heretofore granted to the Public
Officers, they shall:
A. Investigate the buildings and conditions of the Township in order to
determine which buildings therein are unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use;
B. Administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
C. Enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination; provided,
that such entry shall be made in such manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to persons in possession;
D. Have such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and
effectuate the purposes and provisions of this section and of N.J.S.A.
40:48-2.3 to 40:48-2.12.
§ 112-10 LAWRENCE CODE § 118-3
1:210
§ 118-3. Determination of unfitness.
The Public Officers may determine that a building is unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use, if they find that conditions existing in such
building are dangerous or injurious to the health or safety of the occupants
of such building, the occupants of neighboring buildings, or other residents
of the Township. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to,
defects increasing the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities; lack
of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; dilapidation; disrepair;
structural defects and uncleanliness. The Public Officers, in reaching such
determination, shall be guided by, among other things, the standards set by
the State Uniform Construction Code, Zoning Ordinance, health ordinances
and Uniform Fire Safety Act of the Township and by the pertinent
requirements of Title 26 of the Revised Statutes.
§ 118-4. Filing of complaints; hearings; issuance of orders to
correct conditions.
Whenever a petition is filed with the Public Officers by any officer who is
in charge of any Department or branch of the government of the Township,
the County or of the State, relating to health, fire, building regulations or
to other activities concerning buildings within the Township, or whenever
a petition is filed with the public officers by at least five residents of
the Township charging that any building is unfit for human habitation,
occupancy or use; or whenever it appears to the Public Officers or on
the motion of a majority of them that any building is unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use, the Public Officers shall, if their preliminary
investigations disclose the basis for such charges, issue and cause to be
served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such building, a
complaint stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that a
hearing will be held before the Public Officers, or their designated agents,
at a place therein fixed not less than 10 days or more than 30 days after
service of the complaint; that the owner and parties in interest shall be
given the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or
otherwise to give testimony at the time and place fixed in the complaint; and
that the rules of evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be
controlling in hearings before the Public Officers. If, after such notice and
hearing, the Public Officers determine that the building in consideration is
unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use, they shall state in writing
their findings and facts in support of such determination, and shall issue
and cause to be served upon the owner thereof and parties in interest, an
order:
A. Requiring the owner to repair, alter or improve the building, to the
extent specified in the order, to render it fit for human habitation,
occupancy or use, if such repair, alteration or improvement can be
made at a reasonable cost in the opinion of the Public Officers, or, at the
option of the owner, to vacate and close the building as unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use;
§ 118-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-4
1:211
§ 118-5. Service of complaints and orders.
The complaint and orders issued by the Public Officers pursuant to this
section shall be served upon the persons either personally or by registered
mail, if their whereabouts are known, but if the whereabouts of such
persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the Public
Officers in the exercise of reasonable diligence, and the Public Officers
shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of such complaint
or order upon such persons may be made by the publication of same once
each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper published in the County
and circulating in the Township. A copy of such complaint or order shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected by such complaint
or order. A copy of such complaint or order shall be duly recorded or lodged
for record with the County Clerk.
§ 118-6. Repair, alteration, etc., by Township.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or improve, or
at the option of the owner, to vacate and close the building, the Public
Officers may cause such building to be repaired, altered or improved, or to
be vacated and closed. The Public Officers may cause to be posted on the
main entrance of any building the following words: "This building is unfit for
human habitation, occupancy or use; human habitation, occupancy or use
of this building is prohibited and unlawful."
§ 118-7. Removal or demolition by Township.
If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish the
building, the Public Officers may cause such building to be removed or
demolished.
§ 118-8. Recovery of Township's costs.
In the event that the Public Officers cause such buildings to be repaired,
altered, improved, vacated, closed, removed or demolished, the cost of such
repairs, alterations or improvements, or vacating, closing or removal and
demolition, shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon which
the cost was incurred. If the building is removed or demolished by the
Public Officers, they shall sell the materials of such building and shall credit
the proceeds of such sale against the cost of the removal or demolition,
and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the
Public Officers and shall be secured in such manner as may be directed by
such court, and shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be
entitled thereto in the final order or judgment of such court.
B. Requiring the owner to remove or demolish such building within the
time specified in the order if such building cannot be rendered fit for
human habitation, occupancy or use at a cost deemed to be reasonable
in the opinion of the public officers.
§ 118-4 LAWRENCE CODE § 118-9
1:212
§ 118-9. Additional officers and agents.
The Township Council may by resolution from time to time appoint and fix
the duties of such other officers, agents and employees as may be necessary
to carry out the purposes of this section and to authorize the Public Officers,
with the consent of the Township Council, to delegate any of their functions
and powers under this section to such officers and agents.
Chapter 130
CONSTRUCTION CODES
§ 118-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 118-9
1:213

ARTICLE I
Uniform Construction Code Administration
[Derived from Ch. 5A of the 1971 Code]
§ 130-1. State Uniform Construction Code Enforcing Agency.
There is hereby established in the Township a State Uniform Construction
Code enforcing agency to be known as Division of Licensing and Inspection,
Department of Community Development, consisting of a Construction
Official, Building Subcode Official, Plumbing Subcode Official, Electrical
Subcode Official, Fire Protection Subcode Official and such other subcode
officials for such additional subcodes as the Commissioner of the
Department of Community Affairs of the State shall hereafter adopt as part
of the State Uniform Construction Code. The Construction Official shall be
the chief administrator of the enforcing agency.
§ 130-2. Qualifications of officials; on-site inspection agency.
Each official position created in § 130-1 above shall be filled by a person
qualified for such position pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126 et seq. provided,
that in lieu of any particular Subcode Official, an on-site inspection agency
may be retained by contract, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-1.1 et seq. More than
one such official position may be held by the same person; provided, that
such person is qualified pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-126 et seq. and N.J.A.C.
5:23-1.1 et seq. to hold each such position.
§ 130-3. Office location.
The public shall have the right to do business with the enforcing agency at
one office location except for emergencies and unforeseen or unavoidable
circumstances; and for the purposes of this article, such office shall be that
of the designated Township Construction Official.
§ 130-4. Construction Board of Appeals established; composition.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1476-96; Ord. No. 1776-04]
A. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-127, there is hereby established a
Construction Board of Appeals to hear appeals from decisions by the
enforcing agency. Such Board shall consist of five regular members.
The membership as a whole shall include individuals qualified in the
disciplines of electrical, plumbing, building and fire subcode and a
certified fire official. A member may qualify in more than one discipline.
Any regular member not fulfilling the qualifications required of the
Board as a whole must have at least five years of experience in the
construction industry.
B. In addition to the five regular members, the Board shall include two
special members, one of whom shall be a licensed professional engineer
with municipal construction experience, and one of whom shall be a
builder.
§ 130-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-4
1:215
§ 130-5. Appointment and terms of members; annual
reorganization. [Amended by Ord. No. 1476-96]
§ 130-6. Compensation of Board members.
No regular or alternative members of such Board shall receive any
compensation; except, that they shall be compensated for any expenses
incurred in the course of such duties.
§ 130-7. Fees for construction permit.
See Chapter 156, Fees.
§ 130-8. Appeal; applications fees; waiver.
C. The Board shall include three alternate members with one of the
qualifications required of either a regular or special member.
A. The Township Council shall appoint the Board members and any
alternate members. Members shall be appointed for a term of four
years. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term.
B. The Township Council shall appoint such number of alternates, as may
be appropriate, for terms not to exceed four years, or may, in the
alternative, appoint alternates on a case by case basis.
C. No regular or alternate Board member may be a member of the
enforcing agency, the decisions of which are subject to the review of the
Board.
D. Pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23A-1.2, the Township Council, as the appointing
authority, shall annually designate from the regular membership of the
Board a person to serve as Chair and as Vice Chair or it may delegate
responsibility to the membership to select its officers at its annual
reorganization meeting which shall be called within the first 60 days of
each calendar year.
A. All appeal applications shall be accompanied by a fee as established in
Chapter 156, Fees, made payable to the Township of Lawrence. An
application shall be considered incomplete unless accompanied by said
appeal application fee.
B. In the case of an appeal based on the failure of the enforcing agency to
act within any time frame specified, the fee shall be waived.
Furthermore, the Construction Board of Appeals shall have the
authority to order the reimbursement of an appeal application fee upon
a showing of good cause or if the Board deems reimbursement
appropriate. The Township shall reimburse an appeal application fee to
the appellant if so ordered by the Construction Board of Appeals.
§ 130-4 LAWRENCE CODE § 130-8
1:216
ARTICLE II
Certificates of Occupancy and Building and Zoning Permits
[Derived from §§ 5-7 and 5-11.1 of the 1971 Code]
§ 130-9. Landscaping of slopes and swales required for certificate of
occupancy.
§ 130-10. Building permits.
No building permit shall be issued unless the proposed building or other
structure complies with all provisions of this chapter and will all provisions
of the Township Land Use Ordinance.
§ 130-11. Zoning permits. [Added at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A zoning permit is required prior to the commencement of a use or the
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installation
of a structure or building which acknowledges that the use, building or
structure complies with the provisions of the Township Land Use Ordinance.
A. All new dwellings or structures hereafter constructed shall provide,
prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, for landscaping with
proper slope, minimum of 2% per foot, of outside finished grading away
from the building or structure on all sides, and include construction of
proper drainage swales where other improved properties adjoin either
the sides or rear of such building or structure, contiguous to such
improved properties.
§ 130-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-11
1:217

ARTICLE III
Incomplete Construction
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1438-95]
§ 130-12. Findings.
§ 130-13. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SUBSTANTIAL NONCOMPLETION — Any building in which construction
has begun and which, for a period of six months or more, construction of
a substantial portion remains unfinished as to be potentially dangerous or
injurious to the health and safety of the residents of Lawrence Township
or is so unsightly to potentially lower the value of a neighbor's property or
home.
§ 130-14. Powers of the Construction Official.
The Construction Official is granted the power to investigate any building
and/or structure within the Township in order to determine if it is in a state
substantial noncompletion.
A. Municipalities have been granted the Police power to regulate for the
common good of their citizens, i.e., public health, safety and general
welfare; and they are empowered pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.3 to
repair, close or demolish buildings that are so old, dilapidated or have
been so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or
otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy or use of its citizens.
N.J.S.A. 40:48-1, Subdivision 15, allows a municipality to enact
ordinances for the removal of any building or structure which may
become dangerous to life or health with costs to be assessed to the
owner; and municipalities are empowered to pass ordinances which
preserve and protect property values affecting the general welfare of
the community per N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.
B. There exists in Lawrence Township buildings and/or structures that
remain in such a state of substantial incompletion that they pose a
significant danger in the form of potential injuries to trespassers,
especially children, as such buildings, and/or structures are attractive
nuisances to the young; and buildings and/or structures which remain
substantially incomplete are unsightly and may substantially reduce the
value of other properties in the area, thereby negatively impacting the
general welfare of the citizens of Lawrence Township.
A. The Construction Official may determine that a building and/or
structure is in a state of substantial non-completion if he/she finds that
the conditions of the building and/or structure are of such a state as to
be potentially dangerous or injurious to the health and safety of the
occupants of neighboring buildings or other residents of the Township;
§ 130-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-14
1:219
§ 130-15. Order requiring restoration of property or completion;
time limit.
If, after the hearing, the Construction Official determines that the building
and/or structure is in a state of substantial non-completion as to be
potentially dangerous or to lower the value of neighboring homes, he/she
shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof and parties in
interest, an order requiring the owner to remove and restore the land to its
previous condition prior to commencement of construction or to commence
completion of construction of such building and/or structure within 60 days.
§ 130-16. Owner refuses to comply.
If the owner refuses to comply with the order to remove and restore the
land to its previous condition prior to commencement of construction or
to commence completion of the building and/or structure within 60 days,
the Construction Official may cause such building and/or structure to be
removed and restore the land to its previous conditions.
§ 130-17. Construction official to act; costs.
In the event that the Construction Official causes such building and/or
structure to be removed and the land restored to its previous condition, the
costs of such action shall be a municipal lien against the real property upon
which the costs were incurred. The Construction Official shall then sell the
materials of such building and/or structure and credit the proceeds of the
sale against the costs of removal or demolition, and any balance remaining
shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the Public Health Officer and
shall be disbursed by such court to the persons found to be entitled thereto
in the final order or judgment of such court.
or that the condition of the building and/or structure is so unsightly
as to potentially lower the value of neighboring homes or property.
Moreover, the building and/or structure must be in or have remained in
a similar state for a period of three months. The Construction Official
may rely, as needed, on the expertise of engineers or other such
professionals, in making such determination, as allowed by the
Lawrence Township budget.
B. Upon concluding that a substantially uncompleted building and/or
structure is potentially dangerous or injurious to the health and welfare
of the Township's occupants, the Construction Official shall serve,
either personally or by certified mail, a complaint on the owner of the
building and/or structure stating the charges, and containing a notice
that a hearing will be held before the Construction Official at a place
therein fixed not less than 10 days or more than 30 days from service of
the complaint.
§ 130-14 LAWRENCE CODE § 130-18
1:220
§ 130-18. Appointment of officers and employees; authority.
Township Council may by resolution appoint and fix the duties of such
officers, agents and employees as may be necessary to carry out the
purposes of the section.
§ 130-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-18
1:221
Chapter 144
EVENT MANAGEMENT
§ 130-18 LAWRENCE CODE § 130-18
1:222
ARTICLE I
Amusements and Public Events and Gatherings
[Derived from Ch. 12, Art. II, of the 1971 Code]
§ 144-1. Application and fee generally.
Application for a license under this article shall be made at least 10 days
prior to the event sought to be licensed and shall be accompanied by the
payment of a fee which may be found in Chapter 156 of this Code and
which fee shall be used to defray the administrative cost to the Township of
processing and investigating applications for licenses.
§ 144-2. Contents of application.
Applications for licenses shall set forth, in part, the name and address of the
applicant, those persons who will be actively in charge and responsible for
compliance with this article and the maintenance of good order; and in the
case of corporations, the names and addresses of the officers and directors
thereof and the statutory agent for service of process in this state. In the
case of clubs and unincorporated associations, the names and addresses
of such officers or additional committee members shall be required as are
reasonably believed necessary by the Township Clerk and Chief of Police.
§ 144-3. Exemption from fees.
No license fee shall be required under this article for any event, otherwise
required to comply with the requirements thereof, which is conducted,
sponsored or operated by and on the premises of any school, church,
Volunteer Fire Company, First Aid Squad or veterans' organization within
the Township, for the benefit of any such organization.
§ 144-4. Conditions upon issuance.
The issuance of any license under this article may be conditioned upon:
§ 144-5. Refusal, suspension or revocation.
Licenses issued under this article may be refused, suspended or revoked by
the Chief of Police for violation of law, of this Code or any other ordinance of
A. The furnishing, at the expense of licensee, of such reasonable number
of special officers as may be deemed necessary by the Chief of Police for
all such events or gatherings.
B. Satisfactory proof of compliance with the laws of the state and the
regulations of the State Division of Alcoholic Beverage Control
regarding the use, sale, serving or consumption of alcoholic beverages.
C. Such other conditions as may be reasonably believed necessary by the
Chief of Police for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare
including approval by the Health Officer if deemed necessary.
§ 144-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-5
1:223
the Township, or for other good cause reasonably believed to be necessary
by the Chief of Police for the protection of the public health, safety or
welfare, but any such refusal, suspension, or revocation may be appealed to
the Township Council for hearing at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
§ 144-6. Monthly report of Township Clerk.
The Township Clerk shall furnish to the Township Council a monthly written
report of all licenses issued, refused, suspended or revoked pursuant to this
article.
§ 144-5 LAWRENCE CODE § 144-6
1:224
ARTICLE II
Tournament Events
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1576-99]
§ 144-7. Definition.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TOURNAMENT EVENT — A golf tournament to be held over a period of two
or more days, and including events associated with the tournament, if it is
projected that the tournament attendance will exceed 5,000 people per day.
§ 144-8. Application to conduct event.
§ 144-9. Submission requirements.
The application shall include:
A. Not later than 120 days prior to the tournament, an application for a
permit to conduct a tournament event shall be made in writing to the
Township Council of the Township of Lawrence (hereinafter referred to
as "Township") and the Township Committee of the Township of
Princeton (hereinafter referred to as "Princeton") (by the person or
entity) or (the sponsor) responsible for staging the event. The fees for
this permit and the escrow deposit are contained in Chapter 156, Fees.
B. Princeton will provide the applicant with a final accounting within 30
days after the Tournament, and within 15 days thereafter the applicant
will make any remaining payment or Princeton shall return to the
applicant any excess escrow funds. These funds shall be jointly utilized
by the Township and Princeton for the review of the event application
by the professional committee established in § 144-10 herein below.
A. The tournament event plan, including:
(1) Dates:
(a) When pre-tournament construction will start;
(b) When pre-tournament events start;
(c) Of tournament play with rain dates, if any;
(d) When post-tournament removal of temporary facilities will end.
(2) Description of and schedule of golf events during tournament
week.
(3) Projection of number of people attending golf event on a day by day
basis during tournament week, including:
(a) Spectators;
§ 144-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-9
1:225
(b) Volunteers;
(c) Golfers and their staff;
(d) Tournament staff;
(e) Sponsors and hosts and their staff;
(f) Others.
(4) Information about applicant to demonstrate professional
experience and financial responsibility.
(5) Contact person(s) to be contacted by municipal staff in the event of
problems. If there is more than one contact person, the area of
responsibility of each contact person shall be specified.
(6) A description of location of each entrance and exit to the golf
course, including:
(a) What people or vehicles are allowed to enter and leave;
(b) If both vehicles and pedestrians, how separated;
(c) Permitted hours of entrance and exit;
(d) Plan for staffing, regulating, and controlling entrances and
exits;
(e) Where ticket booths are located;
(f) What entrance trucks will use for pre- and post-tournament
construction and removal activities;
(g) What entrances will be used for service traffic during the
tournament event.
(7) The plan for off-site event directional signage and the plan for its
removal after the event.
(8) The plan for dealing with inclement weather as it relates to
cancellation of days of the event and public notification process.
B. A transportation plan, including the following elements:
(1) An off-site parking plan designating:
(a) The location of off-site parking areas;
(b) The number of cars which can be accommodated at each
location;
(c) The contractual arrangements which are in effect for each
location;
§ 144-9 LAWRENCE CODE § 144-9
1:226
(d) A schedule showing when during the tournament each of the
locations will be in use;
(e) A capacity analysis report which relates the number of parking
spaces to the expected crowd size during the tournament with
particular reference to peak periods;
(f) The plan, if any, for VIP and handicapped parking;
(g) A plan showing any limitations on the off-site parking areas in
the event of inclement weather.
(2) A routing and parking allocation plan showing:
(a) The expected geographical areas from which those driving to
the event will be coming and the methodology for determining
this;
(b) The plan for directing drivers to parking areas, including VIP
and handicapped parking, if any;
(c) The driving directions which will be sent to advance
purchasers of tickets;
(d) The parking information and directions which will be included
with the tournament promotional materials for those not
purchasing tickets in advance.
(3) A busing plan showing:
(a) The main and any secondary tournament dropoff and pickup
areas;
(b) The routes from the off-site parking areas to the dropoff areas;
(c) The routes from the dropoff areas to the off-site parking areas;
(d) The schedule of bus departures from the off-site parking areas
during the course of the tournament and the expected bus
travel times;
(e) The capacity of the dropoff and pickup areas to handle the
proposed schedules, particularly at peak times;
(f) The plan for linking buses to other public transportation (e.g.,
train station and bus stops) and from in-town locations for use
by local residents;
(g) The contractual arrangement for having buses available;
(h) The plans for general and any special arrangements for
intersection and other roadway control devices or persons;
(i) The staging areas for buses not in use;
§ 144-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-9
1:227
(j) The plan for avoiding conflicts between buses and pedestrians
and other traffic near the tournament entrance and exit areas.
(4) The course-area parking and traffic regulations plan showing:
(a) Any special parking regulations which are proposed for public
roads which are proximate to the course;
(b) The plan for legally adopting any special regulations;
(c) The plan for posting and enforcing the regulations and for
coordinating with the needs of local residents;
(d) Whether it is contemplated that there will be restriction on
private landowners in the vicinity of the course from setting up
parking lots on their property;
(e) Whether it is contemplated that private cars or taxicabs or van
services will be allowed to drop off people at the entrance
areas.
(5) A pedestrian safety plan, including:
(a) Specially designated areas for pedestrians using the public
street, including any special plans needed for pedestrians
walking along or crossing Route 206;
(b) The plan for directing pedestrians to the entrances areas;
(c) The plan for the safety of passengers embarking and
disembarking from the bus dropoff and on-line at the pickup
areas.
(6) A bicycle plan, including:
(a) Whether it is contemplated there will be restrictions on
bicyclists using public roads in the course area;
(b) Where bicycle racks will be provided at the course.
(7) A background traffic plan, including:
(a) Estimates of non-tournament traffic on area roadways during
the tournament period and identifying times and places of
potential conflicts with tournament traffic;
(b) Other unusual traffic-generating activities taking place within
a five mile radius of the course and of each off-site parking area
during the tournament event.
(8) A summary and analysis plan prepared by a professional traffic
engineer and based on the facts in the other elements of the plan
demonstrating:
§ 144-9 LAWRENCE CODE § 144-9
1:228
(a) That the off-site parking areas are adequate to accommodate
the expected parking demand during the tournament event;
(b) That the routing and parking allocation plan is designed to
effectively disperse the arriving automobiles and to direct
them to parking areas with the least disruption on local area
streets;
(c) That the busing plan is adequate to safely transport people
from the off-site parking areas to the tournament dropoff areas
and from the tournament pickup areas to the off-site parking
areas without undue travel times, without undue wait times,
and without causing undue traffic congestion;
(d) That the parking and other traffic movements on the area
roadways are adequately regulated so as to minimize the
problem for area residents and will not unduly interfere with
buses and other transportation objectives;
(e) That the proposed plans do not pose a safety problem for
pedestrians and bicyclists and will not interfere with buses and
other transportation objectives, and that adequate
arrangements have been made to accommodate the needs of
handicapped persons; and
(f) That the bus dropoff and pickup areas are designed to
efficiently and safely board and unload passengers and to avoid
conflicting bus movements and with sufficient capacity to
handle pickup demands.
C. Emergency and other services plan.
(1) Police services plan describing:
(a) The Police services that will be required during the
tournament;
(b) Special security arrangements which might be necessary;
(c) Any private security companies and personnel which will be
present during the tournament.
(2) Fire services plan describing:
(a) The location and volume of water availability from fire
hydrants within or adjacent to the tournament site, or from
other sources;
(b) The duration of flows or storage capacity as measured in hours
of deliverable flows and water pressure available for fire
protection purposes within the site of the tournament;
(c) How the on site temporary structures to be located during the
tournament, such as tents, food preparation areas, as defined
§ 144-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-9
1:229
under § 144-9D(3) satisfy the requirements of the National
Fire Protection Association Standards 1231 as adopted by the
Township.
(3) Ambulance and emergency services plan describing:
(a) The proposed location for the stationing of ambulance and first
aid station on the site of the tournament;
(b) The medical personnel that the applicant proposes having
available on site during the tournament;
(c) The location of an emergency helevac landing area for the
removal of those who may become ill or injured on site during
the tournament.
(4) Trash removal plan describing:
(a) The size and location of all trash receptacles and holding areas
on site;
(b) The method to be utilized for the removal of the trash from the
tournament site;
(c) The number of trips that will be made to and from the site
during the tournament for trash removal purposes and the
proposed routing of the trash removal vehicles;
(d) A certification that the trash storage and removal will be done
in accordance with the applicable regulations of the Princeton
Board of Health.
(5) Disaster Control Plan describing the plans and contingencies
should there be a natural disaster occurring during the
tournament.
D. Temporary tournament facilities plan, including a site plan showing the
location and dimensions of the following structures, facilities or areas
together with a narrative describing the use of temporary structures
and facilities.
(1) Press and media coverage.
(a) Location and size of staging area(s), including setback from
property lines;
(b) Location of press and media area(s), including setback from
property lines;
(c) Location and height of elevated camera area(s) and antennas,
including height and setback from property lines;
(d) Power supply and needs (if new service is to be brought in).
(2) Concession area.
§ 144-9 LAWRENCE CODE § 144-9
1:230
(a) Location and size of area(s);
(b) Location, size, height, and setback from property lines of
structure(s);
(c) Power supply and needs (if new service is to be brought in).
(3) Temporary structures such as grandstands, skyboxes, hospitality
tents, leader boards, trailers (media, press, tournament officials,
etc.), portable restrooms, and water fountains.
(a) Location, size, height and setback from property lines of
structures;
(b) Description of special maintenance requirements;
(c) Power supply and needs (if new service is to be brought in).
(4) Trash storage area.
(a) Location, size, height, and setback from property lines of
area(s) for refuse and recyclables;
(b) Tonnage estimate for solid waste and schedule for pickup;
(c) Plan for controlling windblown debris.
(5) Emergency services.
(a) Location of emergency service area;
(b) Emergency service access points.
(6) Utility connections.
(a) Location and size of existing and proposed utility connection;
(b) Location and size of any proposed generators(s).
(7) On-site advertising.
(a) Sign location, size, height and setback from property lines;
(b) Whether it is contemplated that there will be cigarette or
liquor advertising.
(8) Noise, light and odors.
(a) Identify source and location;
(b) Identify control measures;
(c) Measurement estimates showing compliance with Township
noise ordinance;
(d) Plans to ensure compliance with other municipal standards.
§ 144-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-9
1:231
E. Risk management plan, including:
(1) Insurance. The applicant shall present to the Township Manager
and the Princeton Administrator all necessary insurance
information. All insurance policies shall be provided by companies
licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey. The applicant
shall purchase and maintain insurance with companies satisfactory
to the Township Manager and Princeton Administrator as follows:
(a) Public liability policies, including comprehensive general
liability insurance, for the satisfaction of all claims for damages
by reason of bodily injury to or the death of any one person and
of all claims for damages by reason of bodily injury to or the
death of all persons resulting from an accident. Such liability
policies shall be in an amount of not less than $2,000,000 for
each person and $5,000,000 for each accident. If the Township
Manager or the Princeton Administrator deems this insurance
to be inadequate to fully protect the Township or Princeton,
either community, with the consent of the professional review
committee, may require increased insurance to provide both
the Township and Princeton with adequate protection. The
named insurer shall be the applicant, and the Township and
Princeton shall be named as additional insureds;
(b) Contractual liability insurance must be included in the
comprehensive general liability insurance specifically insuring
the indemnification clause specified below in Subsection E(2)
of this subsection;
(c) Policies shall remain in force until the tournament event has
concluded and until all retained deposits and performance
bonds have been released;
(d) Certificates of insurance required must be filed with the
Township and Princeton Administrator. The comprehensive
general liability certificate must specifically state that standard
contractual liability insurance is in force insuring the
indemnification clause, and the indemnification clause must be
typed on the certificate or specifically incorporated therein by
reference. All certificates must provide for 30 days' prior
written notice to the Township Manager and Princeton
Administrator of policy cancellation or material change;
(e) Copies of the insurance policies must be filed with the
Township and Princeton at least 14 days before the beginning
of the tournament event.
(2) Indemnification. The applicant shall agree in writing to assume the
defense of and indemnify and save harmless the Township and
Princeton, their servants, agents, employees and officers for all
suits, actions, damages or claims to which the Township or
Princeton may be subjected of any kind or nature whatsoever
§ 144-9 LAWRENCE CODE § 144-9
1:232
resulting from, caused by, arising out of or as a consequence of
such tournament event, excluding negligence and intentional acts
or failure to act by the Township or Princeton, its servants, agents,
employees and officers.
(3) Performance bonds/letters of credit. The applicant, within 10 days
after issuance of a permit, shall supply the Township Manager and
Princeton Administrator with a performance bond or letter of credit
in an amount equal to 100% of the costs associated with the
tournament event as specified in the tournament agreement and
guaranteed by a qualified surety on a performance bond. In the
event of the insolvency of the surety, the applicant shall forthwith
furnish and maintain another performance bond. In lieu of posting
the aforementioned performance bonds/letters of credit, the
sponsor may make a cash deposit to cover said cost with the
Township. The costs associated with the tournament event or which
the aforementioned performance bond/letters of credit must be
posted shall cover the following: contractual arrangements under
Subsection B(1)(c), Subsection B(3)(g) and Subsection C(4). If
these contractual arrangements are submitted to and approved by
the Township Attorney and Princeton Attorney prior to the issuance
of the permit, the Township Manager and the Princeton
Administrator may relieve the applicant from the requirements of
posting security for them.
(4) Deposits. An amount equal to at least 10% of the performance bond
or letter of credit must be provided to the Princeton Administrator
in cash or its equivalent at the time the performance bond or letter
of credit is required to be supplied to be held by Princeton for the
joint benefit of said Township and Princeton. This amount shall be
held until the applicant has fully performed its obligations to
Princeton and may also be used as security to assure the repairs of
damage to public property and for the removal of off-site signs.
Said deposit shall secure performance of the cost associated with
the tournament event as referenced in Subsection E(3)
hereinabove.
F. The staffing plan, including:
(1) A description of the paid staff (other than Police and other
emergency services personnel described in Subsection C.),
including numbers, their schedule, their on-site activities and
responsibilities, and any special parking arrangements;
(2) A description of the volunteer staff including:
(a) Day-by-day schedule showing how many and when needed;
(b) A description of the activities to be performed;
(c) A description of any special parking arrangements.
§ 144-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-9
1:233
§ 144-10. Professional Review Committee.
§ 144-11. Specific arrangements and payment for emergency
services.
(3) A recruitment plan, showing:
(a) How recruited;
(b) How trained;
(c) Who is responsible for recruiting volunteers;
(d) What payments or other items are required from volunteers.
G. Local charitable purpose fund plan. The applicant shall cause an
amount equal to 10% of the total charitable funds generated by the
tournament to be paid into the Local Charitable Purpose Fund. The
Fund shall be either a new IRS § 501(c)(3) entity or part of an existing
IRS § 501(c)(3) entity as mutually determined by the Township Council
and the Princeton Committee. The Local Charitable Purpose Fund will
allocate funds to local charitable purposes, as determined by its Board
of Trustees.
A. The applicant's submission shall be reviewed by a joint committee of
Township officials and Princeton officials. This Committee shall consist
of 11 members to be constituted as follows: five members from the
Township, including the Township Manager and two staff members
appointed by the Township Manager, plus two members appointed by
the Mayor: five members from Princeton as determined by the
Princeton Township Ordinance and the Princeton Borough Chief of
Police or his or her designee.
B. The Committee after reviewing the applicant's submissions may
request such additional information as may be necessary to fully
evaluate the applicant's permit request. The Committee may also
designate professional consultants to review and evaluate submission
items which are beyond the expertise of the Committee members. The
Committee shall make a final determination as to whether the permit
should be issued, including any conditions to be attached to the permit.
A. Police.
(1) At least 60 days prior to the proposed tournament, the applicant
shall meet with the Township Chief of Police or his or her designee
and the Princeton Chief of Police or his or her designee to review
the Police services that will be required during the tournament. At
that time, the applicant shall review in detail the final
transportation plan.
(2) After discussing with the applicant the requirement for Police
services, the Township Police Department and Princeton Police
§ 144-9 LAWRENCE CODE § 144-11
1:234
Department shall determine the cost of providing Police personnel
for the tournament, including, but not limited to, the expense
associated with regular duty officers assigned to the tournament
and the need for special officers assigned to the tournament. The
applicant shall be required to post an escrow deposit or payment
bond with the Township and Princeton in the amount determined
by the respective Chiefs of Police or his or her designee to cover
these anticipated costs. All costs associated with providing these
services to the tournament shall be paid by the applicant through
said deposit.
(3) Within 30 days following the tournament, the Township and
Princeton shall provide a full and final accounting to the applicant
as to the costs charged to this escrow deposit. All funds
unexpended shall be returned to the applicant. If the escrow
deposit is insufficient, the applicant shall be required to pay to the
Township or Princeton any additional costs within 15 days of
receiving the final accounting.
B. Fire.
(1) At least 60 days prior to the tournament, the applicant shall meet
with the Township Fire Official and Princeton Fire Official to ensure
that the fire protection plan is adequate. The applicant shall also
review with the Fire Officials the establishment of an instant
command system to provide adequate fire protection during the
tournament.
(2) All costs associated with the time spent by the Township Fire
Official and Princeton Fire Official in conferring with the applicant
and reviewing the fire protection plan shall be paid for through an
escrow deposit by the applicant.
C. Ambulance and emergency services.
(1) At least 60 days prior to the tournament, the applicant shall meet
with representatives of the Princeton First Aid and Rescue Squad
and Lawrence First Aid and Rescue Squad to ensure that there will
be adequate ambulance and emergency services available on the
site at the tournament.
(2) The applicant shall also arrange to make a reasonable donation to
both squads providing ambulance and emergency services to the
tournament.
D. Disaster control. At least 60 days prior to the tournament, the applicant
shall meet with the Princeton Township Emergency Management
Council and Lawrence Township Public Safety Coordinating Committee
to discuss plans and contingencies should there be a natural disaster
occurring during the tournament.
§ 144-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-12
1:235
§ 144-12. Issuance of permit.
As provided for in § 144-10 hereinabove, the Professional Review
Committee shall approve, disapprove, or approve with conditions the
issuance of a tournament permit. Any permit granted under this chapter
may contain conditions reasonably calculated to reduce or minimize the
dangers and hazards to vehicular or pedestrian traffic and the public health,
safety, or welfare; to reduce or minimize the possibility of damage to public
and private property and the liability of the Township therefor; and to
reduce or minimize the nuisance effects arising out of the tournament event
activity.
§ 144-13. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect 20 days after adoption thereof, in accordance
with law.
§ 144-12 LAWRENCE CODE § 144-13
1:236
Chapter 152
FARMING
§ 144-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 144-13
1:237

ARTICLE I
Right to Farm
[Derived from Ch. 6AA of the 1971 Code]
§ 152-1. Right to farm activities protected.
Subject to any federal, state or county law or regulation, the following
commercial farming activities shall be deemed established as recognized,
and entitled to encouragement and protection as the collective embodiment
of the "right to farm," and all commercial farmers, as long as these activities
are not done so as to pose a direct threat to public health or safety, have the
right to:
A. Produce agricultural and horticultural crops, trees and forest products,
livestock, poultry and other such related commodities;
B. Process and package the agricultural output, of the commercial farm;
C. Provide for the wholesale and retail marketing, including "u-pick"
marketing and sales, of the agricultural output of the commercial farm,
and related products that contribute to farm income, including the
construction of building and parking areas in conformance with
applicable municipal standards;
D. Replenish soil nutrients, including, but not limited to, the spreading of
manure and applying chemical and organic fertilizers;
E. Use federally approved products, in accordance with labeled
instructions, as recommended by state, federal or county bodies such as
the New Jersey Agricultural Experiment Station and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency for the control of pests, predators,
varmints, diseases affecting plants and livestock, and for the control of
weed infestation;
F. Clear woodlands using open burning and other accepted techniques
and install and maintain vegetative and terrain alterations and other
physical facilities for water and soil conservation and surface water
control in wetland areas;
G. Use of irrigation pumps and equipment and aerial and ground seeding
and spraying, using tractors and other necessary equipment;
H. Hire and utilize necessary farm labor;
I. Construct fences;
J. Transport large, slow-moving equipment over roads within the
Township;
K. Conduct farming activities on holidays and Sundays as well as
weekdays, in the evening and during the day, notwithstanding the
production thereby of normal but unavoidable noise, dust, odors and
§ 152-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 152-1
1:239
§ 152-2. Effect on nonfarm land.
No commercial farming activity or structure conforming to recognized
agricultural management practices and not posing a direct threat to public
health or safety shall be deemed to otherwise invade or interfere with the
use and enjoyment of any other land or property in the Township or to
constitute a public or private nuisance.
§ 152-3. Zoning.
Commercial farms, as defined herein, are permitted uses everywhere within
the Township of Lawrence irrespective of zoning designation or specifically
designated permitted uses.
§ 152-4. Notice of farm use.
For the purpose of giving due notice of the within farm rights to proposed
new residents of the Township, the Planning Board shall require an
application for every major or minor subdivision, or site plan review, as a
condition of approval of such application, to provide every purchaser with a
copy of this chapter.
§ 152-5. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGRICULTURE — The production principally for sale to others of plants
and animals or their products, including, but not limited to, forage and sod
crops, grain and feed crops, dairy animals and dairy products, livestock
including beef cattle, poultry, sheep, swine, horses, ponies, mules and goats;
the breeding and grazing of such animals; bees and apiary products, fruits
of all kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries, vegetables, nursery, floral,
ornamental and greenhouse products.
COMMERCIAL FARM — A minimum one acre area of land of single or
multiple contiguous or noncontiguous parcels actively devoted to
agricultural or horticultural use and producing agricultural or horticultural
products worth $500 or more annually, including, but not limited to,
cropland, pasture, idle or fallow land, woodland, wetlands, farm ponds,
farm roads and certain farm buildings and other enclosures related to
agricultural pursuits.
fumes caused by such necessary activities when conducted in
accordance with recognized agricultural practices;
L. Conduct on-site disposal of organic agricultural wastes.
§ 152-1 LAWRENCE CODE § 152-5
1:240
Chapter 156
FEES
§ 156-1. Administrative.
A. Documents, copying and miscellaneous charges. [Amended by Ord.
No. 1372-93h; Ord. No. 1414-95; Ord. No. 1470-96; Ord. No.
1521-98; Ord. No. 1536-98; Ord. No. 1539-98; Ord. No. 1565-99;
Ord. No. 1569-99; Ord. No. 1591-99; Ord. No. 1705-02; Ord. No.
1716-02; Ord. No. 1786-04; Ord. No. 1792-04; Ord. No. 1802-04;
Ord. No. 1804-04; Ord. No. 1816-04; Ord. No. 1824-05; Ord. No.
1830-05; Ord. No. 1957-07; Ord. No. 1960-07; Ord. No. 1967-08;
Ord. No. 1994-08; Ord. No. 1999-09; 8-11-2009 by Ord. No.
2027-09; 10-6-2009 by Ord. No. 2034-09; 8-3-2010 by Ord. No.
2059-10; 1-18-2011 by Ord. No. 2075-11; 2-1-2011 by Ord. No.
2079-11; 3-15-2011 by Ord. No. 2083-11; 3-15-2011 by Ord. No.
2087-11; 4-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2090-11; 9-4-2012 by Ord. No.
2134-12; 5-7-2013 by Ord. No. 2154-13; 11-9-2017 by Ord. No.
2279-17; 3-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2293-18; 12-4-2018 by Ord. No.
2317-18]
(1) Copies.
(a) Letter-sized documents: $0.05 per page.
(b) Legal-sized documents: $0.07 per page.
(c) Plans 24 inches by 36 inches or larger: $5 per sheet/map.
(d) Certified copies of documents: $5.
(e) CD-ROM: $0.25.
(f) DVD: $1.
(g) VHS tape: $4.
(h) Maps: $10.
(2) Marriage and civil unions; birth and death certificates.
(a) Fees for marriages and civil unions: $28.
(b) Fee per ceremony performed by Mayor.
[1] Within jurisdiction of Lawrence Township: $100.
[2] Outside jurisdiction of Lawrence Township: $150.
(c) Method of payment.
§ 152-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-1
1:241
[1] Persons seeking to be married or joined in civil union by
the Mayor shall remit the proper fee as indicated above
payable to the Township of Lawrence.
[2] Said fees are to be submitted to the Office of the Municipal
Clerk prior to the ceremony and are to be forwarded to the
Finance Department for deposit and disbursement to the
Mayor through the biweekly payroll cycle or may be
waived by the Mayor for general fund disbursements.
[3] Additionally, said fees be waived in their entirety for
members of the United States Armed Forces.
(d) Certified copies of marriage, birth, death, domestic
partnership and civil union records: $18.
(e) Corrections to vital records: $35.
(3) Land development.
(a) Lien subordination: $100.
(b) Land Development Ordinance (with amendments and in
binders):
[1] Ordinance in binder: $50.
[2] Amendments: $5.
(4) Volume 1 of the Minute Book: not to exceed $10.
(5) Copies of municipal budget: $5.
(6) Master Plan: $15.
(7) Tax and assessment searches:
(a) As prescribed by N.J.S.A. 54:5-14: $10.
(b) Continuation search: $2.
(8) Burial permit: $5.
(9) Transit permit: $1.
(10) Housing element plan: $15.
(11) Analysis of fair share allocation: (no fee listed)
(12) Tricentennial calendar: not to exceed $7.
(13) Tricentennial book: not to exceed $50.
(14) Research of archival documents: $45 per hour.
(15) Electronic file preparation and transmitting: $15.
§ 156-1 LAWRENCE CODE § 156-1
1:242
(16) CD copies of recorded Township meetings: $5.
(17) Proof of insurance letter for limousines:
(a) First car: $25.
(b) Each additional car: $15.
(18) Execution fee for passport applications: $25.
(19) Bingo and raffle licenses: bingo and raffle license fees shall be in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 13:47-4.9(a) and (b) and N.J.A.C.
13:47-4.10.
(20) Flu shot fee (no fee if for senior citizen or high risk): $15.
(21) Tax Maps: $250 per full size set $100 per half size set.
(22) Animal trap fee. The fee for utilization of an animal trap provided
by Lawrence Township shall be a returnable deposit of $35. Traps
not returned within 10 business days of initiated use shall be
subject to forfeiture of the deposit.
(23) Storage of vehicles: $20 per day.
(24) Compost facility charges:
(a) Mulch, per cubic yard: $11.
(b) Wood chips, per cubic yard: $11.
(c) Receiving material, per yard: $11.
(25) A Guide to Lawrenceville's Historic Landmarks: not to exceed $7.
(26) Mechanic's labor rate:
(a) LTBOE: $31.50 per hour.
(b) ELSA: $31.50 per hour.
B. Police Department fees. [Amended by Ord. No. 1359-93; Ord. No.
1943-07; 2-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2079-11; 3-15-2011 by Ord. No.
2083-11; 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2134-12; 11-9-2017 by Ord. No.
2279-17; 3-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2293-18; 7-23-2019 by Ord. No.
2332-19]
(1) Copies.
(a) Letter-sized documents: $0.05 per page.
(b) Legal-sized documents: $0.07 per page.
(2) Initial incident card (IRC): $1 per copy.
(3) Fingerprinting: $5 per person.
§ 156-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-1
1:243
§ 156-2. Alarm systems. [Amended by Ord. No. 1807-04]
§ 156-3. Alcoholic beverages. [Amended by Ord. No. 1791-04]
(Chapter 83, Article I, Alcoholic Beverages)
§ 156-4. Animals.
(4) Police certificate of good conduct: $5 per person.
(5) Discovery fee - Police Department:
(a) Minimum per request: $10.
(b) Any New Jersey State police case: $25.
(6) Tapes.
(a) Dictaphone recorder (original or copy): $130.
(b) DWI (copy): $25.
(c) Cassette (copy): $10.
(7) Photographs: $10 per photo (plus reproduction costs).
(8) Firearms:
(a) Identification cards: $5.
(b) Pistol permits: $2 per permit.
(c) Assault weapons: $50 per weapon.
(9) Use of police vehicle: $30 per hour.
A. Alarm systems registration permit. A fee of $25 will be required for
each alarm system registration. (Chapter 76, Alarms)
A. Plenary retail consumption license: license year 7-1-2005 and
thereafter: $2,500.
B. Plenary distribution license: license year 7-1-2009 and thereafter:
$2,500.
C. Seasonal retail distribution: no fee listed.
D. Club license: $50.
A. Dog license and registration fees. (Chapter 89, Article III, Licensing of
Dogs) [Amended by Ord. No. 1952-07; 11-23-2010 by Ord. No.
2070-10; 10-18-2011 by Ord. No. 2109-11]
(1) Dogs.
(a) Dogs, if neutered or spayed: $11.
§ 156-1 LAWRENCE CODE § 156-4
1:244
(b) Dogs, if not neutered or spayed: $14.
(c) The fee for dogs not neutered or spayed shall be charged
unless, concurrently with the license application, there is
submitted for each such dog either (1) a certification of
neutering or spaying for dogs of reproductive age by a licensed
veterinarian, or (2) a sworn affidavit of such neutering or
spaying executed by and notarized on behalf of the applicant.
(d) Registration tags: $0.50.
(e) Surcharge for late renewal: $5, plus $1 per month.
(2) Potentially dangerous dog annual fee: $150.
B. Licensing requirements for cats. (Chapter 89, Article VII, Cats)
[Amended by Ord. No. 1514-98; Ord. No. 2015-09; 8-3-2010 by
Ord. No. 2061-10; 9-6-2011 by Ord. No. 2105-11]
(1) License fee schedule. A license shall be issued after payment of a
fee of $11 for each cat if spayed or neutered, $14 per cat if not
spayed or neutered and of reproductive age. The fee of $10 shall be
charged unless concurrently with the license application, there is
submitted for each cat either (1) a certification of spaying or
neutering for cats by a licensed veterinarian or (2) a sworn affidavit
of such spaying or neutering executed and notarized on behalf of
the applicant. Persons who fail to obtain a license as required
within the time period specified in this section will be subject to a
surcharge of $2 plus a delinquent fee of $1 per month in addition to
the license fee for each cat.
C. Fees for kennels and pet shops. (Chapter 89, Article VIII, Kennels, Pet
Shops, Shelters and Pounds)
(1) Kennels (as prescribed by N.J.S.A. 4:19-15.9):
(a) Ten dogs or less: $10.
(b) More than 10 dogs: $25.
(2) Annual pet shop fee: $10.
(3) Surcharge for late renewal: $5.
(a) Plus per month: $1.
D. Fees for maintenance of swine. (Chapter 89, Article X, Swine)
(1) Swine: $2.
(2) Surcharge for late renewal (fee): $5.
(a) Plus per month: $1.
§ 156-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-4
1:245
§ 156-5. Body art establishments. [Added by Ord. No. 1731-02]
§ 156-6. Construction Code. [Amended by Ord. No. 1349-93; Ord.
No. 1404-94; Ord. No. 1441-95; Ord. No. 1530-98; Ord. No. 1554-98;
Ord. No. 1575-99; Ord. No. 1893-06; Ord. No. 2014-09; 9-1-2009 by
Ord. No. 2028-09]
E. Animal traps. [Amended 2-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2079-11; 9-4-2012
by Ord. No. 2134-12; 11-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2279-17; 3-20-2018
by Ord. No. 2293-18]
(1) Animal trap rental: $15 for one to seven days.
(2) Animal release: $50.
A. License fee and delinquency charge. (Chapter 399, Tattooing and Body
Art)
(1) The annual license fee shall be $250 and the license shall be issued
on February 1 of each year.
(2) There shall be a delinquent charge of $1 per day including
Saturdays, Sundays and holidays where the operator of a body art
establishment fails to apply for a license by February 1.
A. Fees for construction permits. In accordance with the provision of
N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.17, "Municipal enforcing agency fees," the Township of
Lawrence hereby adopts the schedule. (Chapter 130, Article I, Uniform
Construction Code Administration)
(1) General.
(a) The fee for plan review, computed as a percentage of the fee
for a construction permit, shall be paid at the time of
application for a permit. The amount of this fee shall then be
deducted from the amount of the fee due for a construction
permit, when the permit is issued. Plan review fees are not
refundable.
(b) The fee to be charged for a construction permit will be the sum
of the basic construction fee plus all applicable special fees,
such as elevator or sign fees. This fee shall be paid before a
permit is issued.
(c) The fee to be charged for a certificate of occupancy shall be
paid before a certificate is issued. This fee shall be in addition
to the construction permit fees.
(d) Lawrence Township is designated as the plan review agency
and as the local enforcing agency pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:23-4.3.
(2) Where Lawrence Township performs plan review only, the plan
review fee shall be in the amount of 25% of the new construction
§ 156-4 LAWRENCE CODE § 156-6
1:246
permit fee which would be charged by Lawrence Township
pursuant to these rules.
(3) Lawrence Township (enforcing agency) fees shall be as follows:
(a) Plan review fee or administrative fee: The fee for plan review
or an administrative fee to void out an existing issued permit or
a proposed permit shall be 20% of the amount to be charged
for a new construction permit, except that elevator device plan
review shall be as in (c III) 6 and 7 below.
(b) The basic construction fee shall be the sum of the parts
computed on the basis of the volume or cost of construction,
the number of plumbing fixtures and pieces of equipment, the
number of electrical fixtures and devices and the number of
sprinklers, standpipes, and detectors (smoke and heat) at the
unit rates provided herein plus any special fees. The minimum
fee for a basic construction permit covering any or all of the
building, plumbing, electrical, or fire protection work shall be
$46.
(c) Fee to review revisions to an approved plan, $50 per hour,
maximum fee $150.
[1] Building volume or cost. The fees for new construction or
alteration areas follows:
[a] Fees for new construction shall be based upon the
volume of the structure. Volume shall be computed in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.28. The new
construction fee shall be in the amount of $0.030 per
cubic foot of volume for buildings and structures of all
use groups and types of construction as classified and
defined in Articles 3 and 4 of the building subcode.
The fee shall be $0.010 per cubic foot for structures
on farms, including commercial farm buildings under
N.J.A.C. 5:23-3(d).
[b] Fees for renovations, alterations, repairs and new or
existing HVAC and mechanical systems shall be based
upon the estimated cost of work. The fee shall be in
the amount of $28 per $1,000. From $50,001 to and
including $100,000, the additional fee shall be in the
amount of $22 per $1,000 of estimated cost above
$50,000. Above $100,000, the additional fee shall be
in the amount of $18 per $1,000 of estimated cost
above $100,000. For the purpose of determining
estimated cost, the applicant shall submit to Lawrence
Township such cost date as may be available produced
by the architect or engineer of record, or by a
recognized estimating firm, or by the contractor. A
bona fide contractor's bid, if available, shall be
§ 156-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-6
1:247
submitted. Lawrence Township shall make the final
decision regarding estimated cost.
[c] Fees for additions shall be computed on the same
basis as for new construction for the added portion.
[d] Fees for combination renovations and additions shall
be computed as the sum of the fees computed
separately in accordance with Subsection A(3)(c)[1][a]
and [b] above.
[2] Plumbing fixtures and equipment fees shall be as follows:
[a] The fee shall be in the amount of $15 per fixture
connected to the plumbing system for all fixtures and
applications except as listed Subsection A(3)(c)[2][b]
below.
[b] The fee shall be $85 per special device for the
following: grease traps, oil separators, water-cooled
air-conditioning units, refrigeration units, utility
service connections, back flow preventers, steam
boilers, hot water boilers (excluding those for
domestic water heating), gas piping, active solar
systems, sewer pumps, interceptors and fuel oil
piping. There shall be no inspection fee charged for
gas service entrances.
[3] Electrical fixtures and devices fees shall be as follows:
[a] For from one to 50 receptacles or fixtures, the fee
shall be in the amount of $46 for each 25 receptacles
or fixtures. In addition to this, the fee shall be in the
amount of $10. For the purpose of computing this fee,
receptacles or fixtures shall include lighting outlets,
wall switches, fluorescent fixtures, convenience
receptacle or similar fixtures, and motors or devices of
less than one horsepower or one kilowatt or less.
[b] For each motor or electrical device greater than one
horsepower and less than or equal to 10 horsepower,
and for transformers and generators greater than one
kilowatt and less than or equal to 10 kilowatts, the fee
shall be $15.
[c] For each motor or electrical device greater than one
horsepower and less than or equal to 50 horsepower;
for each service panel, service entrance, or subpanel
less than or equal to 200 amperes; for each
transformer and generator greater than 10 kilowatts
and less than or equal to 45 kilowatts; and for each
utility load management device, the fee shall be $55.
§ 156-6 LAWRENCE CODE § 156-6
1:248
[d] For each motor or electrical device greater than 50
horsepower and less than or equal to 100 horsepower;
for each service panel, service entrance or subpanel
greater than 200 amperes and less than or equal
1,000 amperes; and for transformers and generators
greater than 45 kilowatts and less than or equal to
112.5 kilowatts, the fee shall be $110.
[e] For each motor or electrical device greater than 100
horsepower, for each service panel, service entrance
or subpanel greater than 1,000 amperes; and for each
transformer or generator greater than 112.5
kilowatts, the fee shall be $548.
[f] For the purpose of computing these fees, all motors
except those in plug-in appliances shall be counted,
including control equipment, generators,
transformers and all heating, cooking or other devices
consuming or generating electrical current.
[g] Annual electrical certificate of compliance verifying
all wiring in or around the pool pump and associated
electrical equipment is safe and meets the
requirements of the applicable electrical subcode
shall be issued annually and the amount of the fee
shall be $46.
[4] Fire protection and other hazardous equipment: i.e.,
sprinklers, standpipes, detectors (smoke and heat), preengineered
suppression systems, gas and oil fired
appliance not connected to the plumbing system, kitchen
exhaust systems, incinerators and crematoriums: The fees
are as follows:
[a] The fee for 20 or fewer heads or detectors shall be
$80; for 21 to and including 100 heads or detectors,
the fee shall be $150; for 101 to and including 200
heads or detectors, the fee shall be $275; for 201 to
and including 400 heads or detectors, the fee shall be
$710; for 401 to and including 1,000 heads or
detectors, the fee shall be $985; for over 1,000 heads
or detectors, the fee shall be $1,260. In computing
fees for heads and detectors, the number of each shall
be counted separately and two fees, one for heads,
and one for detectors shall be charged.
[b] The fee for each standpipe shall be $275.
[c] The fee for each independent pre-engineered system
shall be $110.
§ 156-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-6
1:249
[d] The fee for each gas or oil fired appliance that is not
connected to the plumbing system shall be $56.
[e] The fee for each kitchen exhaust system shall be $56.
[f] The fee for each incinerator shall be $440.
[g] The fee for each crematorium shall be $440.
[5] Certificates and other permits are as follows:
[a] The fee for a demolitions or removal permit shall be
$80 for a structure of less than 5,000 square feet in
area and less than 30 feet in height, for one- or twofamily
residences (use group R-3 of the building code),
and structures on farms, including commercial farm
buildings under N.J.A.C. 5:23-3(d), and $150 for all
other use groups.
[b] The fee for a permit to construct a sign shall be in the
amount of $1.50 per square foot surface area of the
sign, computed on one side only for double-faced
signs. The minimum fee shall be $50.
[c] The fee for a certificate of occupancy shall be in the
amount of 10% of the new construction permit fee that
would be charged by Lawrence Township pursuant to
these regulations. The minimum fee shall be $150,
except for one- or two-family residences (use group
R-3 to R-5 of the building code) of less than 5,000
square feet in area and less than 30 feet in height, and
structures on farms, including commercial farm
buildings subject to N.J.A.C. 5:23-3.2(d), for which the
minimum fee shall be $80.
[d] The fee for a certificate of occupancy granted
pursuant to a change of use group shall be $180.
[e] The fee for certificate of continued occupancy shall be
$150, and a flat fee of $46 as noted in N.J.A.C.
5:23-4.18(g)4 for cross-connections and backflow
preventers that are subject to testing and require
reinspections, and for other final approvals not listed
in this section.
[f] There shall be no fee for the issuance of the first
temporary certificate of occupancy and no fee for the
renewal of said first certificate of occupancy. The fee
beyond the first renewal for all additional temporary
certificates of occupancies shall be the minimal fee
per that particular use group.
§ 156-6 LAWRENCE CODE § 156-6
1:250
[g] The fee for a certificate of approval or certificate of
compliance certifying the work done under a
construction permit has been satisfactorily completed
shall be no charge.
[h] The fee for plan review of a building for compliance
under the alternate systems and non-depletable
energy source provisions of the energy subcode shall
be $240 for one- and two-family residences (use group
R-3 to R-5 of the building subcode), and for all other
structures as per Ord. No. 1893-06 for geothermal
heating/cooling systems.
[i] The fee for an application for a variation in accordance
with N.J.A.C. 5:23-2:10 shall be $600 for Class 1
structures and $150 for Class II and Class III
structures. The fee for resubmission of an application
for a variation shall be $275 for Class I structures and
$85 for Class II and Class III structures.
[j] A flat fee of $56 per subcode shall be charged on
changes of contractors after the permit has already
been issued.
[6] Annual permit requirements are as follows:
[a] The fee to be charged for an annual construction
permit shall be charged annually. This fee shall be a
flat fee based upon the number of maintenance
workers who are employed by the facility, and who are
primarily engaged in work that is governed by a
subcode. Managers, engineers and clericals shall not
be considered maintenance workers for the purpose of
establishing the annual construction permit fee.
Annual permits may be issued for building/fire
protection, electrical and plumbing.
[b] Fees for annual permits shall be as follows:
[i] One to 25 workers (including foremen): $667 per
worker;
[ii] Each additional worker over 25: $232 per worker.
[c] Prior to the issuance of the annual permit, a training
registration fee of $176 per subcode shall be
submitted by the applicant to the Department of
Community Affairs, Bureau of Technical Assistance,
Training Section, along with a copy of the construction
permit (Form F-170C). Checks shall be made payable
to "Treasurer, State of New Jersey."
§ 156-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-6
1:251
§ 156-7. Emergency medical services. [Amended by Ord. No.
1927-07; Ord. No. 2016-09; Ord. No. 2077-11; Ord. No. 2141-12]
[7] The State Department of Community Affairs in the elevator
subcode for Lawrence Township and state fees will comply.
[8] The fee for a mechanical inspection in a use group R-3 to
R-5 structure by a mechanical inspector shall be $50 for
the first device and $15 for each additional device. No
separate fee shall be charged for gas, fuel oil, or water
piping connections associated with the mechanical
equipment inspected.
B. Appeal; application fee; waiver. All appeal applications shall be
accompanied by a fee of $50. (Chapter 130, Article I, Uniform
Construction Code Administration)
C. Right-of-way access permit fee. A right of access permit fee shall be
$50.
A. Emergency medical services and ambulance transport services fees:
(1) A fee of $785 plus $15 per mile calculated one way will be charged
to all persons receiving ambulance transport service by the
Lawrence Township Emergency Medical Services.
(a) In addition to the above, a fee in the amount of $70 will be
charged for the use of oxygen when required,
(b) A fee in the amount of $25 will be charged for the use of a
cervical collar when required.
(c) When it becomes necessary to extricate a person(s) from a
motor vehicle, domestic entrapment or confined spaces, the
following fees will be assessed: stabilization/extrication, $950;
power extrication with the use of mechanized tools, $1,950; a
technical rescue (rope/swift water/floodwater, trench, confined
space, etc.), $2,800.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the payment of the fee by any
person receiving such ambulance transport services from the
Lawrence Township Emergency Medical Services will be waived
provided such person certifies that he/she has no medical
insurance coverage in effect to cover the ambulance transport
services.
(a) All persons that receive ambulance services shall be billed for
any co-payments, co-insurance payment or deductible payment
as required.
(b) The recipient of ambulance transport services must facilitate
the submittal of the bill for such services if required by the
§ 156-6 LAWRENCE CODE § 156-7
1:252
§ 156-8. Events.
§ 156-9. Fire prevention and fire protection. [Amended by Ord. No.
1777-04; Ord. No. 1840-05; 2-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2079-11; 9-4-2012
by Ord. No. 2134-12; 11-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2279-17; 3-20-2018 by
Ord. No. 2293-18]
(Chapter 167, Article II, Enforcement of Uniform Fire Safety Code)
insurance company or secondary insurance company, and
provide all required information necessary for payment.
(c) The Chief Financial Officer and Chief of Police will be
responsible for the billing of all services and/or third party
administration of billing.
(3) The Township of Lawrence is authorized to enter into contracts
with various hospitals that provide Advanced Life Support (ALS)
services to patients that are transported by the Lawrence Township
Emergency Medical Service allowing the hospitals to bundle bill
Medicare for service rendered. The hospital will reimburse the
Township of Lawrence its transportation costs within 45 days of
receiving payment.
A. Events and gatherings. (Chapter 144, Article I, Amusements and Public
Events and Gatherings) [Amended 2-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2079-11;
9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2134-12; 11-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2279-17;
3-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2293-18]
(1) Miscellaneous events: $15 per day.
B. Golf tournament events. A fee of $1,500 shall accompany the
application with 50% of the fee payable to the Township and 50% of the
fee payable to Princeton. Additionally, an escrow deposit of $5,000 for
retaining professional consultants to review the applicant's submissions
shall be paid to Princeton. If additional escrow funds are needed, the
applicant shall make payment within 15 days of the request. (Chapter
144, Article II, Tournament Events) [Amended by Ord. No. 1576-99]
A. Division of Fire Safety, Uniform Fire Code.
(1) Basic inspection fee.
Square Feet Fee
Under 500 $75
501 to 999 $105
1,000 to 4,999 $145
5,000 to 9,999 $180
10,000 to 15,000 $200
§ 156-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-9
1:253
Square Feet Fee
15,001 to 20,000 $285
20,001 to 30,000 $395
Over 30,000 $620
(2) Application permit fee.
Type Fee
Type 1 $54
Type 2 $214
Type 3 $427
Type 4 $641
Type 5 $1,380
(3) Certificate of smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm
compliance.
(a) Application fee received:
[1] Ten business days prior to change of occupant: $45.
[2] Four to 10 business days prior to change of occupant: $90.
[3] Fewer than four business days prior to change of
occupant: $161.
(4) Fire lane summons: $50.
(5) MRNA alarm registration: $30.
B. Permit fees established by the Uniform Fire Code shall be as provided
for in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.9(c).
C. Due dates, penalties.
(1) Billing for basic inspection fees will take place in January of each
year. Fees are due by March 31 in the same year. Failure to remit
required basic fees by this date will result in additional fee equal to
the amount of the basic fee.
(2) Failure to obtain permits required by the Uniform Fire Code will
result in penalties detailed in N.J.A.C. 5:70-2.12.
D. Uniform Fire Code. The following users shall be exempt from the local
permit fees; however, they shall be requested to properly apply for such
permits and to comply with all other Code requirements.
(1) Volunteer Fire Companies.
(2) Volunteer Ambulance Squads.
§ 156-9 LAWRENCE CODE § 156-9
1:254
(3) Nonprofit civic groups when applying for a use of an occasional
nature (once or twice a year).
(4) Contractors and construction firms when the activity is part of
work performed under a valid permit issued by the construction
official.
(5) Township of Lawrence.
(6) Lawrence Township Board of Education.
E. Fees for fire protection subcode permits under the Uniform
Construction Code are as follows:
(1) Minimum charges:
(a) Building permit fees: 30% surcharge on volume-based permit
fee (0.0096 per cubic foot).
(b) Renovation permits: 30% surcharge on fee ($6 per $1,000 of
estimated cost).
(c) Certificate of occupancy, continuing certificate of occupancy:
20% surcharge on fee (C.O.: 10% of permit cost; continuing
C.O.: $25).
(d) Demolition permit: 20% surcharge on fee ($6 per $1,000 of
cost).
(2) Add-ons, fire protection system.
(a) Sprinkler systems and fire detection systems based on the
number of sprinkler heads, smoke detectors and heat detectors
installed:
Number of Items Fee
1 to 20 items $65
21 to 100 items $120
101 to 200 items $229
201 to 400 items $594
401 to 1,000 items $822
Over 1,000 items $1,050
(b) Standpipe systems: $229 per standpipe.
(c) Special extinguishing systems:
[1] Dry chemical system: $92.
[2] Carbon dioxide system: $92.
[3] Halogenerated system: $92.
§ 156-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-9
1:255
§ 156-10. Housing and rental property.
(d) Miscellaneous:
[1] Removal of underground storage tanks: $65.
F. Pre-engineered systems: $85.
G. Tank installation - flammable liquid: $25.
A. Inspections. [Amended by Ord. No. 1377-94; 2-1-2011 by Ord. No.
2079-11; 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2134-12; 11-9-2017 by Ord. No.
2279-17; 3-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2293-18]
(1) Housing inspection fees. (Chapter 220, Housing)
(a) Single-family dwellings: $80.
(b) Multiple dwellings.
Number of Units Fee
Units 1 through 7 $39 per unit
Units 8 through 24 $27 per unit
Units 25 through 48 $24 per unit
Units 49 and up $18 per unit
(c) Motel, hotel, and rental cottages (dwelling units), rooming and
boarding homes which do not contain kitchen facilities.
Number of Units Fee
Units 1 through 20 $17 per unit
Units 21 through 100 $14 per unit
Units 101 through 250 $10 per unit
Units 250 and up $7 per unit
(2) Condominium conversion fees:
(a) Rental property conversion fee: $100 per unit.
(b) Administrative appeal hearing: $75 per appeal.
B. Periodic inspections of residential rental units. At the time of the filing
of the registration form, and prior to the issuance of a license, the
owner or agent of the owner must pay a fee in accordance with the
following: (Chapter 322, Article II, Licensing of Residential Rental
Units) [Amended by Ord. No. 1932-07]
(1) An annual registration fee of $75 which fee shall not include the
fees for the issuance of a certificate of inspection.
§ 156-9 LAWRENCE CODE § 156-10
1:256
§ 156-11. Massage and somatic therapy. [Amended by Ord. No.
1947-07]
(For current fees, see Chapter 244, Massage and Somatic Therapy)
§ 156-12. Motor vehicle dealers.
(Chapter 252, Motor Vehicle Dealers)
§ 156-13. Parks and recreation. [Amended by Ord. No. 1332-92;
Ord. No. 1350-93; Ord. No. 1382-84; Ord. No. 1401-94; Ord. No.
1417-95; Ord. No. 1422-95; Ord. No. 1430-95; Ord. No. 1432-95;
Ord. No. 1447-96; Ord. No. 1519-98; Ord. No. 1569-99; Ord. No.
1587-99; Ord. No. 1614-00; Ord. No. 1627-00; Ord. No. 1662-01;
Ord. No. 1693-02; Ord. No. 1738-03; Ord. No. 1745-03; Ord. No.
1773-04; Ord. No. 1773-04; Ord. No. 1834-05; Ord. No. 1846-05;
Ord. No. 1877-06; Ord. No. 1917-07; Ord. No. 1972-08; Ord. No.
1983-08; Ord. No. 1996-08; 2-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2078-11;
12-22-2011 by Ord. No. 2115-11; 12-18-2012 by Ord. No. 2139-12;
(2) For each inspection of multiple dwelling units pursuant to § 322-15,
the following fees are established:
Number of Units Cost Per Unit
For units 1 through 7 $33
For units 8 through 24 $21
For units 25 through 48 $18
For units 49 and up $12
(3) No re-inspection fee shall be charged for any re-inspection after a
notice of failure.
A. The license fee for a massage and/or somatic therapist's license shall be
$100 per year and shall be issued by the Municipal Clerk. Included as
part of the $100 fee for a massage and/or therapist's license shall be
$30 made payable by check to the New Jersey State Bureau of
Investigation for a fingerprint background.
B. The license fee for a massage establishment license shall be $250 per
year and issued by the Municipal Clerk.
A. New motor vehicle dealers.
(1) Initial license: $200.
(2) Each succeeding year: $300.
B. Used motor vehicle dealers.
(1) Each year: $300.
§ 156-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-13
1:257
2-19-2013 by Ord. No. 2148-13; 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 2198-14;
3-15-2016 by Ord. No. 2224-16; 5-2-2017 by Ord. No. 2264-17]
A. Activity fees. [Amended 5-7-2019 by Ord. No. 2327-19]
Activity Fee
Art/theater camp, full day until April 30 $260
Art/theater camp, full day after April 30 $275
Art/theater camp, half day until April 30 $185
Art/theater camp, half day after April 30 $195
Art, winter $85
Basketball, competitive $125
Basketball, summer teen $65
Basketball, youth $85
Bocce $5
Camp, after care $60
Camp, before care $50
Cheerleading $55
Children's triathlon clinic $75
Field hockey, indoor $75
Fitness trainer $60
Garden plot, resident $45
Garden plot, nonresident $90
Golf camp, week $185
Nature center camp, week $185
Playgrounds, full day until April 30 $290
Playgrounds, full day after April 30 $305
Playgrounds, half day until April 30 $200
Playgrounds, half day after April 30 $215
Playgrounds, one week full day until April
30
$200
Playgrounds, one week full day after April
30
$215
Safety Town $75
Senior instruction $3 per class
Sports camps, full day until April 30 $260
Sports camps, half day until April 30 $185
Sports camps, full day after April 30 $275
§ 156-13 LAWRENCE CODE § 156-13
1:258
Activity Fee
Sports camps, half day after April 30 $200
Sports camps, one week full day until April
30
$185
Sports camps, one week full day after April
30
$200
Sports clinics $40
Swim lessons $80
Swim team
October - March, Level 1, 2 days/week $215
October - March, Level 2, 2 days/week $190
October - March, Level 3, 2 days/week $190
October - March, Level 1, 1 day/week $100
October - March, Level 2, 1 day/week $85
April - May, Level 1 $70
April - May, Level 2 $70
Tennis instruction, adult $85
Tennis instruction, youth $11/hour
Travel camp, daily (resident) $85
Travel camp, daily (nonresident) $100
Travel camp, week (resident) $295
Travel camp, week (nonresident) $350
Volleyball $70
Wrestling $45
B. Permit fees.
Permit Fee
Picnic/park/facility $45
Athletic field without lights $90/3 hours
Athletic field with lights $150/3 hours
C. Swimming pool fees.
Type Fee
Family membership
School year $165
Summer $115
§ 156-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-13
1:259
§ 156-14. Peddlers, solicitors, canvassers and transient merchants.
(For current fees, see Chapter 300, Peddling, Soliciting and Related
Activities)
Type Fee
Individual membership
School year $90
Summer $70
Senior membership
School year $25
Summer $20
Daily fee (all year nonmember) $5
Dip ticket $5
D. Miscellaneous fee. Except as provided for, fees for nonresidents and
organizations with their base of operation not in Lawrence Township
shall be twice the established fee.
E. Financial assistance for program fees. Upon review of gross household
income and family size, the Superintendent of Recreation can issue a
partial scholarship to Lawrence Township residents for Recreation
Department fees set forth in said ordinance. Qualified participants will
be assessed 35% or 65% of the registration fee. Travel Camp
participants meeting the guidelines will be required to pay a minimum
of $125 per week.
F. Refunds of registration fees. Individuals withdrawing from a program
before the start date will receive a refund, minus 25% of the established
registration. No refund will be issued if the participant withdraws after
the starting date of the activity.
G. Temporary food license for community day. Individuals must obtain a
temporary food license for the purpose of distributing food and/or
beverages at Community Day and meet all the requirements as outlined
by the Lawrence Township Health Department. The fee for nonprofit or
not-for-profit organizations based in Lawrence Township will be waived.
A. Peddler permit. [Amended 11-23-2010 by Ord. No. 2071-10;
6-19-2012 by Ord. No. 2125-12]
(1) Issuance fee (includes background check and badge for 1
individual): $75.
(2) Additional background checks and badges: $8 each.
B. Solicitors and canvassers.
(1) Application fee: $50.
§ 156-13 LAWRENCE CODE § 156-14
1:260
§ 156-15. Rent control.
§ 156-16. Retail food establishments. [Amended by Ord. No.
1365-93; Ord. No. 1524-98; Ord. No. 1644-01; Ord. No. 1830-05;
Ord. No. 1839-05; 2-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2079-11; 9-4-2012 by Ord.
No. 2134-12; 11-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2279-17; 3-20-2018 by Ord. No.
2293-18]
(Chapter 192, Article II, Licensing of Retail Food Establishments)
C. Transient or temporary merchants. The license fee for each transient or
temporary merchant license shall be $1,000 for the first month and
$500 for each month thereafter, not exceeding in all, a period of six
months. Upon application for the license in question, the applicant
shall, in addition to the bond, deposit a sum in cash equivalent to the
full amount that would be due hereunder for the license based on the
estimated time required. The Township will reimburse the licensee if
the license is used for less than the full estimated time. It is understood
that after the initial $1,000, the $500 monthly additional fee is for the
month or any part thereof. Adjustments are not made on a per diem
basis.
A. There shall be a fee payable to the Township of Lawrence Rent
Stabilization Board of $10 per rental unit application with a maximum
fee of $2,000 per application. (Chapter 325, Rent Control)
A. Sales predominately for on-premises consumption:
(1) Fifty seats or fewer: $125.
(2) Fifty-one seats to 200 seats: $200.
(3) More than 200 seats: $335.
(4) Theaters and auditoriums: $335.
B. Temporary or mobile.
(1) Temporary establishment/event.
(a) Weekdays: $45.
(b) Weekends or holidays: $90.
(2) Agricultural market and temporary establishment, per location:
$45.
(3) Mobile unit, per unit: $60.
C. Food vending machines.
(1) First machine: $25.
(2) Each additional machine located in same building: $10.
§ 156-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-16
1:261
§ 156-17. Solid waste. [Amended by Ord. No. 1652-01]
D. Sales predominately for off-premises consumption.
(1) Zero to 3,500 square feet per location: $90.
(2) 3,501 to 5,000 square feet per location: $175.
(3) 5,001 to 10,000 square feet per location: $325.
(4) More than 10,000 square feet per location: $450.
E. Delinquent fee/duplicate license.
(1) Each business day: $1.50 per day.
(2) Duplicate retail food license: $10.
F. Retail food establishment plan review.
(1) Less than 1,000 square feet: $150.
(2) 1,000 to 5,000 square feet: $200.
(3) More than 5,000 square feet: $250.
G. Food handlers licenses:
(1) Various categories: $5 to $450.
(2) Food handlers licenses-duplicate: $15.
(3) Food handlers licenses-delinquent: $2.50 per day.
A. Fee for Lease of Trash Receptacles. [Amended 2-1-2011 by Ord. No.
2079-11; 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2134-12; 11-9-2017 by Ord. No.
2279-17; 3-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2293-18]
(1) The one-time fee for lease of a trash receptacle is as follows:
(a) Thirty-five gallon container: $45.
(b) Sixty-five gallon container: $50.
(c) Ninety-five gallon container: $55.
(2) Annual container lease.
(a) Thirty-five gallon container: $150.
(b) Sixty-five gallon container: $200.
(c) Ninety-five gallon container: $250.
B. Garbage collection vehicles.
(1) Per year or portion thereof: $10.
§ 156-16 LAWRENCE CODE § 156-17
1:262
§ 156-18. Streets and sidewalks. [Amended by Ord. No. 1311-92]
§ 156-19. Swimming pools. [Amended by Ord. No. 1377-94; Ord. No.
1830-05; Ord. No. 1839-05; 2-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2079-11; 9-4-2012
by Ord. No. 2134-12; 11-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2279-17; 3-20-2018 by
Ord. No. 2293-18]
(Chapter 392, Article I, Swimming Pools)
(2) Above fee shall not be prorated nor any portion refunded for any
reason.
A. Curb and sidewalk permit; required; fees. (Chapter 384, Article II,
Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters) [Amended by Ord. No. 1311-92]
(1) For each permit for the repair of an existing sidewalk, curb or
gutter, $1.
(2) For each permit for the construction of a new sidewalk, driveway
apron, curb or gutter, $20 per 100 linear feet or portion thereof.
B. Curb and sidewalk contractor's license. Payment to the Construction
Official of the license fee of $25, which shall not be prorated regardless
of the date of issue. (Chapter 384, Article II, Sidewalks, Curbs and
Gutters)
C. Excavations in street opening permits. (Chapter 384, Article III,
Excavations) [Amended by Ord. No. 1423-95; Ord. No. 1661-01]
(1) Application and inspection fee: $50.
(2) Base fee: $225.
(3) Square foot fee: $2.50.
(4) Bonded utilities which provide street restoration following their
excavation shall pay an application and inspection fee only.
(5) Street openings resulting from site plans reviewed by the Township
Planning Board will not require a fee; however, the permit
application process must be followed.
D. Right-of-way access permit fee. Whenever a property owner of a singlefamily
dwelling installs a driveway which enters onto a public street
when the driveway installation is not part of an approved site plan or
other land use development approval, the homeowner shall obtain from
the Township Engineer a right-of-way access permit, the fee for which
shall be established in Chapter 156, Fees.
A. For the issuance of a permit to locate and construct a public
recreational bathing facility: $325.
B. For the issuance of a permit to alter a public recreational bathing
facility: $325.
§ 156-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-19
1:263
§ 156-20. Taxicabs.
The annual fee for each taxicab driver's license hereafter issued, or any
renewal thereof, shall be $7 for each year or portion of a year for which the
license is issued or renewed, and the annual fee for such taxicab owner's
license issued or renewed shall be $25 for each year or portion of a year for
which the license is issued or renewed. (Chapter 410, Taxicabs)
§ 156-21. Theaters.
§ 156-22. Towing and storage. [Amended by Ord. No. 1831-05]
(For current fees, see Chapter 423, Towing and Storage of Motor Vehicles)
C. Issuance or renewal of license to operate a swimming pool.
(1) Pool operating year-round: $525.
(2) Pool operating seasonally: $325.
A. Theater licenses. (Chapter 416, Theaters)
(1) Not exceeding 1,250 seats: $600.
(2) 1,250 seats and over: $725.
(3) Outdoor drive-in: $700.
A. All applications for a tow operator's license shall be accompanied by a
fee of $350. [Amended 2-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2080-11]
B. No person shall be liable to any tow operator who tows or stores an
automobile for any fees in excess of the following:
(1) Basic towing service fees (first hour, additional time prorated at 1/4
hour intervals).
Fee
Type Day Night
Light duty (DOT Class 1 and 2) $75 $85
Medium duty (DOT Class 3, 4, 5
and 6)
$125 $130
Heavy duty (DOT Class 7 and 8) $225 $230
(2) Recovery service fees (first hour, additional time prorated at 1/4
hour intervals).
§ 156-19 LAWRENCE CODE § 156-22
1:264
Type Fee
Light duty (DOT Class 1 and 2) $85
Medium duty (DOT Class 3, 4, 5 and
6)
$125
Heavy duty (DOT Class 7 and 8) Price as per job
(3) Winching (first hour, additional time prorated at 1/4 hour intervals).
Type Fee
Light duty (DOT Class 1 and 2) $85
Medium duty (DOT Class 3, 4, 5 and
6)
$125
Heavy duty (DOT Class 7 and 8) $250
(4) Clean up materials: $15 per 50 pounds speed dry.
(5) Service calls.
(a) Day: $55 plus parts.
(b) Night: $65 plus parts.
(6) Rates for towing outside Township three-mile limit: negotiable
between tow operator and owner or operator.
(7) Storage per day.
Fee
Type Outside Inside
Class 1 and 2 $25 $45
Class 3, 4, 5 and 6 $40 $85
Class 7 $50 $100
Class 8 $100 $200
(8) Vehicle removal charge.
Type Fee
Class 1 and 2 $40
Class 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 8 $55
(9) When towing services are required, the day rate shall apply when
the time of the accident is between 7:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. Monday
through Friday except New Jersey State holidays. The night,
weekend and holiday rate shall otherwise apply.
§ 156-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-22
1:265
§ 156-23. Trapshooting.
(Chapter 173, Fireworks)
§ 156-24. Water and sewers.
(10) Storage fees are for each twenty-four-hour period or fraction
thereof. A new twenty-four hour period begins at 12:01 a.m.
(11) Tow operators shall document the time needed to complete each
basic towing service, recovery, or winching assignment to alleviate
any disputes on charges. Failure to document times will result in
the one-hour fee being charged.
A. Trap shoot: $3 per event.
B. Annual club license: $25.
A. Individual well (for single-family residences — non-public supply)
[Amended by Ord. No. 1839-05; 2-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2079-11;
9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2134-12; 11-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2279-17;
3-20-2018 by Ord. No. 2293-18]
(1) Installation: $175.
(2) Abandonment permit: $75.
B. Bacterial analysis of private water supply system: $50.
C. Permit to empty septic tank: $5. (Chapter 360, Article III, Abandonment
of Cesspools and Septic Tanks)
D. Schedule of rates for sewer connections. (Chapter 360, Article II, Sewer
Connections) [Amended by Ord. No. 1660-01; Ord. No. 1756-03;
Ord. No. 1876-06; Ord. No. 1976-08; Ord. No. 2002-09; 4-5-2011
by Ord. No. 2088-11; 5-15-2012 by Ord. No. 2120-12; 10-18-2016
by Ord. No. 2247-16]
(1) Fees attributable to debt service, billing and administration. The
annual charge per unit attributable to debt service, billing, and
administration is as follows:
(a) Single-family residential, multifamily residential, hotel/motel,
and commercial. There will be a charge of $43 annually for
each residence (including individual apartments in apartment
complexes) and each individual nonresidential unit.
(2) Fees attributable to operation and maintenance charges.
(a) All users shall be subject to an additional fee attributable to
operation and maintenance charges of $4.80 per cubic feet of
water or part thereof. Annual water use shall be measured by
the amount of water supplied to the user or returned to the
sewer system.
§ 156-22 LAWRENCE CODE § 156-24
1:266
(3) Water meters required. All users connected to the sanitary sewer
system shall have installed either of the following:
(a) A water meter at the source of the water supply, which meter
may be read by the Township.
(b) An effluent meter at the point at which the effluent leaves the
subject property, which meter may be read by the Township.
(4) Rate charges for unmetered premises.
(a) Charges for residential sewer service for premises without
metered sewer or water connections shall be based on an
estimated annual water consumption of 14,200 cubic feet.
Applying the operation and maintenance charges of $4.80:
[1] Each unmetered residential use: $681.60.
(b) Charges for sewer service for hotels and motels without
metered sewer or water connections shall be based on an
estimated annual water consumption of 6,450 cubic feet.
Applying the operation and maintenance charges of $4.80 per
hundred:
[1] Each unmetered room: $309.60.
(c) Charges for sewer service for all other uses without metered
sewer or water connections shall be based on an estimated
annual water consumption of 14,200 cubic feet for up to 10
fixtures. Each additional fixture shall be estimated at 1,420
cubic feet. Applying the operation and maintenance charges of
$4.80 per hundred:
[1] Each use up to 10 fixtures: $681.60.
[2] Each additional fixture: $68.16.
E. Application for site plan review prior to storage or treatment of waste
above or adjacent to aquifers. (Chapter 360, Article IV, Protection of
Water Supplies)
(1) Maximum: $3,000.
F. Individual subsurface sewage disposal systems. (Chapter 360, Article
II, Individual Sewage Disposal Systems) [Amended by Ord. No.
1412-95; 2-16-2010 by Ord. No. 2046-10; 3-2-2010 by Ord. No.
2047-10; 2-1-2011 by Ord. No. 2079-11; 9-4-2012 by Ord. No.
2134-12; 11-9-2017 by Ord. No. 2279-17; 3-20-2018 by Ord. No.
2293-18]
(1) New construction (fee per system) fee for review of design and
installation: $775.
§ 156-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 156-24
1:267
§ 156-25. Zoning and land use. [Added by Ord. No. 2140-12]
§ 156-26. Miscellaneous.
(2) Alterations to existing system fee for review of design and
installation: $600.
(3) Minor repair: $175.
(4) Septic system tank permit to empty: $10.
(5) Septic tank abandonment: $50.
(6) Soil testing: $75 per hour. [Amended 12-4-2018 by 2318-18]
(7) A minimum of $450 per lot must be deposited in escrow for soil
testing services. [Amended 12-4-2018 by 2318-18]
A. Zoning permit fees.
(1) Residential:
Type Fee
Additions $50
Pools $50
Home occupations $50
Decks and patios $30
Fences $25
Sheds $25
Standard zoning permit (if none
of the above)
$25
(2) Commercial:
Type Fee
Business occupations $50
Signs (reface existing sign) $50
Signs (new or modified sign $100
Building expansion $250
Standard zoning permit (if none
of the above)
$30
A. Permit of variance application from noise nuisances. (Chapter 259,
Noise)
(1) Application fee of $25.
§ 156-24 LAWRENCE CODE § 156-26
1:268
Chapter 161
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
§ 161-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
COMMISSIONER — The State Commissioner of Insurance.
LIEN — Any lawful lien, including liens for taxes, special assessments,
municipal charges, demolition and clearance costs and interest thereon
arising by operation of law against real property in favor of the Township.
PUBLIC OFFICER — The Tax Collector, Township of Lawrence.
REAL PROPERTY — Improved property upon which there is erected any
residential, commercial or industrial building or other structure.
SPECIAL LIEN — A lien upon fire insurance proceeds created pursuant to
this chapter and Chapter 184 of the Laws of 1979.
§ 161-2. Township liens to take precedence.
No insurance company shall pay to or on behalf of any insured or other
claimant any claim in excess of $2,500 for fire damage to or upon any
real property located within the Township of Lawrence pursuant to any fire
insurance policy issued or renewed after the effective date of this chapter
until such time as all taxes and assessments and all other municipal liens or
charges due and payable shall have been paid either by the owner of such
real property or by the insurance company concerned. Except as otherwise
herein set forth, the claim of the Township shall constitute a special lien
against the proceeds of any such fire insurance policy and shall, as to such
proceeds, be prior to all other liens and claims except the claim of any
mortgages of record named in such policy to the extent provided by law.
§ 161-3. Not to interfere with other liens.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to or construed to alter,
impair or affect the right of the Township to acquire or enforce any other
municipal lien against property as may otherwise be provided by law, but
shall be in addition to any other such provision.
B. Annual license to deliver unsolicited and unsubscribed publications.
(Chapter 375, Article VI, Deposit of Litter on Private Property and
Public Roadways)
(1) Per year or portion thereof: $150.
§ 156-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-4
1:269
§ 161-4. Insurance company required to pay lien.
Any insurance company issuing fire insurance policies in the Township is
authorized and required, prior to the payment of any such claim for fire
damage in excess of $2,500 to any claimant for loss to real property therein,
to pay to the municipality the amount of the liens for taxes, assessments or
charges appearing on an official certificate or search pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:5-12 as may be certified to the insurance company and the insured owner
of the real property concerned by the public officer, such certificates of
search to be without cost, fee or charge and to be provided to both the
insurance company and the insured owner of the real property upon the
written request of either within not more than five business days after
receipt of such request; provided, however, that if an appeal is taken on the
amount of any lien or charge, other than appeal on the assessed valuation
of real property pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:3-21, the insurance company shall
withhold 75% of the full amount of the lien or charge being contested
pending termination of all proceedings, at which time such moneys,
together with interest accruing thereon at prevailing lawful rates for
savings accounts, shall be disbursed in accordance with the final order or
judgment of the court.
§ 161-5. Duty of Public Officer.
The Public Officer shall maintain and update any certificate of search issued
pursuant to this chapter, which certificate shall also be made available upon
request on the terms and in the manner provided in § 161-4 hereof.
§ 161-6. Township Council to act.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Township Council
may at any time enter into an agreement with the owner of any fire
damaged property to pay in full all delinquent taxes, assessments or other
municipal liens by installments pursuant to N.J.S.A. 54:5-19 or for the
redemption of the tax sale lien by installment payments pursuant to Article
7 of Chapter 5 of Title 54 of the New Jersey Statutes, if the Township
Council is satisfied that the claim for fire damages to be used to restore
or improve the fire damaged property. An insurance company receiving a
certified copy of a resolution of agreement from the Township Council is
authorized to make full payment on the claim to the insured person.
§ 161-7. Filed with state.
The Township Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to file a certified
copy of this chapter with the State Commissioner of Insurance immediately
upon its final adoption in accordance with law, by certified mail with return
receipt obtained.
§ 161-8. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect after final adoption and publication in
accordance with law and upon filing thereof with the Commissioner, as
§ 161-4 LAWRENCE CODE § 161-8
1:270
shown on the certified mail return receipt therefor, which shall be deemed
the effective date hereof.
Chapter 167
FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE PROTECTION
§ 161-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 161-8
1:271

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Derived from §§ 8-9 through 8-11 of the 1971 Code; amended at
time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 167-1. Right of entry.
§ 167-2. Abatement of hazardous conditions.
A. It shall be lawful for the Fire Official or such other officer of the Bureau
of Fire Prevention to enter into and upon at any and all reasonable
times, every house, structure, or other building to inspect such
premises and buildings for the purpose of ascertaining and prosecuting
persons for violation of any law of the state, this Code or other
ordinance of the Township, intended for the more effectual prevention
of fires; and such Fire Official or officer of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
may also enter into or upon any lands or buildings for the examination
of the fire doors, trap doors, fireplaces, hearths, chimneys, stoves and
pipes, boilers, heaters, chemicals, chemical apparatus, in any building
whatsoever.
B. In the event that the owner, occupant or person in charge of any
building enumerated in this section, shall refuse to admit the Fire
Official or his designee to enter in, on or upon any such building, or any
part thereof, and inspect the same for the purposes aforesaid, it shall be
the duty of the Fire Official or his designee to make immediate
complaint before the municipal court of the Township, and the judge
thereof shall hear and determine whether such refusal was willful and
in violation of the intents and purposes of this section.
A. It shall be the duty of the Fire Official or his designee to order and
direct the owner, agent, occupant, lessee or other person in charge
thereof, to remedy, abate or remove anything promoting fires or
hazardous fire conditions, or anything making the same unsafe for
occupancy or for work. The Fire Official or his designee shall order and
direct the owner, agent, occupant, lessee or person in charge of any
building or structure, to remove the same, if in his judgment the same is
menacing and dangerous or a violation of any law or ordinance, or to
order and direct such measures as will make safe and secure the
occupants or works in any such building.
B. The owner, agent, occupant, lessee or person in charge thereof shall
comply with such direction of the Fire Official or his designee within the
time fixed in such order, either written, printed or verbal, and in case of
the neglect or refusal of the party or parties as aforesaid, or the
possessor of any combustible or inflammable materials, to remove or to
secure the same within the time and in the manner directed in such
order, it shall be the duty of the Fire Official or his designee to make
complaint against the owner, occupant, agent, lessee or person or
possessor before the Municipal Court of the Township, for the violation
§ 167-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-2
1:273
§ 167-3. Obstruction of Fire Official or his designee.
No person shall obstruct or hinder the Fire Official or his designee in the
discharge of the duties imposed by this chapter, or shall neglect or refuse to
comply with any order made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
of the order issued by virtue of the provisions of this section or the
provisions of this Code relating to the keeping and storing of explosives,
and any other ordinances of the Township or laws of the state passed
for the prevention of fire, or for removing hazardous fire conditions.
C. Any person aggrieved by the order of the Fire Official or his designee
may appeal from such order or direction to the Township Council;
provided, that he shall do so, in writing, within five days from the date
of the receipt of the order made by the Fire Official or his designee, and
the appeal shall set forth the reasons why such appellant thinks the
order and direction of the Fire Official or his designee is inequitable and
unjust. The decision of the Township Council shall constitute the final
order to be complied with when their judgment is rendered.
§ 167-2 LAWRENCE CODE § 167-3
1:274
ARTICLE II
Enforcement of Uniform Fire Safety Code
[Adopted by 5-3-2016 by Ord. No. 2234-16]
§ 167-4. Local enforcement.
Pursuant to Section 11 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983, c. 383;
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.), the New Jersey Uniform Fire Code shall be
locally enforced in the Township of Lawrence.
§ 167-5. Agency designation.
The local enforcing agency shall be the Bureau of Fire Prevention, which is
hereby created in the Department of Public Safety.
§ 167-6. Duties.
The local enforcement agency shall enforce the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the codes and regulations adopted under it in all buildings, structures and
premises within the established boundaries of the Township of Lawrence,
other than owner-occupied one and two-family dwellings, and shall
faithfully comply with the requirements of the Uniform Fire Safety Act and
the Uniform Fire Code.
§ 167-7. Life hazard uses.
The local enforcing agency established by § 167-5 of this chapter shall carry
out the periodic inspections of life hazard uses required by the Uniform Fire
Code on behalf of the Commissioner of Community Affairs.
§ 167-8. Organization.
The local enforcing agency established by § 167-5 of this chapter shall be a
part of the Department of Public Safety.
§ 167-9. Appointments.
§ 167-10. Board of Appeals.
Pursuant to Sections 15 and 17 of the Uniform Fire Safety Act, any person
aggrieved by any order of the local enforcement agency shall have the
A. Appointment of Fire Official. The local enforcing agency shall be under
the direct supervision of the Fire Official. The Fire Official shall be
appointed by the Municipal Manager pursuant to Title 11, Civil Service,
of the Revised Statutes.
B. Inspectors and employees. Such Inspectors and other employees as
may be necessary for the local enforcing agency to properly carry out
its responsibilities shall be appointed by the Municipal Manager
pursuant to Title 11, Civil Service, of the Revised Statutes.
§ 167-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-10
1:275
right to appeal to the Construction Board of Appeals of the Township of
Lawrence.
§ 167-11. Additional required inspections and fees.
In addition to the inspection and fees required pursuant to the Act and
the regulations of the Department of Community Affairs, the following
additional inspections and fees shall be required and shall be set by
Lawrence Township Fee Ordinance.
§ 167-12. Application fees for permits.
As per the Uniform Fire Safety Act, N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et seq.
§ 167-13. Certificate of smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm
compliance.
Before any use group R-3 or R-4 structure is sold, leased, or otherwise
made subject to a change of occupancy for residential purposes, the owner
shall obtain a certificate of smoke detector and carbon monoxide alarm
compliance CSDCMAC, evidencing compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:70-4.19, from
the appropriate enforcing agency.
§ 167-10 LAWRENCE CODE § 167-13
1:276
ARTICLE III
Local Amendments to Uniform Fire Safety Code
[Derived from Ch. 8, Art. III, of the 1971 Code]
§ 167-14. Amendment of Section F-4000, Construction Activities.
A. The Uniform Fire Safety Act (P.L. 1983 c. 383; N.J.S.A. 52:27D-192 et
seq.) was enacted for the purpose of establishing a system for the
enforcement of minimum fire safety standards throughout the State of
New Jersey.
B. The Uniform Fire Safety Act authorizes municipalities to adopt local
amendments to the Uniform Fire Safety Code and the Township has
determined that such amendments will improve fire safety and fire
service operations. The Uniform Fire Safety Code shall be amended as
follows: [Amended 9-7-2010 by Ord. No. 2062-10]
F-4000 Construction Activities.
F-4000.1. General. All construction requiring a construction permit
under N.J.A.C. 5:23, the Uniform Construction Code, shall comply with
the requirements of the Fire Prevention Code and this section as shall
be applicable. The term construction activities which require a permit
under the Uniform Construction Code.
F-4000.2 Refuse Containers: All active construction sites and
locations shall be provided with noncombustible refuse container(s) in
such numbers as shall be necessary to contain all combustible refuse
generated by the construction activities.
All combustible refuse, rubbish and debris shall be collected up and
deposited in the container(s) on a daily basis. Refuse container(s) shall
be located a minimum of 20 feet away from any building, structure, lot
line or combustible material storage location.
F-4000.3 Extinguishers: While construction activities are in
progress, fire extinguishers shall be provided by the builder in
accordance with the following subsections, and shall be maintained
in a location approved by the Fire Official. Personnel normally on the
construction site shall be instructed in the use of the fire extinguishers
provided.
F-4000.3.1 Industrial, Commercial: At construction sites for new
industrial or commercial structures, at least four portable fire
extinguishers having a rating of at least 10-A, 60-BC shall be provided.
§ 167-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-14
1:277
F-4000.3.2 Multi Unit Residential: At construction sites for new
residential structures where more than three buildings or buildings
containing four or more dwelling units are under construction, at least
four portable fire extinguishers having a rating of at least 10-A, 60-BC
shall be provided, and in addition, one extinguisher with similar rating
shall be provided for each site supervisor.
F-4000.3.3 All Other Locations: In locations other than those
specified in F-4000.3.2. and F-4000.3.3, at least one portable fire
extinguisher having a rating of at least 4-A, 30-BC shall be within a
travel distance of 75 feet or less to any point of the structure under
construction.
F-4000.4 Liquids and Gases: Flammable or combustible liquids and
gases shall be stored, handled, or used in accordance with the
applicable provisions of the Fire Prevention Code and the standards of
the National Fire Protection Association.
F-4000.5 Occupied Buildings: When construction activities take
place in occupied buildings special fire safety precautions shall be
taken as required by the Fire Official in accordance with the Fire
Prevention Code.
F-4000.5.1 Egress: The means of egress for building occupants shall
be properly maintained and readily available. In cases where
construction activities block existing exits, provisions shall be made
for alternate means of egress or for a protected path of travel. Means
of egress shall also be provided for building trades workers in the
construction areas.
F-4000.5.2 Fire Protection Equipment: When fire suppression,
detection or alarm systems or devices are affected by construction
activities, their down time shall be kept to a minimum. When possible,
isolation of system components shall occur to ensure operation in
unaffected areas.
Whenever fire protection systems or devices are removed from service,
a fire watch shall be posted if deemed necessary by the Fire Official.
When the area affected is of a high hazard use, normal operations and
occupancy of the area may be required to be suspended by the Fire
Official until protection is restored.
F-4000.6 Access: Temporary all-weather surface access roads, gravel
or equivalent, capable of supporting a 30 ton emergency vehicle, shall
be provided at all times for fire department vehicular access to all
structures under construction and storage of combustible construction
materials. Access to such locations shall be within 125 unobstructed
feet at all times.
§ 167-14 LAWRENCE CODE § 167-14
1:278
Every dead-end roadway more than 300 feet in length shall be
provided at the closed end with a temporary turn around acceptable to
the Fire Official.
F-4000.7 Water Supply: The fire protection water supply system,
including fire hydrants shown on the approved site plan, shall be
installed and in service prior to placing combustible building materials
on the project site or utilizing them in the construction of building
structures. If phased construction is approved, coordination phased
installation of the fire protection water system shall be permitted as
approved by the Fire Official.
F-4000.8 Buildings Markings: All buildings shall display number
or letters of unit before occupancy. Numbers or letters will be of
contrasting color from the building and will be sized as listed in
following sections.
F-4000.8.1 Single units including dwellings, individual apartments,
townhouses, offices, and condominiums shall have numbers or letters
on front door and must be a minimum of four inches high.
F-4000.8.2 All buildings in complexes including apartments,
educational uses, townhouses, condominiums, office and commercial
shall have numbers, names or letters to designate each building.
Numbers shall be a minimum of 18 inches high.
F-4001.0 Water Supplies
F-4001.1 General: Public and private fire hydrants, connections and
appliances shall be installed and maintained in accordance with this
section.
F-4001.2 Blocking hydrants or connections: No person shall
obscure from view, damage, deface, obstruct or restrict the access
to any fire hydrant or any fire department connection for the
pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants of
fire department connections that are located on public or private
streets and access lanes, or on private property.
§ 167-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-14
1:279
F-4001.3 Use of appliances: A person shall not obstruct, remove,
tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance
required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of this
code except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, training or testing
purposes, recharging or making necessary repairs, or when permitted
by the Fire Official. In all cases other than fire extinguishment,
notification and approval of the Fire Official shall be required prior to
such activity. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as prior to such
activity. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as herein permitted,
it shall be replaced or reinstalled as soon as the purpose of which it
was removed has been accomplished. Defective and non-approved fire
appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by
the Fire Official.
F-4002.0 Street Obstruction
F-4002.1 Street Obstruction: A person or persons shall not erect,
construct, place or maintain any bumps, fences, gates, chains, bars,
pipes, wood or metal horses or any other type of obstruction in or on
any street within the boundaries of the municipality. The word street
as used in the ordinance, shall mean any roadway accessible to the
public for vehicular traffic, including, but not limited to private streets
or access lanes, as well as all public streets and highways within the
boundaries of the municipality.
Prior to the closing of any street, notification shall be made to the Fire
Official and the fire company in whose area the street is located. Such
notice shall include why the street is to be closed, when the street is
to be closed, and how long such a closing shall last. Notification shall
also be made upon the reopening of the street.
F-4002.1.1 Exception: The Fire Official may approve the installation
of road bumps on private lanes or roadways within residential
developments or on Board of Education property due to the density of
children and/or elderly residents.
F-4002.1.2 Definition Section: Private lanes or roadways shall
mean:
a. Private lanes or roadways within a residential development.
b. Roadways on property owned by the Lawrence Township Board of
Education.
c. Roadways maintained by Lawrence Township where all abutting
property is owned by Lawrence Township.
§ 167-14 LAWRENCE CODE § 167-14
1:280
F-4002.1.3 Policy Guidelines: Road bumps shall be used in
accordance with the following guidelines:
a. The private lane or roadway shall either have a high incidence of
speed related accidents or be a lane or roadway that is intended to
primarily provide access to the abutting land use.
b. The private lane or roadway shall have a maximum speed limit of
25 m.p.h. as determined in accordance with State law.
c. The private lane or roadway shall be no more than one lane in each
direction.
d. The private lane or roadway shall not be a truck route or a transit
route.
e. The private lane or roadway shall not have grades greater than 5%.
F-4002.1.4 Installation/Construction:
a. The shape and dimensions of road bumps shall be as follows:
In Profile View - generally circular, 12 feet in length and with a
maximum height at its midpoint of four inches, with an allowable
tolerance of 1/2 inch.
In Plan View - across the roadway to a point near the edge of the main
traveled portion or roadway with the last one to three feet tapered so
that it is flush with the roadway.
b. There shall be a firm adherence between the bump and the roadway,
the shape and tolerance of the bump shall be achieved and the
bump shall be compacted to reduce the probability of deformation.
c. Road bumps shall be placed singly with a maximum distance
between bumps along the roadway of 500 feet and a minimum
distance of 400 feet.
d. Road bumps shall not be located within 200 feet of an intersection
or sharp horizontal curve. They shall be clearly visible for a distance
of at least 200 feet.
e. The specific positioning of road bumps shall consider access to
utilities in the roadway, driveway locations, existing illumination of
the roadway and the impact on the abutting.
f. Warning signs and markings shall be installed as follows:
1. Warning signs shall be installed 200 feet before the road bumps
with the wording Road bump ahead 15 mph, four-inch minimum
black letters on a yellow background with dimensions of 24
inches by 24 inches.
2. Warning signs shall be installed at the road bump with the
wording "Road bump," four inch minimum black letters on a
yellow background with dimensions of 24 inches by 24 inches.
3. The words "Road bump" shall be painted on the private lane or
roadway five feet prior to the road bump with 24 inches yellow
letters.
§ 167-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-14
1:281
F-4002.1.5 Permit and Approval Required: The installation of a
road bump or bumps shall require approval of, and the issuance of
a permit by the Fire Official. Application for approval and permit
issuance shall be accompanied by a review fee of $150. No application
shall be deemed complete without the required fee.
The application shall also be accompanied by an engineering traffic
study justifying the need for the road bumps. The study shall include
information on pedestrian traffic, number of dwelling units, traffic
flow and speeds, accidents, possibility of diversion of traffic from one
roadway to another and delays to emergency equipment. Submitted
with the study shall be two copies of a site plan drawn to scale showing
all site details and the location of the proposed road bumps, as well as
a construction detail of the road bumps and markings. The drawings
shall be sealed by a N.J. licensed architect or engineer.
The Fire Official shall have 60 days to review an application once
accepted as complete.
F-4002.1.6 Maintenance: Road bumps, when installed, shall be
maintained as constructed. The Fire Official shall have the authority to
order the repair or removal of an existing road bump and its associated
markings if not maintained in good condition.
F-4002. 1.7. Exception: Road bumps approved by the Fire Official
prior to the adoption of this code shall comply with Sections
F-4002.1.4, a., b., e., and f. and Section F-4002.1.6.
F-4003.0 Fire Lanes.
F-4003.1 Requirement, designation: The Fire Official may require
and designate public or private fire lanes as deemed necessary for the
efficient and effective use of fire apparatus, access for firefighting, or
the egress of occupants.
F-4003.2 Markings: The owner shall, within 30 days of being given a
notice to do so by the Fire Official, mark the lane as follows:
a. Signs constructed of metal and with red letters a minimum of two
inches in size on a white background with the wording "No parking
fire lane" shall be posted. Spacing of the signs shall be even, with a
minimum of one sign for every 100 feet of fire lane or part thereof,
or as ordered by the Fire Official.
§ 167-14 LAWRENCE CODE § 167-14
1:282
b. The area of the fire lane on improved areas shall be delineated
along its entire circumference with yellow lines four inches in
width. Within the yellow lines shall be marked "No Parking Fire
Lane" in yellow letters 18 inches in height. The number of times
this wording is to be repeated shall be at the discretion of the Fire
Official. The inside of the fire lane shall be further marked with
diagonal striping yellow in color and four inches in width spaced at
intervals of five feet. If the designated fire lane abuts a curb, the
curbing shall be yellow in color where it abuts the fire lane.
F-4003.3 Size: Fire lanes for vehicle access shall be a minimum of 18
feet in width. Fire lanes for egress of occupants shall be a minimum of
at least the width of the exitway served.
F-4003.4 Notification: Once a fire lane has been designated by the
Fire Official and properly marked by the owner of the premises, the
Fire Official shall notify the Police Department, Construction Code
Agency and Municipal Court Clerk in writing of the existence and
location of the designated fire lane.
F-4003.6 Restricted Access: Gates, chains or other methods utilized
to prevent unauthorized access to fire lanes shall be approved by the
Fire Official prior to installation.
F-4003.7 Installation, Maintenance: Fire lanes shall be installed
and maintained by the owner of the premises in conformance with the
provisions of this article. Fire lanes in existence prior to the enactment
of this article shall be required to conform to the provisions herein at
the discretion of the Fire Official.
F-4003.8 Obstructions: Designated fire lanes shall be maintained
free of obstruction and vehicles at all times.
F-4003.9 Parking, Stopping or Obstruction: No person, firm or
corporation shall park or stop any vehicle or place any obstruction in
or upon any fire lane.
F-4003.10 Removal: The Fire Official shall have the authority to
remove or have removed such obstructions or vehicles as may violate
Section 4003.9 at the expense of the owner of the premises in the case
of obstructions or at the expense of the owner of the vehicle.
F-4003.11 Existing Lanes: All fire lanes in existence prior to the
adoption of this section shall be properly maintained and shall be
enforceable under Sections F-4003.7 of this section. For the purpose
of this section, the terms "fire zone" and "fire lane" shall be
interchangeable.
§ 167-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-14
1:283
F-4003.12 Violations and Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation
in violation of this section shall be subject to penalties as provided in
the Uniform Fire Code (N.J.A.C. 5:70, Subchapter 2).
§ 167-14 LAWRENCE CODE § 167-14
1:284
ARTICLE IV
Code Inspections
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1930-07]
§ 167-15. Code inspection prior to sale, lease or other transfer of
realty.
§ 167-16. Inspections.
A. Residential (single family). Prior to any sale, rental or other transfer of
any single-family residential real estate, or part thereof, to another, the
owner shall apply for and obtain a Certificate of Inspection, as provided
for herein, issued by the Fire Official or his or her designee.
B. Residential (rental). Prior to any sale, rental or other transfer of any
rented single-family residential real estate, or part thereof, to another,
the owner shall apply for and obtain a Certificate of Inspection, as
provided for herein, issued by the Fire Official or his or her designee.
C. Residential (less than three units). Prior to any sale, rental or other
transfer of any residential real estate containing less than three units,
or part thereof, to another, the owner shall apply for and obtain a
Certificate of Inspection, as provided for herein, issued by the Fire
Official or his or her designee.
D. Nonresidential. Prior to any sale, rental or other transfer of any
nonresidential real estate, or part thereof, to another, the owner shall
apply for and obtain a Certificate of Inspection, as provided for herein,
issued by the Fire Official or his or her designee.
A. The owner of real estate, set forth above, shall apply for the issuance of
a Certificate of Inspection on forms to be provided by the Fire Official.
The application shall at least contain the name of the owner and the
name of the person signing the notice and the relationship to the owner;
shall describe the property or portion thereof to be transferred by
street address or in such other manner as may reasonably be required
by the Fire Official and shall be accompanied by the fee set forth by
ordinance.
(1) Within 15 working days of receipt of the application and fee, the
Fire Official shall make an inspection and issue a written Inspection
Certificate, in duplicate, stating (a) that an inspection of the
premises has been made, specifying any violations of any
applicable ordinance statute or code relating to the premises,
including the BOCA National Property Maintenance Code as
adopted or (b) if there are no such violations, stating that there are
none, or (c) that an inspection is not required because of the
provisions below.
(2) Each certificate shall be dated and the Fire Official shall retain a
duplicate copy.
§ 167-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-16
1:285
(3) If the inspection is not conducted within the time specified above,
the owner shall be under no further obligation.
(4) By such inspection the Township of Lawrence, its agents, servants,
employees or officers, does not guarantee quality or soundness of
any property or structure and it is not and will not be liable for any
act or omission in connection with an inspection or failure to
inspect, nor is the Township, its agents, servants, employees or
officers, in any way involved in any contractual relationship
between owners, tenants and/or purchasers. Such inspections are
conducted only to determine compliance with established codes as
may be ascertained by reasonable observation.
(5) This section shall not be construed to prohibit a transfer of
property; but shall be construed to prohibit occupancy without the
issuance of a Certificate of Inspection which is otherwise exempt as
provided in this section.
B. If an inspection has been made and a Certificate of Inspection issued
within one year prior to the date of receipt of the completed application,
or if a Certificate of Inspection has been issued for the premises within
one year prior to the date of receipt of such completed application, the
Fire Official may, but is not required to, make an inspection.
C. If a property transfers between a parent and child, or spouse, a
Certificate of Inspection is not required.
D. Prior to completing the sale, rental or other transfer, the owner shall
inform any transferee(s) of any violations reported by the Fire Official,
and shall give the transferee(s) a copy of the Certificate of Inspection.
(1) All violations shall be corrected prior to completing the sale, rental
or other transfer, except as otherwise provided for in this section.
(2) Failure of the owner to comply with this provision does not relieve
the transferee(s) from the obligations imposed by this section, or
any of the relevant statues, ordinances or Codes.
(3) The buyer of any residential property for sale under this section
can accept responsibility for outstanding violations. The buyer
cannot, though, inhabit the property if any violations are of a life
and safety nature. Otherwise, with minor violations, the Fire
Official can permit the buyer to occupy the property. A buyer will
have 45 days to complete all repairs before a Certificate of
Inspection is issued.
E. Any owner who violates this section by failing to apply for a Certificate
of Inspection under this section, or, by failing to inform the
transferee(s) of violations, shall be liable upon conviction to the penalty
stated in Chapter 1, Article III.
§ 167-16 LAWRENCE CODE § 167-16
1:286
§ 167-17. Annual inspection of multifamily dwellings.
F. Upon correction of all violations noted in the Inspection Certificate, the
Fire Official shall issue a new Certificate of Inspection.
G. Exceptions.
(1) No inspection under this section shall be required in the case of the
sale, rental or other transfer of unimproved real estate.
(2) Where no immediate occupancy is contemplated in a residential
property transfer, an inspection under this section shall not be
required, however, prior to residential occupancy, an inspection
under this section or as required by the New Jersey Uniform
Construction Code shall be conducted.
(3) Any nonresidential property for which a Certificate of Occupancy is
required under the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code prior to
occupancy shall be exempt from this section.
H. Any owner who desires to appeal from a Certificate of Inspection may
file an appeal pursuant to the BOCA National Property Maintenance
Code.
A. In addition to the inspections provided for above, the Fire Official shall
make or provide for periodic inspections, at least annually, of all
structures and premises used for multiple dwelling purposes, such as
apartments, motels, hotels and rental cottages. Any violation of any
applicable statute, code or ordinance shall be remedied and such
penalties shall be imposed as are provided by the applicable statute,
code or ordinance, The Fire Official shall issue a Certificate of
Inspection specifying such violations if any, and upon request of the
owner shall issue a further Certificate of Inspection indicating that the
specified violations have been remedied.
B. Nothing in this section is intended to limit or restrict the application of
the provisions of the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Act of the State of
New Jersey, as from time to time amended, to the extent that Act
supersedes the provisions of this section or any ordinances, regulations
or codes now or hereafter adopted by the Township of Lawrence.
§ 167-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-17
1:287

ARTICLE V
Knox Boxes
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1938-07]
§ 167-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
KNOX BOX — A secure rapid entry system that is designed to be used by
Fire Company personnel in the event of an emergency to gain entry into a
structure by using the enclosed owner provided key(s). This box is usually
mounted on the exterior of the building in a location that is specified by
the local Fire Marshal. All boxes shall be UL (Underwriters Laboratories)
certified and approved by the Township Fire Marshal.
§ 167-19. When required.
A. Knox Box required for new commercial buildings. All new commercial
buildings shall have installed a Knox Box of a UL type and size approved
by the Township Fire Marshal, in a location specified by the Township
Fire Marshal prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The
initial placement of this Knox Box on new construction shall be under
the direction of the Lawrence Township Fire Subcode Official.
B. Knox Box required for existing commercial buildings with
improvements. All existing commercial buildings constructing
improvements that require Planning Board approval shall have installed
a Knox Box of a UL type and size approved by the Township Fire
Marshal in a location specified by the Township Fire Official prior to the
issuance of the construction permit. The initial placement of this Knox
Box on new construction shall be under the direction of the Lawrence
Township Fire Subcode Official.
C. Knox Box required for existing commercial buildings. All existing
commercial buildings shall have installed a Knox Box of a UL type and
size approved by the Township Fire Marshal in a location specified by
the Township Fire Marshal within one year of the effective date of this
section. Any exceptions to this requirement will be at the discretion of
the Lawrence Township Fire Marshal.
D. Knox Box required for multifamily residential structures. All multifamily
residential structures that have restricted access through locked doors
and have a common corridor for access to the living units shall have
installed a Knox Box of a UL type and size approved by the Township
Fire Official in a location specified by the Township Fire Official within
one year of the effective date of this section.
§ 167-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 167-20
1:289
§ 167-20. Knox Box contents.
All Knox Boxes shall contain labeled keys, easily identified in the field to
provide access into the property and/or building, and to any locked areas
within the said buildings as the Township Fire Marshal may direct. This
shall include keys or access cards to all tenant spaces within a multioccupancy
office, business or residential building. If keys or locks must be
changed, the Lawrence Township Fire Marshal's Office must be notified
within three working days to have keys changed in the Knox Box.
§ 167-21. Penalties.
Any property or building owner failing to comply with or in violation of the
terms of this section after notice from the Township Fire Marshal shall be
subject to an initial fine of $100. Failure to comply after seven days will
result in an additional fine of $500. Each day thereafter that the rope or
building owner fails to comply will result in a fine of $100 per day.
§ 167-22. Exemptions.
Any business, school or complex which employs full-time security personnel
(24/7) equipped with mobile transportation, radio communications and keys
to all buildings and spaces on the business, school or complex shall be
exempt from this section.
§ 167-23. Emergency contact persons for building owner.
In the event that an emergency contact person for the building owner is
requested to respond to the building due to damage, hazardous materials
or security reasons by an authorized Township Official (Fire Marshal, Fire
Chief or Designee, Police Officer) and this person refuses to respond in a
timely manner, a $500 penalty will be issued to the building owner by the
requesting agency.
§ 167-20 LAWRENCE CODE § 167-23
1:290
Chapter 173
FIREWORKS
§ 173-1. Permit for public display.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 21:3-1 et seq., upon occasions of public celebrations
and exhibitions the Township Council may grant permits for the display and
discharge of fireworks, which permit shall define the kind and place of such
display, the method of storage and such other conditions as may appear
necessary or proper for the public safety, which permit shall be signed by
the Chairman of the Township Council and attested by the Municipal Clerk.
§ 173-2. Firing range; permit required; competitive shooting
contests.
The Township Council may grant permits for the discharge of firearms in
such competitive shooting as trap-shooting, skeet-shooting or other range
shooting. Such permits shall be granted only upon proper application
showing the sites at which and the hours during which the applicant desires
to hold such shoots, and further, only after it shall be made to appear
that such shoots can be properly held at such sites and during such hours
with appropriate and due regard for public safety and well-being. Such
permit may be granted for the calendar year upon terms and conditions
necessary to public safety and well-being, and may be revoked at any time
upon a showing that any condition of the granting of such permit has not
been complied with. The fees for such annual permit shall be found in
Chapter 156 of this Code. Any annual permit shall expire on the 31st day of
December in the year in which it was granted. Fees shall be collectible by
the Municipal Clerk.
Chapter 179
FLAGS
§ 179-1. Findings.
A. The freedom of expression is enshrined in the Constitution of the
United States of America; and the National flag of the United States,
the POW/MIA flag and the official flags of the branches of the armed
services of the United States are sacred symbols that remind all of us
that the price of freedom is sometimes paid with a heavy price.
B. Lawrence Township is an honorable and patriotic community that
celebrates and honors its American soldiers, patriots and their families
that have sacrificed so much to protect the American way of life; and
this community will never forget the plight of American POW/MIAs and
their hardship and heartache felt by their families and proudly supports
the POW/MIA flag for which they are remembered.
§ 167-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 179-1
1:291
§ 179-2. Right of residents to display certain flags.
Chapter 185
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
§ 185-1. Title.
This chapter may be referred to and cited as the "Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance of the Township of Lawrence, Mercer County, New Jersey."
§ 185-2. Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of New Jersey has, in N.J.S.A. 40:48-1 et seq.,
delegated the responsibility to municipalities to adopt regulations designed
to promote public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry through
the adoption of local ordinances. In accordance with this statutory
C. Lawrence Township is a mindful community that recognizes that since
World War I more than 125,000 American servicemen and women have
remained missing in action, among them more than 2,500 were
captured or listed as missing in action in Vietnam. This Township
recognizes just as did the 101st United States Congress who designated
the POW/MIA flat "as the symbol of our Nation's concern and
commitment to resolving as fully as possible the fates of Americans still
prisoner, missing and unaccounted for in Southeast Asia."
D. Lawrence Township, as a community, wishes to encourage and protect
the rights of residents to respectively display the National flag of the
United States, the POW/MIA flag, the New Jersey State flag and the
official flags of the branches of the Armed Services of the United States.
A. No homeowners' association or any other such entity shall be permitted
to prohibit the right of residents to respectfully display on their
property the National flag of the United States, the POW/MIA flag, the
official flags of the branches of the Armed Services of the United States,
the New Jersey State flag, and/or the display of a yellow ribbon in honor
and remembrance of our Nation's servicemen and women as long as the
displays do not block the public right-of-way or easements of
structurally harm the exterior of the buildings.
B. Action by any homeowners' association or any other such entity which
attempts to prohibit the right of residents to respectfully display on
their property the National flag of the United States, the POW/MIA flag,
the official flags of the branches of the Armed Services of the United
States, the New Jersey State flag, and/or the display of a yellow ribbon
in honor and remembrance of our nation's servicemen and women, shall
be null and void and any fees, fines, penalties, or costs imposed by any
such homeowners' association or any other such entity in such a case
shall be of no force and affect on any Township resident.
§ 179-1 LAWRENCE CODE § 185-2
1:292
authorization, the Township Council of the Township of Lawrence of Mercer
County, New Jersey, does hereby establish measures to prevent or reduce
damage from flooding.
§ 185-3. Findings of fact.
§ 185-4. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
§ 185-5. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:
A. The flood hazard areas of the Township of Lawrence are subject to
periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public
health, safety, and general welfare.
B. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in
areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and
velocities, and when inadequately anchored, causes damage in other
areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise
protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
A. Protect human life and health;
B. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
C. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding
and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
D. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
E. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas
mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
F. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;
G. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of
special flood hazard; and
H. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
§ 185-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-5
1:293
§ 185-6. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
§ 185-7. Definitions.
A. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
B. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve
such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
C. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
floodwaters;
D. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which
may increase flood damage; and,
E. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
A. Considered the minimum requirements to effectuate its purposes;
B. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
C. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
A. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
B. As used in this chapter, words in one tense shall include other tenses or
derivative forms; words in the singular shall include the plural and in
the plural, the singular; either gender shall include the other; the word
"shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive; the word "used"
shall include "arranged," "designed," "constructed," "altered,"
"converted," "rented," "leased," or "intended to be used."
C. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AH ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding) where average depths are
between one and three feet. Base flood elevations (BFEs) derived from
detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone.
AO ZONE — Areas subject to inundation by one-percent-annual-chance
shallow flooding (usually sheet flow on sloping terrain) where average
depths are between one and three feet.
§ 185-5 LAWRENCE CODE § 185-7
1:294
APPEAL — A request for a review of the Municipal Engineer's and/
or Zoning Officer's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a
request for a variance.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING — A designated AO or AH zone on
a community's Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM) with a onepercent
annual or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of
one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where
the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be
evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in the floodplain within
a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in
any given year and is shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map as Zone
V, VE, V1-30, A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
BASE FLOOD — A flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The flood elevation shown on a
published Flood Insurance Study (FIS), including the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM). For zones AE, AH, AO, and A1-30 the elevation
represents the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has
a one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL — A wall that is not part of the structural support
of the building and is intended through its design and construction to
collapse under specific lateral loading forces without causing damage
to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations, or storage of equipment or materials located within the
area of special flood hazard.
DEVELOPMENT PERMIT — A form of specialized zoning permit
pursuant to § 1202 of the Land Use Ordinance of the Township of
Lawrence, as it may amended or superseded.
DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM) — The Official Map
on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
ELEVATED BUILDING —
A nonbasement building.
Built, in the case of a building in an area of special flood
hazard, to have the top of the elevated floor elevated above the
(a)
(1)
§ 185-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-7
1:295
EROSION — The process of the gradual wearing a way of land masses.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed before the first effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The Official Map on which
the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report in which the
Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as
the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) and the water surface elevation of the
base flood.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS — Zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special
purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance
and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power.
The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
base flood elevation plus freeboard by means of piling, columns
(posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the
water; and
Adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural
integrity of the building during a flood up to the magnitude of
the base flood.
(b)
In an area of special flood hazard, "elevated building" also includes
a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter
walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded
movement of floodwaters.
(2)
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
§ 185-7 LAWRENCE CODE § 185-7
1:296
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that shall be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without accumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than 0.2 foot.
FREEBOARD — A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a
flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends
to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to
flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood
and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed or existing
walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable
solely for the parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an
area other than a basement is not considered a building's lowest floor
provided that such enclosure is not built so to render the structure in
violation of other applicable nonelevation design requirements of 44
CFR 60.3.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for
use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(1)
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(2)
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
(3)
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(a)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(b)
(4)
§ 185-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-7
1:297
required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a
"recreational vehicle."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME
SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into
two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain regulation
adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are
to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring
of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the
floodplain management regulations adopted by the municipality.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
START OF CONSTRUCTION — For other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act
(P.L. No. 97-348) including substantial improvements, is the date the
building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start
means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond
the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling nor does it include the installation
of streets and/or walkways, nor does it include excavation for a
basement, footings or piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary
forms, nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory
buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units
or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall,
(1) Built on a single chassis;
Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the longest
horizontal projections;
(2)
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck; and
(3)
Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
(4)
§ 185-7 LAWRENCE CODE § 185-7
1:298
§ 185-8. Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the
jurisdiction of the Township of Lawrence, Mercer County, New Jersey.
§ 185-9. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that
alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or
a gas or liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition
before damage would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
VARIANCE — A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter
that permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be
prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with this chapter. A new or substantially improved
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local Code
Enforcement Officer and which are the minimum necessary to
ensure safe living conditions; or
(1)
Any alteration of an "historic structure" provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure."
(2)
A. The areas of special flood hazard for the Township of Lawrence,
Community No. 340250, are identified and defined on the following
documents prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency:
(1) A scientific and engineering report "Flood Insurance Study, Mercer
County, New Jersey (All Jurisdictions)" effective date of July 20,
2016.
§ 185-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-9
1:299
§ 185-10. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development
begins, including placement of manufactured homes, within any area of
special flood hazard established in § 185-9. Application for a development
permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Department of Engineering
and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale
showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in
question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage
facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following
information is required:
§ 185-11. Designation of the local administrator.
The Zoning Officer with the assistance of the Municipal Engineer is hereby
appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying
development permit applications in accordance with its provisions.
§ 185-12. Duties and responsibilities of the administrator.
(2) "Flood Insurance Rate Map for Mercer County, New Jersey (All
Jurisdictions)" as shown on the Index Map and the following DFIRM
panels hereinbelow, effective date of July 20, 2016: 34021C0109F,
34021C0117F, 34021C0119F, 34021C0126F, 34021C0127F,
34021C0128F, 34021C0129F, 34021C0136F, 34021C0137F,
34021C0138F, 34021C0139F, 34021C0141F, 34021C0143F,
34021C0207F and 34021C0226F.
B. The above documents are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of
this chapter. The Flood Insurance Study, maps and advisory documents
are on file at the Department of Engineering, Lawrence Municipal
Building, 2207 Lawrenceville Road, Lawrenceville, New Jersey.
A. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
B. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
C. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in § 185-15B; and
D. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
A. Duties of the Zoning Officer serving as the Administrator of the
municipality's flood damage prevention efforts shall include, but not be
limited to, the following types of review for flood prevention:
(1) Review all development permits to determine that the permit
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
§ 185-9 LAWRENCE CODE § 185-12
1:300
(2) Review all development permits to determine that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies from which prior approval is required.
(3) Review all development permits to determine if the proposed
development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway,
assure that the encroachment limitations of § 185-16, are met.
(4) Review plans for walls to be used to enclose space below the base
flood level.
B. Use of other base flood and floodway data. In the event that base flood
elevation and floodway data has not been provided in accordance with
§ 185-9, Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard, the Zoning
Officer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood
elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other
source, in order to administer § 185-15A, Specific standards for
residential construction, and § 185-15B, Specific standards for
nonresidential construction.
C. Information to be obtained and maintained.
(1) Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or
substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure
contains a basement.
(2) For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures:
(a) Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea
level); and
(b) Maintain the floodproofing certifications required in
§ 185-10C.
(3) Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the
provisions of this chapter.
D. Alteration of watercourses.
(1) Notify adjacent communities and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section
and the Land Use Regulation Program prior to any alteration or
relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such
notification to the Federal Insurance Administration.
(2) Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or
relocated portion of said watercourse so the flood-carrying capacity
is not diminished.
E. Substantial damage review.
(1) After an event resulting in building damages, assess the damage to
structures due to flood and nonflood causes.
§ 185-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-12
1:301
§ 185-13. Variance procedure.
(2) Record and maintain the flood and nonflood damage of substantial
damage structures and provide a letter of substantial damage
determination to the owner and the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection, Dam Safety and Flood Control Section.
(3) Ensure substantial improvements meet the requirements of
§ 185-15A, Specific standards for residential construction, and
§ 185-15B, Specific standards for nonresidential construction.
F. Interpretation of FIRM boundaries. Make interpretations where
needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict
between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in § 185-13.
A. Appeal Board.
(1) The Zoning Board of Adjustment as established by Township
Council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter and shall use the procedures
established for an appeal of an administrative officer's decision in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72a.
(2) The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals
when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Zoning Officer in the enforcement or
administration of this chapter.
(3) Those aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the NJ Superior Court,
as provided for in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-17h.
(4) In passing upon such applications, the Zoning Board of Adjustment,
shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors,
standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
(b) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion
damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community;
§ 185-12 LAWRENCE CODE § 185-13
1:302
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use
which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and
anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive
Plan and floodplain management program of that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for
ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site; and
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems, and streets and bridges.
(5) Upon consideration of the factors of § 185-13A(4) and the purposes
of this chapter, the Zoning Board of Adjustment may attach such
conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to
further the purposes of this chapter.
(6) The Zoning Officer shall maintain the records of all appeal actions,
including technical information, and report any variances to the
Federal Insurance Administration upon request.
B. Conditions for variances.
(1) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing
structures constructed below the base flood level, providing items
§ 185-13A(4)(a) through (k) have been fully considered. As the lot
size increases beyond the 1/2 acre, the technical justification
required for issuing the variance increases.
(2) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued
designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure. In the evaluation of the variance, the Zoning Officer may
consult with the Lawrence Historic Preservation Advisory
Committee or qualified professional as may be necessary.
§ 185-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-13
1:303
§ 185-14. General standards for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazards, compliance with the applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (N.J.A.C. 5:23) and the
following standards, whichever is more restrictive, is required:
(3) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
(4) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard,
to afford relief.
(5) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on
or victimization of the public as identified in § 185-14A(4), or
conflict with other existing local laws or ordinances.
(6) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation and that the cost of
flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk
resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
A. Anchoring.
(1) All new construction to be placed or substantially improved and
substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.
Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use
of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is
in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for
resisting wind forces.
B. Construction materials and methods.
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood
damage.
§ 185-13 LAWRENCE CODE § 185-14
1:304
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood
damage.
C. Utilities.
(1) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(2) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems
and discharge from the systems into floodwaters;
(3) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding;
and
(4) For all new construction and substantial improvements the
electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning
equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or
located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating
within the components during conditions of flooding.
D. Subdivision and site plan applications.
(1) All subdivision and site plan applications and other proposed new
development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage;
(2) All subdivision and site plan proposals and other proposed new
development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer,
gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage;
(3) All subdivision proposals and other proposed new development
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(4) Base flood elevation data shall be provided for site plan, subdivision
and other proposed new development for any property within an
area of special flood hazard.
E. Enclosure openings. All new construction and substantial
improvements having fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that
are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in
an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall
be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs
for meeting this requirement shall either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or shall meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria: A minimum of two openings in at least two exterior
walls of each enclosed area, having a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
§ 185-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-14
1:305
§ 185-15. Specific standards for flood hazard reduction.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data have
been provided as set forth in § 185-9, Basis for establishing the areas of
special flood hazard, or in § 185-12B, Use of other base flood and floodway
data, the following standards are required:
shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than
one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers,
or other covering or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Specific standards for residential construction (for manufactured
housing, see § 185-15C).
(1) New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure located in an A or AE zone shall have the lowest floor,
including basement together with the attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, elevated at or above the base flood elevation plus
one foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive; and
(2) Within any AO or AH zone all new construction and/or substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest
floor, including basement together with the attendant utilities and
sanitary facilities, elevated above the depth number specified in
feet plus one foot, above the highest adjacent grade (at least three
feet if no depth number is specified).
(3) Adequate drainage paths shall be established around structures on
slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
B. Specific standards for nonresidential construction.
(1) In an area of special flood hazard, all new construction and
substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial or other
nonresidential structure located in an A or AE zone shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, together with the attendant
utilities and sanitary facilities:
(a) Either:
[1] Elevated to or above the base flood elevation plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive; and
[2] Require within any AO or AH zone on the municipality's
DFIRM to elevate above the depth number specified in feet
plus one foot, above the highest adjacent grade (at least
three feet if no depth number is specified); and require
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to
§ 185-14 LAWRENCE CODE § 185-15
1:306
§ 185-16. Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 185-9 are areas
designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles,
and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:
guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures;
(b) Or:
[1] Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level plus one
foot or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 6-1,
whichever is more restrictive, the structure is watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of
water;
[2] Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy; and
[3] Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the design and methods of construction are
in accordance with accepted standards of practice for
meeting the applicable provisions of this subsection. Such
certification shall be provided to the official as set forth in
§ 185-12C(2).
C. Manufactured homes.
(1) Manufactured homes shall be anchored in accordance with
§ 185-14A.
(2) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved
within an area of special flood hazard shall:
(a) Be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
(b) Be constructed to minimize flood damage;
(c) Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood
damage; and
(d) Be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the top of the
lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation plus one foot
or as required by ASCE/SEI 24-14, Table 2-1, whichever is
more restrictive.
A. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other development unless a technical evaluation
demonstrates that encroachment shall not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
§ 185-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-16
1:307
§ 185-17. Penalties for noncompliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, relocated to, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter
and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this chapter
by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of
conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, for
each violation, and in addition shall pay all costs and expenses involved
in the case. Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a separate
and equal offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the Township of
Lawrence, from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent
or remedy any violation.
§ 185-18. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter
and other ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or
overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
§ 185-19. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
Chapter 192
B. If Subsection A hereinabove is satisfied, all new construction and
substantial improvements shall comply with § 185-14, General
standards for flood hazard reduction, and § 185-15, Specific standards
for flood hazard reduction.
C. In all areas of special flood hazard in which base flood elevation data
has been provided and no floodway has been designated, the
accumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with
all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
water surface elevation of the base flood more than 0.2 of a foot at any
point.
A. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and
engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare
occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural
causes. this chapter does not imply that land outside the area of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Township of
Lawrence, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance
Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
§ 185-16 LAWRENCE CODE § 185-19
1:308
FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 185-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 185-19
1:309

ARTICLE I
Retail Food Establishment Code
[Derived from Ch. 9, Art. I, of the 1971 Code]
§ 192-1. Adoption of Code. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 192-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be liable, upon
conviction, for the penalties stated in the State Sanitary Code.
A. A Code known as "Sanitation in Retail Food Establishments and Food
and Beverage Vending Machines" as amended and supplemented is
adopted by the Township.
B. Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.2, three copies of the Sanitation in Retail
Food Establishments and Food and Beverage Vending Machines Code
shall be on file in the office of the Township Clerk and the Code is
hereby adopted by reference.
§ 192-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-2
1:311

ARTICLE II
Licensing of Retail Food Establishments
[Derived from Ch. 9, Art. II, of the 1971 Code]
§ 192-3. Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or any body corporate to conduct a retail
food establishment as defined in and governed by the State Sanitary Code,
without first having procured a license to be issued annually by the Health
Officer on or before November 1 of each year, or without complying with
any or all of the provisions concerning operation and maintenance of the
same as contained in the State Sanitary Code.
§ 192-4. Fees. [Amended by Ord. No. 1611-00; Ord. No. 1771-03]
§ 192-5. Suspension or revocation.
A. The annual license fees of retail food establishments are hereby fixed
and may be found in Chapter 156 of this Code.
B. The following shall be exempt from payment of the aforesaid license
fees, but shall otherwise comply with the provisions of this section:
(1) Food establishments conducted by churches, veterans'
organizations, volunteer fire and first aid organizations, and
Lawrence Township Parent Teachers Organizations, and charitable
organizations operating food pantries.
C. Any applicant for renewal of a license issued pursuant to § 192-3 who
shall fail to make payment of the foregoing fees on or prior to the
expiration date of the license being renewed shall, in addition to the
fees herein provided, pay a penalty of $1 per day for each day of the
delinquency commencing on November 15 of the then current licensing
year.
A. Any license issued under the terms and provisions of this section may
be suspended or revoked by the Division of Health of this Municipality
for the violation by the licensee of any provision of this section or the
State Sanitary Code or whenever it shall appear that the business,
trade, calling, professional or occupation of the person to whom such
license was issued, is conducted in a disorderly or improper manner, or
in violation of any law of the United States, this State, this section or
any other ordinance of this Municipality, or that the purpose for which
the license has been issued is being abused to the detriment of the
public, or is being used for a purpose foreign to that for which the
license was issued, or that toilet and hand-washing facilities in all
permanent retail food establishments are not provided for the
convenience of the public. A license issued under the terms and
provisions of this section shall not be withheld, revoked, cancelled or
suspended until a hearing thereon shall have been had by the Division
of Health. Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be
§ 192-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-5
1:313
§ 192-6. Unlawful burden on interstate commerce, etc.
No provision of this section shall be applied so as to impose any unlawful
burden on either interstate commerce or any activity of the state or federal
government.
§ 192-7. Display of "Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (FAS)" warning signs.
All licensees under § 83-1 who sell alcoholic beverages shall prominently
post on their premises a warning of the dangers to the unborn children
of women who consume alcoholic beverages while pregnant. The nature
and type of warning signs shall be determined by the Lawrence Township
Department of Health, which shall prepare and distribute the warning
signs. Any licensee violating the provisions of this section shall be subject
to a fine as provided by law.
served upon the licensee at least three days prior to the date set for
such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief statement of the
grounds to be relied upon for revoking, cancelling or suspending such
license. Notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the
person to be notified or be deposited in the United States Post Office
in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be
notified at the business address appearing upon such license or license
application. At the hearing before the Division of Health, the person
aggrieved shall have an opportunity to answer and may thereafter be
heard, and upon due consideration and deliberation by the Division of
Health, the complaint may be dismissed, or if the Division of Health
concludes that the charges have been sustained and substantiated, it
may revoke, cancel or suspend the license held by the licensee.
B. If such license shall have been revoked, neither the holder thereof nor
any person acting for him, directly or indirectly, shall be entitled to
another license for the same establishment, unless the application or
such license shall be approved by the Division of Health.
§ 192-5 LAWRENCE CODE § 192-7
1:314
ARTICLE III
Packaging and Labeling of Meats
[Derived from Ch. 9, Art. III, of the 1971 Code]
§ 192-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FOOD DEALER — As used in this section, shall be construed to mean
and include every person, his agent, servant or employee, engaged in the
business of selling, offering or exposing for sale, food at retail for human
consumption, either on or off the premises where sold.
§ 192-9. Package to be colorless and transparent; size of labeling;
contents to be wholly visible.
It shall be unlawful for any food dealer in the Township, as defined in
§ 192-8, to sell or offer or expose for sale, at retail, any sealed, prepackaged,
unprocessed or untreated fresh or frozen cut meat or fowl unless the
package is colorless and transparent on all sides, exclusive of labeling
which shall not exceed five square inches of one side of the package, or in
which fresh or frozen cut meat or fowl is layered or shingled, making the
entire contents of the package not wholly visible.
§ 192-10. Overlapping of package material so as to obscure
visibility of package.
The package material shall not be so layered, overlapped or sealed so as to
obliterate the clarity of the transparency of the packaging or to obscure in
any manner the visibility or transparency of the package.
§ 192-11. Date of packaging to be stamped on label.
The package of fresh or frozen cut meat or fowl shall be stamped or shall
have printed prominently on the face of the label the date when the contents
of such package were originally processed and packaged.
§ 192-12. Enforcement.
The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Department of
Health.
§ 192-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-12
1:315
Chapter 198
GAMES OF CHANCE
§ 192-12 LAWRENCE CODE § 192-12
1:316
ARTICLE I
Sunday Operation
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1923-07]
§ 198-1. Legalized games of chance permitted on Sundays.
Nonprofit organizations shall be permitted to conduct legalized games of
chance on Sundays.
§ 198-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 198-1
1:317
Chapter 206
GRAFFITI
§ 206-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GRAFFITI — Any inscription that is drawn, painted or otherwise made on a
bridge, building, public transportation vehicle, rock, wall, sidewalk, street
or other exposed surface on public or private, real or personal property,
without the prior written permission of the owner of the property.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lawrence.
§ 206-2. Removal of graffiti.
A. The Chief of Police or his designee will issue a written notice to the
owner of record of any building, structure or exposed surface within
Lawrence Township that contains graffiti. This written notice shall be
hand-delivered, or sent by certified and regular mail.
B. The written notice shall order the owner to remove the graffiti within 90
days from the date the notice is sent, however, the Department of
Transportation shall be afforded 120 days from the date the notice is
sent.
C. The written notice shall contain a form to be utilized by the property
owner to inform the Township that the graffiti has been removed. The
form shall contain a provision stating that by affixing a signature to the
form, the property owner is certifying that the graffiti has been
removed. The property owner is also certifying that the facts set forth
therein are true and that the certification shall be considered as if made
under oath and subject to the same penalties as provided by law for
perjury.
D. The owner who has been ordered to remove graffiti shall respond to the
Chief of Police or his designee by personal delivery or by certified mail:
(1) Within 30 days of the date of the order if there is any objection to
the order.
(2) Within 90 days of the date of the order that the graffiti has been
removed, or in the case of the Department of Transportation,
within 120 days.
E. An owner who objects to an order to remove graffiti may institute an
action challenging the order in the Superior Court of New Jersey -
Mercer County within 60 days of the date of the order.
F. If the property owner does not undertake the removal of graffiti within
90 days of the date of the order, or 120 days for the Department of
§ 198-1 LAWRENCE CODE § 206-2
1:318
§ 206-3. Regulations and procedures.
The Chief of Police shall promulgate such rules, regulations and procedures
not inconsistent with this chapter as may be reasonable and necessary to
carry out the provisions of this chapter.
§ 206-4. Enforcement.
Chapter 213
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Transportation, unless an action challenging the order to remove
graffiti is still pending, the Township may remove the graffiti from that
property using reasonable and customary methods for such removal.
The Director of Public Works will prepare an invoice with a detailed
itemization of the costs incurred by the Township. This invoice will
be mailed to the property owner by certified and regular mail for
reimbursement to the Township.
G. Whenever the Township undertakes the removal of graffiti from any
building, structure, or exposed surface, the Township, in addition to
assessing the cost of the removal as a municipal lien against the
premises, may enforce the payment of such assessment, together with
interest, as a debt of the owner of the property and may authorize the
institution of an action at law for the collection thereof. The Superior
Court of New Jersey shall have jurisdiction of any such action.
A. The Chief of Police or his designee is authorized to enforce this chapter.
B. The Chief of Police shall develop regulations/procedures to effect this
chapter.
§ 206-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-4
1:319

ARTICLE I
Recovery of Costs
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1886-06]
§ 213-1. Authority.
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provision of N.J.S.A. 58:10-23.11a
et. seq.
§ 213-2. Purpose.
The Township Department of Public Safety has responded to an increasing
number of hazardous materials incidents. These responses involve
substantial expenditures. The purpose of this section is to insure that the
Township is financially able to respond to hazardous materials incidents by
requiring the person or entity who causes discharge of hazardous materials
to reimburse the Township for the expenditures made in responding to that
incident.
§ 213-3. Liability.
Any person who causes or permit's the discharge of hazardous materials
shall be strictly liable, jointly and severally, without regard to fault for all
control and clean-up costs incurred by the Township of Lawrence.
§ 213-4. Period of payment.
Any person or entity liable for control and clean-up costs pursuant to this
section shall reimburse the Township the entire amount of such costs within
45 days after receipt of a request for payment for expenses incurred for the
response.
§ 213-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or entity who fails to reimburse the Township the entire amount
of the control and clean-up costs within 45 days after receipt of the request
for payment shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$500 per day or by imprisonment for a period of not more than four months,
or both.
§ 213-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 213-5
1:321
Chapter 220
HOUSING STANDARDS
§ 220-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASEMENT — A story, the floor of which is below grade and the ceiling of
which is not less than four feet and six inches above grade.
CELLAR — A story, the floor of which is below grade and the ceiling of which
is less than four feet and six inches above grade.
DWELLING — Any building or structure, or part thereof, used and occupied
for human habitation or designed to be so used, and includes any outhouses,
and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms or part thereof located
within a building and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which
are used or designed to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating,
exclusive of a room or group of rooms without cooking facilities, except a
single element hot plate, which is occupied or intended to be occupied by a
roomer or boarder.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking or consumption of food.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space used or designed
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating, excluding bathrooms,
water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or communicating
corridors, closets and storage spaces.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A residence building having two or more dwelling
units.
OCCUPANT — The owner, tenant, lessee or other person in actual
possession of, and living, sleeping, cooking or eating in a dwelling unit.
OWNER — Either the legal owner or his duly authorized agent or attorney
having charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling unit, a purchaser,
devisee, fiduciary or a person having a vested or contingent interest in the
property in question.
PLUMBING — Any and all of the following facilities and equipment: gas
pipes, garbage disposal units, waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed
dish washers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing
or clothes-drying machines, catch basins, drains, vents and any other
similar fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines,
gas burning equipment, water pipes.
RUBBISH — All combustible and noncombustible waste materials, other
than garbage, and the term shall include paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
§ 213-5 LAWRENCE CODE § 220-1
1:322
mineral matter, glass, crockery and the residue from the burning of wood,
coal, coke or other combustible material.
SUPPLIED — Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of the
owner.
UTILITIES — Gas service and equipment therefor; electric service and
equipment therefor; water supply, including hot water, and equipment
therefor.
§ 220-2. Inspections.
§ 220-3. Enforcement.
The Health Officer, the Construction Official and Housing Inspector are
hereby designated and appointed to enforce the provisions of this section.
§ 220-4. Notice of violations.
A. See Chapter 156, Fees, for housing inspection fees.
B. The Health Officer, the Construction Official and the Housing Inspector
are hereby authorized and directed to make inspections to determine
the condition of dwellings, dwelling units and premises located within
the Township in order that they may perform their duty of safe-guarding
the health and safety of the occupants of dwellings and of the general
public. For the purposes of making such inspections the Health Officer,
the Construction Official and the Housing Inspector are hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all
dwellings, dwelling units and premises. The owner or occupant of every
dwelling, dwelling unit or the person in charge thereof shall give such
officers free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit and its premises, at
all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection, examination
and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall give the owner, or
his agent or employee, access to any part of the dwelling or dwelling
unit or its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making
such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with
the provision of this section or with any lawful rule or regulation
adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provision of this
section.
A. Whenever the Health Officer, the Construction Official or the Housing
Inspector determines that there exists a violation of any of the
provisions of this section or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
therefor, he shall give notice of such violation to the owner, landlord,
tenant or occupant responsible therefor.
B. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
§ 220-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-4
1:323
§ 220-5. Hearings.
Any person affected by any notice issued in connection with the
enforcement of any provisions of this section, or of any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter before the Health Officer; provided, that such person shall file in
the office of the Health Officer a written petition requesting such hearing
and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within 10 days
after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition the
Health Officer shall set a time and place for such hearing, and shall give the
petitioner written notice thereof. The hearing shall be held not less than one
week, nor more than two weeks, after the date on which the petition was
filed; provided, that upon application by the petitioner, the Health Officer
may postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such
two-week period, if in his judgment the petitioner has submitted a good and
sufficient reason for such postponement.
§ 220-6. Orders of Health Officer.
After such hearing the Health Officer shall sustain, modify or withdraw
the notice. If the Health Officer sustains or modifies such notice, it shall
become an order, and the reasonable time set for corrections shall begin
to run on the date the notice is sustained or modified. Any notice served
pursuant to this section shall otherwise automatically become an order
if a written petition for a hearing is not filed in the office of the Health
Officer within 10 days after such notice is served. The proceedings at such
hearings, including the findings and decisions of the Health Officer, shall be
summarized, reduced to writing and entered as a matter of public record
in the office of the Health Officer. Such record shall also include a copy of
every notice or order issued in connection with the premises concerned.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Health Officer may seek relief
therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction as provided by the laws of
this State.
§ 220-7. Emergency orders.
Whenever the Health Officer finds that an emergency exists which requires
immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without notice or
hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and
(2) Contain a statement of the violation existing in the dwelling or
dwelling unit.
(3) Specify a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, in which the
violation shall be abated, corrected or eliminated;
(4) Be served upon the owner or his agent, the landlord, the tenant or
the occupant personally, or by registered or certified mail
addressed to him at his last known address or by posting a copy
thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the dwelling or dwelling
unit affected by such notice.
§ 220-4 LAWRENCE CODE § 220-7
1:324
requiring that such action be taken as he reasonably deems necessary.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section, such order shall
be effective immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall
comply therewith immediately, but upon petition to the Health Officer shall
be afforded a hearing as soon as possible.
§ 220-8. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Division of Health is hereby authorized to make and adopt such written
rules and regulations as may be deemed necessary for the enforcement
of the provisions of this section; provided, that such rules and regulations
shall not conflict with the provisions of this or any other ordinance, nor
in anywise alter, amend or supersede any of the provisions thereof. The
Division of Health shall file a certified copy of such rules and regulations
with the Township Clerk.
§ 220-9. Maintenance; responsibilities of owner.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner of any dwelling:
A. To keep and maintain the exterior of the dwelling and masonry walls,
clapboards, shingles, exterior studs, main cornices, foundation wall,
wood sills, corner posts, wood plates, supporting rafters, roofing boards
and covering; the stoops and porches, flooring, railings, stair treads;
the risers, posts, handrails, balustrades and newels; window sash,
frames, sills, stools and apron; the doors and door frames, the fire
escapes, flooring, railings, ladders, passageways, weights, chains,
stairs; and the joists and crossbeams of every dwelling structurally
sound;
B. To keep the roof, and every part thereof, structurally sound and free
from leakage;
C. To keep and maintain the interior of every dwelling, including the
doors, walls, floors, ceiling, halls, stairs, stairways, attics, cellars,
basement, basement hatchway, plumbing fixtures, heating plants,
including chimneys, smokepipes and flues and all supplied utilities,
facilities and equipment structurally sound;
D. To refrain from shutting off or causing to have discontinued or
disconnected supplied utilities for any occupied dwelling or dwelling
unit, except where such interruption of utility service is necessary while
in the actual process of making repairs, or during temporary
emergencies for which repairs are being arranged;
E. To keep the dwelling free from vermin and rodents;
F. Not to use or permit to be used for sleeping purposes any room in any
dwelling where the cubic capacity for each person of the age of 12
years or over is less than 450 cubic feet and for each child under 12
years of age is less than 250 cubic feet;
§ 220-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-9
1:325
G. Not to use or permit to be used as a sleeping room any room in any
dwelling unless at least 1/2 of the floor area of such room shall have a
ceiling height of at least seven feet;
H. Not to use or permit to be used any cellar space, lobby, hallway, closet,
bathroom or kitchen as a sleeping room;
I. Not to occupy or allow or permit another person to occupy any dwelling
for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the
following requirements:
(1) Every habitable room shall have a window or skylight with an area
not less than 1/12 of the floor area of such room opening directly to
the outdoors, which can easily be opened. A habitable room in an
existing dwelling shall be deemed to comply with this section if it
has an opening, without a door or other closure for the opening, to
an adjoining room having such window or skylight area;
(2) Every bathroom which does not comply with Subsection I(1) of this
section shall be provided with artificial ventilation capable of
producing a complete change of air at least five times every hour;
(3) All electrical outlets, fixtures and facilities shall be properly
installed, shall be maintained in safe condition and shall be
connected to the source of electric power in a safe and proper
manner. Every dwelling unit within 300 feet of a power line shall be
supplied with electricity. Every habitable room shall contain at
least two separate floor or wall-type electric outlets, or one such
outlet and one ceiling-type electric light fixture. Every water closet
compartment, bathroom, laundry room, furnace room, hallway and
stairway shall contain at least one supplied ceiling or wall-type
electric light fixture, in safe condition. No temporary wiring may be
used except adequate extension cords which run directly from
portable electric fixtures to outlets and which do not lie beneath
floor-covering materials or extend through doorways, transoms or
other similar apertures or through structural elements, and no
electric circuit shall be overloaded as a result of facilities or
appliances which operate at wattages in excess of wire or circuit
capacity;
(4) Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working
condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system in
compliance with the Construction and Health Codes of the
Township;
(5) Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a
person within the room and which is equipped with a flush water
closet and lavatory basin in good working condition and properly
connected to a water and sewer system in compliance with the
Construction and Health Codes of the Township. The floor of such
room shall be as reasonably impervious to water as necessary to
facilitate its maintenance in a clean and sanitary condition;
§ 220-9 LAWRENCE CODE § 220-9
1:326
§ 220-10. Responsibilities of tenant.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the tenant or occupant of any
dwelling:
(6) Every dwelling unit shall have an adequate supply of potable
running water with a minimum rate of flow at every faucet or
fixture of not less than one gallon per minute.
J. Not to lease any dwelling unit:
(1) Which does not contain within a room which affords privacy to a
person within the room, a bathtub or shower in good working
condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system in
compliance with the Construction and Health Codes of the
Township;
(2) Which does not have water heating facilities which are properly
installed, are properly connected with the hot water lines to every
kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub and shower required by this
chapter which are maintained in safe working condition and which
are capable of heating water at all times to such a temperature as
to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every
required fixture, at a temperature of not less than 120° F.;
(3) Which is not connected to or does not have a properly installed and
functioning heating system which complies with the Construction,
Health and Fire Prevention Codes of the Township, and which will
supply heat to the dwelling unit safely and regularly to a constant
temperature of at least 68° F. under all cold weather conditions;
(4) In which each habitable room is not supplied with at least one
window screen of not less than 16 mesh per inch.
K. In any building the whole or part of which is occupied by a tenant:
(1) To keep the side walls and ceilings and every habitable room, hall,
closet and compartment retained under the owner's control or used
by more than one tenant reasonably clean and reasonably free of
cracks;
(2) To keep every part thereof retained under the owner's control or
used by more than one tenant including the basement, cellar, halls,
stairs, landings, porches, floors, fire escapes, courts, yards, alleys,
areaways and passageways reasonably clean and free of filth,
ashes, garbage, rubbish, refuse, junk, soil matter, drainage water,
slop, wood, paper and other material of a putrefactive or
combustible nature and free of fire and accident hazards.
A. To keep the dwelling and premises or portion thereof under his
exclusive control:
(1) In a sanitary condition;
§ 220-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 220-10
1:327
§ 220-11. Effect of conflicting provisions.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health ordinance or Code
of the Township, the provision which establishes the higher standard for
the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall
prevail.
Chapter 237
LOITERING
§ 237-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOITERING — Remaining idle in essentially one location, including
spending time idly, loafing or walking about aimlessly.
PARENT or GUARDIAN — Any adult person having care or custody of a
minor, whether by reason of blood relationship, the order of any court or
otherwise.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public has access, including
any street, highway, road, alley or sidewalk. It shall also include the front
or neighborhood of any store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of
business and public grounds, areas and parks, as well as parking lots or
other vacant private property not owned by or under the control of the
(2) Free from vermin and rodents;
(3) Free of filth, ashes, garbage, rubbish, refuse, junk, soil matter,
drainage water, slop, wood, paper and other material of a
putrefactive or combustible nature.
B. To place all garbage and refuse in proper containers;
C. To maintain all plumbing fixtures over which he has exclusive control in
a sanitary condition;
D. Not to use or authorize to be used for sleeping purposes:
(1) Any room where the cubic content for each person of the age of 12
years or over is less than 450 cubic feet and for each child under 12
years of age is less than 250 cubic feet;
(2) Any room unless at least 1/2 of the floor area of such room shall
have a ceiling height of at least seven feet;
(3) Any cellar space, lobby, hallway, closet, bathroom or kitchen;
(4) Any room which does not comply with the requirements of § 220-9I.
§ 220-10 LAWRENCE CODE § 237-1
1:328
person charged with violating this chapter, or in the case of a minor, not
owned or under the control of his parent or guardian.
§ 237-2. Prohibited acts.
No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
§ 237-3. Discretion of Police Officer; order to leave; violation.
Whenever any Police Officer shall, in the exercise of reasonable judgment,
decide that the presence of any person in any public place is causing or is
likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in § 237-2, he may, if he
deems it necessary for the preservation of the public peace and safety, order
that person to lease that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after
being ordered to do so by a Police Officer shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
§ 237-4. Responsibility of parent or guardian.
No parent or guardian of a minor under the age of 18 years shall knowingly
permit that minor to loiter in violation of this chapter.
§ 237-5. Notice of violation to parent or guardian.
Whenever any minor under the age of 18 years is charged with a violation
of this chapter, his parent or guardian shall be notified of this fact by the
Chief of Police or any other person designated by him to give such notice.
§ 237-6. Repeated offenses; presumption of knowledge.
If, at any time within 30 days following the giving of notice as provided in
§ 273-5, the minor to whom such notice relates again violates this section, it
shall be presumed in the absence of evidence to the contrary that the minor
did so with the knowledge and permission of his parent or guardian.
Chapter 244
MASSAGE AND SOMATIC THERAPY ESTABLISHMENTS
A. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace:
B. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person.
C. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles.
D. Obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place as defined in § 237-1. This subsection shall include the making of
unsolicited remarks of an offensive, disgusting or insulting nature or
which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person to whom, or in
whose hearing, they are made.
§ 237-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-1
1:329
§ 244-1. Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared that the business of operating a massage business, as
defined in this chapter, is a business affecting the public health, safety and
general welfare.
§ 244-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPIST — Any person licensed
pursuant to the provisions of the Massage and Bodywork Therapist
Licensing Act, N.J.S.A. 45:11-53.
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND SOMATIC THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT —
Any establishment wherein massage, bodywork and/or somatic therapies
are administered or are permitted to be administered, when such therapies
are administered for any form of consideration.
MASSAGE, BODYWORK AND/OR SOMATIC THERAPIES — Any systems of
activity of structured touch which include, but are not limited to, holding,
applying pressure, stroking, kneading, positioning and mobilizing soft
tissue of the body by manual technique and use of visual, kinesthetic,
auditory and palpating skills to assess the body for purposes of applying
therapeutic massage, bodywork or somatic principles. Such applications
may include, but are not limited to, the use of therapies such as
heliotherapy or hydrotherapy, the use of moist hot and cold external
applications, external application of herbal or topical preparations not
classified as prescription drugs, movement and neuromyofacial education
and education in self-care and stress management massage, bodywork and
somatic therapies do not include the diagnosis or treatment of illness,
disease, impairment or disability.
§ 244-3. Nonlicensed therapists prohibited.
The administering of massage, bodywork and/or somatic therapies for any
form of consideration by any person not licensed by the State of New
Jersey pursuant to the Massage and Bodywork Therapist Licensing Act, P.L.
1999 c. 19, amended 2007, c. 337 (N.J.S.A. 45:11-53), shall be prohibited
throughout the Township of Lawrence.
§ 244-4. License required.
Establishment: No person, firm or corporation shall operate any
establishment or utilize any premises in the Township of Lawrence as or
for a massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment unless or
until such person, firm or corporation has obtained a license for such
establishment or premises from the Municipal Clerk in accordance with the
terms and provisions of this chapter.
§ 244-5. Renewals.
§ 244-1 LAWRENCE CODE § 244-5
1:330
§ 244-6. Application for license.
Establishment: Any person desiring a massage, bodywork and somatic
therapy establishment license shall file a written application with the
Municipal Clerk upon a form provided by the Clerk. The application form
shall contain the following information:
A. All licenses shall be valid for a period of three years from the date of
issuance.
B. Licensees may renew their licenses prior to expiration by filing a new
application with the Municipal Clerk in the manner prescribed in this
chapter and accompanied by the requisite fee.
C. All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at the end of the
respective calendar year. Renewal applications are due by November 1
of that year the license expires.
A. The type of ownership of the business, i.e., whether individual,
partnership, corporation or otherwise.
B. The name, style and designation under which the business is to be
conducted.
C. The business address and all telephone numbers, including facsimile,
where business is to be conducted.
D. A complete list of the names and residence addresses of all massage,
bodywork and somatic therapists and employees of the business and
the name and residence address of the manager or other person
principally in charge of the operation of the business.
E. A sworn statement indicating that all massage, bodywork and somatic
therapists employed or to be employed by the establishment or
otherwise permitted to work at the establishment have been licensed by
the State of New Jersey pursuant to the Massage and Bodywork
Therapist Licensing Act, P.L. 1999 c. 19, amended 2007, c. 337 (N.J.S.A.
45:11-53).
F. The following personal information concerning the applicant (s), if an
individual; concerning each stockholder holding more than 10% of the
stock of the corporation, each officer and each director, if the applicant
is a corporation; concerning the partners, including limited partners, if
the applicant is a partnership; and concerning the manager or other
person principally in charge of the operation of the business shall be
provided:
(1) The name, complete residence address and residence telephone
number.
(2) The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant.
§ 244-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:331
§ 244-7. Inspection requirements.
(3) Written proof of age.
(4) Height, weight, sex, color of hair and eyes.
(5) Two front-face portrait photographs taken within 30 days of the
date of the application and at least two inches by two inches in size.
(6) Provide any massage therapy or similar business history and
experience, including, but not limited to, whether or not such
person has previously operated in this or another municipality or
state under a license or permit or has had such license or permit
denied, revoked or suspended and the reason therefore and the
business activities or occupations subsequent to such action or
denial, suspension or revocation.
(7) All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
fully disclosing the jurisdiction in which convicted and the offense
for which convicted and circumstances thereof. The applicant shall
execute a waiver and consent to allow a criminal background check
by the Lawrence Township Police Division. Failure to execute such
a waiver and consent shall result in a denial of a license.
(8) The names and addresses of three adult residents who will serve as
character references. These references must be persons other than
relatives and business associates.
(9) The fingerprints of the applicant(s).
G. At the time the application is filed, a fee as established in § 244-20,
Fees, shall be paid to the Township Clerk to cover the cost of processing
the application and investigating the facts stated therein.
A. The Municipal Clerk, upon receiving an application for a massage,
bodywork and somatic therapy establishment license, shall refer the
application to the various municipal departments (Division of Code
Enforcement, Zoning, Health, and Emergency Services) for review and
conformance with applicable State and Township Codes for such an
establishment.
B. No massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment shall be
issued a license or be operated, established or maintained in the
Township unless inspections by the appropriate municipal departments
reveals that the establishment complies with the minimum
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code and Health Codes for
businesses operating in the Township of Lawrence. In addition, the
establishment must comply with each of the following minimum
requirements:
§ 244-6 LAWRENCE CODE § 244-7
1:332
§ 244-8. Investigating and issuance of license.
(1) All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas
and floors shall be constructed of material with surfaces which are
smooth, non-absorbent, and which may be readily disinfected.
(2) A public restroom shall be available to clients and employees
during all business hours.
(3) Water closets and lavatories shall be in conformance with the
regulations set forth in the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code,
N.J.A.C. 5:23.
(4) If bathing, dressing and locker facilities are provided for the
patrons and male and female patrons are served simultaneously,
separate bathing, dressing, locker and massage room facilities
shall be provided.
(5) The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting
nondisposable instruments and materials used in administering
massages. Such nondisposable instruments and materials shall be
disinfected after use on each patron.
(6) Adequate hand washing facilities shall be conveniently located to
each treatment area to maintain clean hands and arms of all
employees before, after and during treatments.
(7) Hand sinks shall be provided with hot and cold water capable of
delivering running water under pressure at a temperature of 90° F.
to 110° F.
A. When said application is properly filled out, signed by the applicant and
has been filed with the Municipal Clerk with all accompanying
information, the application shall be referred by the Clerk to the
Township Police Division. The Chief of Police or his or her designee
shall investigate the information available as to the applicant's business
and good moral character of the applicant as deemed necessary for the
protections of the public health, welfare and safety.
B. If as a result of such investigation the applicant's character or business
responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory or that the issuance of a
license to the applicant would present a danger to the public health,
welfare or safety, the Chief of Police shall endorse on such application
his disapproval and reasons for same and return the application to the
Township Clerk, who shall notify the applicant that the application is
disapproved.
C. If as a result of such investigation the character and business
responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory and the
issuance of the license to the applicant will present no danger to the
public health, safety and welfare, the Chief of Police shall indicate his
§ 244-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-8
1:333
§ 244-9. Revocation of license.
§ 244-10. Criteria for immediate closure.
The licenses issued under this chapter may be immediately suspended by
the Chief of Police for the following reasons:
approval on the application and return the application to the Township
Clerk, who shall execute and deliver to the applicant the license.
A. Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked by the Chief of
Police, after notice and a hearing, for any of the following causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement in the application for
the license.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
carrying on the licensed business in the Township.
(3) If the Chief of Police, Health Officer or their designee is denied
access to the premises for the purpose of conducting an inspection.
(4) Any violation of this chapter.
(5) Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude, a felony, an offense
involving sexual misconduct, keeping or residing in a house of
prostitution, and any crime involving dishonesty.
(6) Conducting the licensed business in the Township in an unlawful
manner or in such a manner as to constitute a menace to the
health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. Notice of the hearing for the revocation of a license shall be given in
writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the
time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be given personally or
mailed to the licensee at his/her last known address at least five days
prior to the date set for the hearing. (See § 244-18, Relicensing after
revocation.)
C. Such license may, pending revocation proceedings, be suspended for
not more than 10 days by the Chief of Police if, in his/her opinion, the
conduct of the licensee is detrimental to the health, safety and general
welfare of the Township of Lawrence.
D. The Chief of Police, or his or her designee, shall serve as hearing officer
for any hearing pursuant to this subsection.
A. Massage, bodywork or somatic therapy is provided by unlicensed
therapist.
B. Unsanitary or unsafe conditions which may adversely impact the health
and/or safety of the public.
§ 244-8 LAWRENCE CODE § 244-11
1:334
§ 244-11. Display of license.
The massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment shall display
its license as well as the New Jersey license of each and every massage,
bodywork and somatic therapist employed in the establishment in an open
and conspicuous place on the premises of the establishment.
§ 244-12. Operating requirements.
Every massage, bodywork, and somatic therapy establishment shall comply
with the following:
A. Every portion of the massage, bodywork, and somatic therapy
establishment, including appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean
and operated in a sanitary condition. A broad spectrum antimicrobial
disinfectant shall be used.
B. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted (brochures or
price list) in the reception area in a location available to all prospective
customers.
C. All employees, including massage, bodywork, and somatic therapists,
shall be clean and wear clean, nontransparent outer garments.
Dressing rooms must be available on the premises. Doors to such
dressing rooms shall open inward, be self-closing, and nonlockable.
D. Hand-wash sink shall be used solely for the washing of hands, arms and
other parts of the body.
E. Hand-sinks shall be supplied with liquid soap and disposable hand
towels at all times.
F. Every area of the establishment shall be provided with lighting capable
of providing a minimum of 50 footcandles of artificial light. Lighting
may be dimmed during treatment sessions.
G. Massage tables shall be maintained in good condition and free of rips or
tears.
H. Toilet paper, covered trash, liquid hand soap and disposable paper
towels or alternate means of hand drying shall be provided in rest
rooms.
I. All massage bodywork and somatic therapy establishments shall be
provided with clean laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity
which shall be laundered after each use thereof and stored in a sanitary
manner.
J. Soiled linens and draping materials shall be either commercially
laundered or washed on site in a clothes washing machine, in hot water
with detergent and at least one cup of bleach or an antibacterial agent,
and dried on the high heat setting in a clothes dryer.
§ 244-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-12
1:335
§ 244-13. Inspections by Police Division or Health Department.
K. Linens used in a licensed establishment may not be laundered in a
private home.
L. Closed containers shall be provided for soiled linens.
M. The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels, cloths
or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or massage,
bodywork or somatic therapist.
N. No massage, bodywork or somatic therapy shall be knowingly served on
any patron infected with any fungus or other skin infection, nor shall
service be performed on any patron exhibiting skin inflammation or
eruptions unless a duly licensed physician has certified that person may
be safely served.
O. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly, in a massage, bodywork,
and somatic therapy establishment, to place his or her hand upon or
touch with any part of his or her body, to fondle in any manner or to
massage a sexual or genital area of any other person. No massage,
bodywork and somatic therapist, employee or operator shall perform or
offer to perform any act which would require the touching of the
patron's sexual or genital area.
P. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all
other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat-rooms, steam or vapor
rooms or steam or vapor cabinets and shower compartments and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in
operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each
use. When carpeting is used on the floors it shall be kept dry.
Q. Oils, creams, lotions and other preparations used in administering
massage, bodywork and somatic therapies shall be kept in clean closed
containers or cabinets.
R. Animals, except for Seeing Eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the
massage work area.
S. Each massage, bodywork and somatic therapist shall wash his or her
hands in hot running water, using a proper soap or disinfectant before
administering a massage.
A. The Chief of Police and Health Officer and/or their designees are
authorized to conduct random inspections of massage, bodywork and
somatic therapy establishments granted a permit under the provisions
of this chapter for the purpose of determining whether the provisions of
this chapter are being compiled with. Such inspections shall be
unannounced but shall be made at reasonable times and in a reasonable
manner. It shall be unlawful for any licensee or employee of the licensee
§ 244-12 LAWRENCE CODE § 244-13
1:336
§ 244-14. Sleeping quarters.
No part of any quarters of any massage, bodywork and somatic therapy
establishment shall be used for or connected with any bedroom or sleeping
quarters nor may any person sleep in such massage, bodywork and somatic
therapy establishment except for limited periods incidental to and directly
related to a massage, bodywork or somatic therapy treatment or bath. This
provision shall not preclude the location of massage, bodywork and somatic
therapy establishment in separate quarters of a building housing a hotel or
other separate businesses or clubs.
§ 244-15. Prohibited acts.
§ 244-16. Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to massage, bodywork or
somatic therapies given:
to fail to allow such inspection officer access to the premises or to
hinder such officer in any manner.
B. The operator shall permit access to all parts of the establishment and
all pertinent records required for the inspection shall be made available
to the health authority representative for review.
A. No owner or manager of a massage, bodywork and somatic therapy
establishment shall tolerate in his or her establishment any activity or
behavior prohibited by the laws of the State of New Jersey, particularly,
but not limited to, laws proscribing prostitution, indecency and
obscenity, including the sale, uttering or exposing and public
communication of obscene material; laws which relate to the
commission of sodomy, adultery and proscribing fornication, nor shall
any owner or manager tolerate in his or her establishment any activity
or behavior which violates this chapter.
B. Any conviction of any employee of a massage, bodywork and somatic
therapy establishment of a violation of the aforementioned statutes and
codes may devolve upon the owner or manager of such establishment, it
being specifically declared that following such conviction of an
employee, the owner or manager of the establishment may be
prosecuted as an accessory to such violation and the licenses which
have been issued may be automatically revoked.
A. In the office of licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist; or
B. By a regularly established medical center, hospital or sanitarium having
a staff which includes licensed physicians, chiropractors and/or
physical therapists; or
C. By any licensed physician, chiropractor or physical therapist in the
residence of his or her patient; or
§ 244-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-16
1:337
§ 244-17. Violations and penalties.
In addition to the revocation or suspension of the license granted under this
chapter any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to a fine in the amount no lower than $500 and no more than $2,000 as
determined by the Municipal Court Judge.
§ 244-18. Relicensing after revocation.
§ 244-19. Service of notices.
Whenever notice is required or permitted to be given by this chapter, such
notice may be effected by personal service upon the licensee if an individual
or any general partner, if a partnership, or upon any corporate officer, if a
corporation, or alternatively, to any of foregoing, by certified mall, return
receipt requested, to the last address listed in the Township Clerk's office
in conjunction with the license information. It shall be the duty of each
licensee to keep the Township advised of any subsequent change of address.
Upon failure of a licensee to comply with this requirement, any notice
returned with the notation "unknown," "moved," or "not claimed" shall be
deemed proper service of all notices required by this chapter.
§ 244-20. Fees.
D. By a licensed barber or cosmetologist/hairstylist limited to the areas of
the face, neck, scalp or upper part of the body as set forth in the
Cosmetology and Hairstyling Act of 1984, N.J.S.A. 45:5B-1 et seq.
A. Any person whose license has been revoked under the provisions of
§ 244-12 may apply to be relicensed upon filing of proof that all loss
caused by the actor or omissions for which the license was revoked had
been fully satisfied and that all conditions imposed by the decision of
the revocation have been complied with.
B. Payment of a registration fee as established in § 244-20.
A. Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate or conduct a
massage, bodywork and somatic therapy establishment shall file an
application with the Municipal Clerk upon a form provided by the Clerk
and pay a fee of $400, which shall be nonrefundable, unless the
applicant voluntarily withdraws the application within five days of
filing, and can demonstrate that it has not operated the business for
which the application is pending during said five-day period; in which
event, $150 shall not be refundable.
B. Fingerprinting. An additional fee for the amount set by the state (and
subject to change by the state) shall be submitted for processing of
fingerprints.
§ 244-16 LAWRENCE CODE § 244-21
1:338
§ 244-21. Severability.
In the event that any portion of this chapter is found to be invalid for
any reason by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be
limited in its effect only to the portion of the chapter actually adjudged to be
invalid, and the remaining portions of this chapter deemed severable there
from and shall not be affected.
Chapter 252
MOTOR VEHICLE DEALERS
§ 252-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NEW MOTOR VEHICLE DEALER — A dealer authorized by a manufacturer
of new motor vehicles, including, but not limited to, trucks, all as defined
more particularly in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 and 39:10-2 and motorcycles, as defined
in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1, or by the manufacturer's distributors, agents or
representatives, to deal in the manufacturers products, and otherwise to
engage in the business herein regulated and licensed and who does engage
in such business during the annual licensing period in the Township, and
shall also include the right to engage in the business of used motor vehicle
dealer without separate licensing or payment of additional fees.
USED MOTOR VEHICLE DEALER — A dealer in motor vehicles, which
term shall be deemed to include used motorcycles in all instances hereafter
referred to in this paragraph who engages in the business herein regulated
and licensed during the annual licensing period in the Township, but whose
business is not authorized by any manufacturer of new motor vehicles,
directly or indirectly, to deal in its products and consists primarily in trading
in motor vehicles previously purchased, used and resold by ultimate
consumers, such as are defined as a "used motor vehicle" in N.J.S.A.
39:10-2.
§ 252-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any lands or premises, whether
improved or unimproved, in the Township for the sale, display, exchange
or storage for sale of used or new motor vehicles without first obtaining a
license, as provided in this chapter, and no such business shall be conducted
except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A separate license
shall be required for each separate place of business.
§ 252-3. Application.
A. Every applicant for a license to engage in a business under this chapter
shall file with the Township Clerk, together with the license fee
required by this chapter, a written application, signed and sworn to by
§ 244-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-3
1:339
§ 252-4. Fees.
The license fees under this chapter may be found in Chapter 156, Fees, of
this Code.
§ 252-5. Limitation on number of used motor vehicle dealers'
licenses. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
The number of used motor vehicle dealers in the Township and licensed
under this chapter shall not exceed the number holding current licenses
from the Motor Vehicle Commission of the state, in the case of used
automobile dealers, to engage in such business, and who are in fact actively
engaging in such business on the date of initial publication and on the
the applicant, or by an authorized officer of the applicant if a
corporation, which application shall state:
(1) The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm or corporation
the names and addresses of the partners or officers and the
registered agent, as the case may be. If the business is to be
conducted under a trade name, such name shall be stated in the
application.
(2) The place of previous employment or occupation of the applicant,
or of the partners or officers, as the case may be, and whether or
not the applicant, partners or officers have ever been convicted of a
crime.
(3) The detailed nature of the business to be conducted.
(4) A sketch of the premises upon which the business is to be
conducted, showing dimensions and frontages on streets, the
distance to the nearest street intersecting the street upon which
the premises front if an interior lot and, if a corner lot, showing the
streets upon which the lot fronts, and also showing existing or
proposed entrances or exits to the premises; and if a building exists
on the premises, showing the location of the same, or of any
proposed building and its type and dimensions.
(5) If the applicant is not the owner of the premises where the business
is to be conducted, the property owner's consent to the carrying on
of the business shall be endorsed on the application.
B. The application forms shall be prepared by the Township Clerk and be
made available to applicants. The Township Clerk may require such
information from the applicant in addition to that provided for in this
section, as he may deem necessary and proper to the application,
including, without limitation, proof that the applicant has been, or will
be prior to the commencement of business, licensed by the State Motor
Vehicle Commission pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:10-19. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 252-3 LAWRENCE CODE § 252-5
1:340
effective date of this chapter and in the case of used motor vehicle dealers
shall not exceed three, provided that the foregoing shall not prevent any
licensed new motor vehicle dealer at any time from also carrying on the
business of used motor vehicle dealer without separate licensing or
payment of additional fees.
§ 252-6. Term; transferability.
§ 252-7. Suspension or revocation.
Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked for
false statements contained in the application, for violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, for commission of a crime or maintenance of
a nuisance on the licensed premises or in the operation of the licensed
business or for any other good cause by the Township Council after 10
days' notice in writing of and then a hearing on the charges before the
Township Council. No license so revoked shall be reissued except for good
and sufficient reasons shown by the applicant. Notice shall be deemed
sufficient if mailed by certified mail to the address of the licensed premises
shown on the most recent annual license application or by personal service
upon anyone in charge of the licensed premises during normal hours of
business.
§ 252-8. Regulations governing operation of lot.
A. All licenses whenever applied for or issued shall be valid for a term of
one year beginning the first day of October in each year, and expiring
on the 30th day of September in the following year. Applications for
initial licenses received after October 1 in any year shall be eligible for
a license for the balance of the licensing year, through the next
September 30, and, if received after April 1 in any year, shall also
receive a 1/2 reduction in the fee payable for the balance of that initial
licensing year.
B. All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall become null and void
automatically upon the effective date of any sale, conveyance or other
hypothecation of the business herein licensed unless a transfer license
be first applied for by and issued to the successors in interest. No
additional fee shall be required upon the transfer of any such existing
valid license, nor shall any sale or transfer for the unexpired balance of
the term of the license approved for transfer. A license which has lapsed
for any reason shall not be re-issued except upon payment of the full fee
for the entire current licensing year, as well as compliance with all
other pertinent requirements of this chapter applicable to an initial
license.
A. The holder of each license issued under this chapter shall comply with
the following requirements and each lot licensed under this chapter
shall be subject to the following conditions and provisions, and failure
to comply with any of same or the violation of any of same shall
§ 252-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 252-8
1:341
constitute good cause to have such license suspended or revoked by the
Township Council.
(1) Each licensed area shall be enclosed by a bumper rail of sturdy
permanent construction erected to a height sufficient to prevent
motor vehicles from intruding onto the sidewalk or street beyond
the property line of the lot.
(2) All motor vehicles which are displayed for sale or exchange shall at
all times be parked or stored on the licensed lot and shall at no time
be permitted to stand or be parked on the sidewalks or in the
streets or roadways of the Township either in front of or adjacent to
the licensed premises, or elsewhere.
(3) There shall be no openings for entrance or exit to or from the lot
along the street line on which the same abuts except where the
street curb has been lowered in accordance with the ordinances of
the Township and only at such locations and in such manner as may
be approved by the Township Engineer and Chief of Police.
(4) Whenever artificial lighting is used on the licensed premises, the
same shall be so erected and maintained that no disturbing glare
will be visible to adjacent property owners or to motorists using the
public streets, and no colored bulbs shall be permitted in the
lighting that may in any way be mistaken for or confused with
traffic lights or signals. All such lighting shall be turned off by
10:00 p.m. and all day on Sunday; except that the licensee may
maintain thereafter only sufficient light to afford protection to the
merchandise stored on the lot.
(5) Each such licensed lot shall be surfaced with cracked stone,
concrete or asphaltic mix in a manner to be approved by the
Township Engineer.
(6) The surface of such licensed premises shall be so constructed as to
provide sufficient drainage to prevent an accumulation of water
thereon and in no instance will the open drainage of water over any
sidewalk be permitted. Such drainage is to be performed in a
manner to be approved by the Township Engineer.
(7) The operation of any such lot, and the sale or exchange of motor
vehicles thereon, is hereby prohibited between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the following day during weekdays, and shall
be prohibited on Sundays.
B. Subsection A(1), (5) and (6) of this section shall not apply to dealers
only in new or used motorcycles whose plans provide for the storage,
whether for sale or display, of motorcycles only within an enclosed
building structure.
§ 252-8 LAWRENCE CODE § 252-9
1:342
§ 252-9. Resolutions of Township Council.
No license under this chapter shall be issued, renewed, assigned or
transferred except by resolution of the Township Council.
Chapter 258
NOISE
§ 258-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONSTRUCTION — Any site preparation, assembly, erection, repair,
alteration or similar action, but excluding demolition of buildings or
structures.
DEMOLITION — Any dismantling, intentional destruction, or removal of
buildings or structures.
MOTOR VEHICLE — Any vehicle that is propelled or drawn on land by an
engine or motor, such as, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, trailers,
semi-trailers, campers, go-carts, snowmobiles, amphibious craft on land,
dune buggies, or racing vehicles, but not motorcycles.
MOTORCYCLE — An unenclosed motor vehicle having a saddle for the
use of the operator and two or three wheels in contact with the ground,
including, but not limited to, motor scooters, mopeds and mini-bikes.
MUFFLER — A sound dissipative device or system for abating the sound of
escaping gases of an internal combustion engine.
NOISE — Any sounds of such level and duration as to be or tend to
be injurious to human health or welfare, or which would unreasonably
interfere with the enjoyment of life, or property throughout the Township or
in any portions thereof, but excludes all aspects of the employer-employee
relationship concerning health and safety hazards within the confines of a
place of employment.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound that:
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust
or other legal entity, or any combination thereof.
§ 258-2. Excessive noise prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for a person to make, continue, or cause to be made or
continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, or any noise which does
A. Endangers the safety or health of any person; or
B. Disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities; or
C. Endangers personal or real property.
§ 252-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-2
1:343
or is likely to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health,
peace or safety of others.
§ 258-3. Examples of excessive noise.
The following acts are hereby declared to be examples of excessive, loud,
disturbing and unnecessary noise in violation of this chapter. This
enumeration is intended only to give typical illustrations of prohibited noise
and shall not be construed as exclusive:
A. Radios; televisions; electronic sound reproduction devices. The playing,
use or operation of any radio receiving set, television, musical
instrument, phonograph, compact disc player or cassette tape player or
other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in
such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of
neighboring inhabitants by an unreasonable extent or with louder
volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for persons who are in
the room, vehicle or chamber in which the machine or device is
operated and who are voluntary listeners. The operation of such a set,
instrument, phonograph, machine, radio, or device so that it is clearly
audible at a distance of 100 feet from the building, structure or vehicle
in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this
chapter.
B. Use of loudspeakers or amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating
or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set,
musical instrument, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or
device for the producing or reproducing of sound between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the following day.
C. Yelling; shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the
public streets, particularly between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m., or at any time or place, which annoys or disturbs the quiet,
comfort or repose of a reasonable person in any office, dwelling, hotel,
motel or other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity.
D. Animals; birds. The keeping of animals or birds which, by causing
frequent or long-continued noise, disturbs the comfort or repose of any
person in the vicinity. (For the purpose of this chapter, a noise
disturbance from a barking dog shall be defined as that created by a
dog barking continually for 10 minutes or intermittently for 30 minutes
unless provoked.)
E. Horns. The sounding of any horn or warning device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except when required by law or when
necessary to give timely warning of the approach of the vehicle, or as a
warning of impeding danger to persons driving other vehicles or to
persons upon the street. No person shall sound any horn or warning
device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle which shall
emit an unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or for any unnecessary or
unreasonable period of time.
§ 258-2 LAWRENCE CODE § 258-3
1:344
F. Muffler. The operation of any motor vehicle or motorcycle not equipped
with the original muffler and other components or equivalent
replacement in good working order and in constant operation; the
removal or rendering inoperative, other than for purposes of
maintenance, repair, or replacement, any muffler or other exhaust
component on a motor vehicle or motorcycle and such vehicle is
emanating excessive noise.
G. Standing motor vehicles. No person shall operate or permit the
operation of any motor vehicle or any auxiliary equipment attached to
such a vehicle, for a period longer than five minutes in any hour while
the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other than traffic congestion or
emergency work on a public right-of-way or public space within 100
feet of a residential area between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
the following day.
H. Steam whistles/sirens. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to
any stationary boiler or fire at a fixed location, except to give notice of
the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of danger or as a signal
or warning in connection with civil defense, fire or ambulance calls.
I. Bells. The sounding of any bell or gong or the blowing of any whistle
attached to a building or locomotive, except as a warning to prevent
injury to life or property. The sounding of any bell or gong includes both
the mechanical sound of a bell or gong as well as any electronic
reproduction or simulation of such sounds.
J. Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, except
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or
explosive noises from the device.
K. Defective vehicles or loads. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such a manner as to create loud
and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise.
L. Loading or unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other
handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, liquids,
garbage cans, refuse or similar objects, or the pneumatic or pumped
loading or unloading of bulk materials in liquid, gaseous, powder, or
pellet form, or the compacting of refuse by persons engaged in the
business of scavenging or garbage collection, between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day except by permit, when the sound
creates a noise disturbance across a residential real property line.
M. Domestic power tools. Operating or permitting the operation of any
mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool,
lawn mower or lawn tractor or similar device used outdoors in
residential areas between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the
following day as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real
property boundary. The operation of such mechanically powered saw,
drill, sander, grinder, lawn or garden tool or similar device used
§ 258-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-3
1:345
outdoors in residential areas so that it is clearly audible at a distance of
100 feet from the source from which it is located shall be prima facie
evidence of a violation of this chapter.
(1) The operation of snow blowers is permitted between the hours of
9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. under this section if there is an accumulation
of snow and/or ice that would require their use.
N. Construction operations. Excavation, demolition, construction, repair
or alteration work in connection with any building, structure or other
improvement between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the
following day, Monday through Saturday. Excavation, demolition,
construction, repair or alteration work may be conducted on Sundays
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. so as long as such
excavation, demolition, construction, repair or alteration work in
connection with any building, structure or other improvement is not
clearly audible at a distance of 100 feet from the excavation,
demolition, construction, repair or alteration source from which it is
located. The operation of such demolition, construction, repair or
alteration work which can be detected 100 feet from its source from
which it is located on Sundays between the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m. shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
(1) In the case of an urgent necessity or in the interest of public health
or safety, the Township Manager may grant a permit for excavation,
demolition, construction, repair, or alteration work for a period not
to exceed three days during which the emergency continues, and
the permit may be renewed for an additional period of three days
where the emergency continues.
(2) If the construction official or Township Engineer, as the case may
be, shall determine that the public health or safety will not be
impaired by the excavation, demolition, construction, repair or
alteration work of any building, structure or other improvement
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., and/or, if he shall
further determine that substantial loss or inconvenience would
result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such
work to be done between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.,
upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is
awarded or during the progress of the work.
O. Drums. The use of any drums or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance,
show, or sale.
P. Hawkers and peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers
and vendors, which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., or at any time on
Sundays and holidays.
Q. Transportation of metal rails, pillars and columns. The transportation of
rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along
§ 258-3 LAWRENCE CODE § 258-3
1:346
§ 258-4. Noise near schools, churches, courts or hospitals.
The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school,
institution of learning, church or court, while the premises are in use, or
adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the working of
such institution or which disturbs or unduly and reasonably annoys patients
in the hospital, is prohibited, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in
such street indicating that the street is a school, hospital or court street.
§ 258-5. Exceptions.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to apply to:
§ 258-6. Conditions for variance.
streets, other public places, upon carts, drays, cars or trucks or in any
other manner so as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and
quiet of such streets or other public places.
R. Pile drivers and hammers. The operation between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day, Monday through Saturday, of any
pile driver, steam shovel, bulldozer or other earth-moving machinery,
pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance,
the use which is attended by loud or unusual noise.
S. Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or
any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise
due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from
such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a
muffler device sufficient to deaden such noises.
A. The use of bells, chimes, or sound amplifiers by churches in church
activities.
B. Activities of the municipal, county, state, or federal government
departments, or their agents or contractors, in the performance of their
duties, drills, or public demonstrations.
C. Activities in the public parks, playgrounds or public buildings under the
permission or authority of the municipal officials.
D. The use of all farm equipment and farming activities for the purpose of
agricultural means.
E. Any public utility as defined in N.J.S.A. Title 48 or any employees of such
public utility when such public utility or its employees shall be engaged
in performing work to prevent the threatened interruption of its
services or to terminate the interruption of its service rendered to its
customers.
A. Any person who owns or operates any stationary noise source may
apply to the noise control officer for a variance from one or more of the
§ 258-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-6
1:347
provisions of this chapter. Applications for a permit of variance shall
supply information including, but not limited to:
(1) The nature and location of the noise source for which such
application is made;
(2) The reason for which the permit of variance is requested, including
the hardship that will result to the applicant, his client, or the
public if the permit is not granted;
(3) The nature and intensity of noise that will occur during the period
of the variance;
(4) The section or subsections for which the permit of variance shall
apply;
(5) A description of interim noise control measures to be taken by the
applicant to minimize noise and the impacts occurring;
(6) A specific schedule of the noise control measures, which shall be
taken to bring the source into compliance with this chapter within a
reasonable time;
(7) A specific length of time that the stationary noise source will be
produced or continue.
B. Failure to supply the information required by the noise control officer
shall be cause for rejection of the application.
C. A copy of the permit of variance must be kept on file by the Municipal
Clerk for public inspection.
D. The Noise Control Officer may charge the applicant a fee as stated in
Chapter 156 to cover expenses resulting from the processing of the
permit of variance application.
E. The Noise Control Officer may, at his/her discretion, limit the duration
of the permit of variance, which shall be no longer than one year. Any
person holding a permit of variance and requesting an extension of time
shall apply for a new permit of variance under the provisions of this
chapter.
F. No variance shall be approved unless the applicant presents adequate
proof that noise levels occurring during the period of the variance will
not constitute a danger to public health; and compliance with this
chapter would impose an arbitrary or unreasonable hardship upon the
applicant compared to providing a benefit to the public.
G. In making the determination of whether to grant a variance, the Noise
Control Officer shall consider:
(1) The character and degree of injury to, or interference with, the
health and welfare of the reasonable use of property which is
caused or threatened to be caused.
§ 258-6 LAWRENCE CODE § 258-6
1:348
§ 258-7. Enforcement.
(2) The social and economic value of the activity for which the variance
is sought.
(3) The ability of the applicant to apply best practical noise control
measures.
(4) The location of the stationary noise source, such as commercial or
residential area.
H. The permit of variance may be revoked by the Noise Control Officer if
the terms of the permit of variance are violated.
I. A variance may be revoked by the Noise Control Officer if there is:
(1) Violation of one or more conditions of the variance;
(2) Material misrepresentation of fact in the variance application; or
(3) Material change in any of the circumstances relied upon by the
Noise Control Officer in granting the variance.
A. Issuance of summons. Violations of any provision of this chapter shall
be cause for a summons to be issued by the Noise Control Officer, Police
Division, or other designated staff member of the Township of
Lawrence.
B. Abatement orders.
(1) In lieu of issuing a summons, the Noise Control Officer, member of
the Police Division, or other designated staff member may issue an
order requiring abatement of any source of sound alleged to be in
violation of this chapter within a reasonable time period and
according to guidelines which the Noise Control Officer may
prescribe.
(2) An abatement order shall not be issued:
(a) If any person knowingly or purposely violates any provisions of
this chapter; or
(b) If the Noise Control Officer, Police Division member, or other
designated staff member has reason to believe that there will
not be compliance with the abatement order.
C. Penalties.
(1) Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be
subject to a penalty for each offense of not more than $500 except
as provided in Subsection C(2).
§ 258-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 258-7
1:349
§ 258-8. Other remedies.
No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common law
or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy of any person for injury or
damage arising from any violation of this chapter or from other law.
Chapter 265
NUISANCES
§ 265-1. Scope.
An ordinance defining and prohibiting certain matters, things, conditions
or acts and each of them as a nuisance, authorizing the inspection of
premises by an enforcing official, providing for removal or abatement of
certain nuisances and recovery of expenses incurred by the division of
health in removing or abating such nuisances, and prescribing penalties for
violations.
§ 265-2. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement
of this chapter:
ENFORCING OFFICIALS — Includes the health officer or other official
authorized by the Board of Health to enforce this chapter.
PERSON — Includes an individual, firm, corporation, association, society,
partnership, and their agents or employees.
§ 265-3. Nuisances defined and prohibited.
(2) Any person who willfully or knowingly violates any provision of this
chapter shall be subject to a penalty for each offense a sum of not
more than $200.
(3) If the violation is of a continuing nature, each day, or twenty-fourhour
period, during which it occurs, shall constitute an additional,
separate, and distinct offense.
A. The following matters, things, conditions or acts and each of them are
hereby declared to be a nuisance and injurious to the health of the
inhabitants of this municipality.
(1) Pollution, or existence of a condition which causes or threatens
pollution of any waters in this municipality in such a manner as to
cause or threaten injury to any of the inhabitants of this
municipality, either in their health, comfort or property.
(2) The escape into the open air from any stack, vent, chimney or any
entrance to the open air, or from any fire into the open air, of such
quantities of smoke, fly ash, dust, fumes, vapors, mists or gases as
§ 258-7 LAWRENCE CODE § 265-3
1:350
§ 265-4. Inspection of premises.
to cause injury, detriment or annoyance to the inhabitants of this
municipality or endanger their health or safety.
(3) The growth, existence or presence of ragweed on any plot of land,
lot, highway, right-of-way or any other public or private place.
(4) The growth, presence or existence of poison ivy within 20 feet of
any property line.
(5) The existence or presence of any water or other liquid in which
mosquito larvae breed or exist.
(6) The existence or presence of any accumulation of garbage, refuse,
manure or other animal or vegetable matter which may attract files
and to which they may have access, or in which fly larvae or pupae
breed or exist.
(7) Depositing, accumulating or maintaining any matter or thing which
serves as food for insects or rodents and to which they may have
access, or which serves or constitutes a breeding place or
harborage for insects or rodents, in or on any land, premises,
buildings or other place.
(8) The artificial discharge by pumping of water, directly or indirectly,
and whether in conjunction with other fluid substances or not, onto
the surface of public rights-of-way in this municipality except only
(a) with respect to water runoff from the watering of grass, and
shrubbery and the washing of vehicles and windows and other
similar and necessary uses of water for ordinary domestic and
commercial cleansing purposes, (b) with respect to the pumping of
flooded cellars and crawl-spaces and as may otherwise be deemed
necessary to alleviate emergency conditions by fire, police, civil
defense and other public safety agencies, and (c) with respect to
such other pumping as, in the opinion of the municipal engineer, is
necessary to relieve a serious and permanent water condition and
where there are no technologically feasible alternatives, such as
curb connections to an existing stormwater system having
necessary capacity or construction of operable on-site dry wells
having adequate capacity; provided, however, in every such
instance, that the municipal engineer also determines that such
pumping will not result in excessive ponding within or upon public
ways in the course of flow to the nearest drainage ditch or natural
stream.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, maintain or allow any
nuisance, as declared and described in this section.
A. All places and premises in this municipality shall be subject to
inspection by the division of health or the enforcing official if the
§ 265-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-4
1:351
§ 265-5. Abatement of nuisances.
§ 265-6. Recovery of municipality's cost of abatement.
The division of health may institute an action at law to recover costs
incurred by it In the removal or abatement of any nuisance, as declared by
§ 265-3, from any person who shall have caused or allowed such nuisance to
exist, or from any owner, tenant or occupant of premises who, after notice
and notification, shall fall to remove and abate the same within the time
specified in such notice.
§ 265-7. Enforcement.
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the division of health or
its enforcing official.
division or that official has reason to believe that any section of this
chapter is being violated.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct, delay, resist or
prevent the division of health or the enforcing official from having full
access to any place or premises upon which a violation of this chapter is
believed to exist.
A. Whenever a nuisance, as declared by § 265-3 is found on any plot of
land, lot, right-of-way or any other private premises or place, notice in
writing shall be given to the owner thereof to remove or abate the same
within such time as shall be specified therein but not less than five days
from the date of service thereof. If the owner resides out of the state or
cannot be so notified speedily, such notice shall be left at the place or
premises with the tenant or occupant thereof, or posted on the
premises and such action shall be considered proper notification to the
owner, tenant or occupant thereof.
B. Whenever a nuisance, as declared by § 265-3 is found on any public
property or on any highway or other public premises or place, notice in
writing shall be given to the person in charge thereof to remove or
abate the same within such time as shall be specified therein. If such
person falls to comply with such notice within the time specified
therein, the division of health may remove or abate such nuisance in the
manner as hereinafter provided in the case of a like condition existing
on a private premises or place.
C. If the owner, tenant or occupant, upon being notified as provided by this
section, shall not comply with such notice within the time specified
therein and fails to remove or abate such nuisance, the division of
health shall proceed to abate the nuisance or may cause it to be
removed or abated in a summary manner by such means as the division
shall deem proper.
§ 265-4 LAWRENCE CODE § 265-8
1:352
§ 265-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates, or neglects to comply with any provision of this
chapter established herein or notice issued pursuant thereto, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be liable for a penalty of not less than $50 nor more than
$2,000 for each violation.
§ 265-9. Severability.
In the event that any section, sentence or clause of this chapter shall
be declared unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such
declaration shall not in any manner prejudice the enforcement of the
remaining provisions.
Chapter 271
NURSING HOMES
§ 265-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 265-9
1:353

ARTICLE I
Emergency Transportation Equipment
[Derived from § 15-5 of the 1971 Code]
§ 271-1. Emergency transportation equipment required.
A. Each licensed nursing home within the confines of the Township is
hereby required to own, lease or rent and have immediately available
an ambulance or van-type vehicle suitable to be used as an ambulance
for the conveyance of nonambulatory patients.
B. Each nursing home shall file proof of the availability of such a vehicle on
or before March 1 of each year.
§ 271-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 271-1
1:355
Chapter 277
OBSCENE MATERIALS
§ 277-1. Possession or sale prohibited.
No person shall import, print, publish, exhibit, sell or distribute, or have
in his possession or give away any book, pamphlet, ballad, printed paper,
moving picture or film or other thing containing obscene language, prints,
pictures, figures or descriptions tending to the corruption of morals in the
Township; or induce any family or school or buy, procure, receive or have in
his possession any such thing either for the purpose of loan, sale, exhibition
or circulation or giving away, or with intent to introduce the thing into any
family or school in the Township.
Chapter 285
PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 285-1. Fees.
See Chapter 156, Fees, § 156-13, for fees for recreation.
§ 285-2. Special event permits.
Permits for special events in parks shall be obtained by application to the
Department of Recreation in accordance with the following procedure:
A. A person seeking a permit hereunder shall file an application with the
Department of Recreation stating:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the person sponsoring the activity.
(3) The day and hours for which the permit is desired.
(4) The park or portion thereof for which such permit is desired.
(5) An estimate of the anticipated attendance.
(6) Any other information which the Department shall find reasonably
necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be
issued hereunder.
B. Standards for issuance of a use permit by the Department shall include
the following findings:
(1) That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the
park.
§ 271-1 LAWRENCE CODE § 285-2
1:356
§ 285-3. Opening and closing of parks.
(2) That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably interfere
with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety
and recreation.
(3) That the proposed activity or uses that are reasonably anticipated
will not include violence, crime or disorderly conduct.
(4) That the proposed activity will not entail extraordinary or
burdensome expense or Police operation by the Township.
(5) That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other use at
the date and hour requested in the application.
C. Within five days after the receipt of an application, the Department of
Recreation shall apprise an applicant, in writing, of its reasons if it
refuses a permit, and any aggrieved person shall have the right to
appeal to the Township Council by serving written notice thereof on the
Township Clerk within five days of such refusal. A copy of such notice
shall also be served on the Department within the same time, and such
Department shall immediately forward the application and the reasons
for its refusal to the Township Council, which shall consider the
application under the standards set forth under Subsection B of this
section and sustain or overrule the Department's decision within 10
days from the receipt of the appeal by the Township Clerk. The decision
of the Township Council shall be final.
D. A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances.
E. The person to whom the permit is issued shall be liable for all loss,
damage or injury sustained by any person whatsoever by reason of the
negligence of the person to whom such permit shall have been issued.
The Department of Recreation shall have the right to require any
permittee to submit evidence of liability insurance covering injuries to
members of the general public arising out of such permitted activities
in such amounts as may be from time to time determined by the
Department prior to the commencement of any activity of issuance of
any permit.
F. The Department of Recreation shall have the authority to revoke a
permit upon a finding of violation of any rule or ordinance, or upon good
cause shown.
A. Parks shall be opened daily to the public from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. No
person shall remain in any park, playground or recreational area after
9:00 p.m. except in attendance at an organized activity approved by the
Recreation Superintendent, or remain in such park, playground or
recreational area 30 minutes subsequent to the conclusion of any
regularly scheduled Township-authorized event ending after 9:00 p.m.
§ 285-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-3
1:357
§ 285-4. Conduct while in public park or recreation area.
B. Any section or part of any park may be declared closed to the public by
the Department of Recreation at any time and for any interval of time,
either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals (daily or
otherwise), and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the
Department shall find reasonably necessary.
A. No person in a public park or recreation area shall:
(1) Willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or
remove any buildings, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings,
pavings or paving materials, water lines or other public utilities or
parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether
temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other
boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or
park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or
personal.
(2) Fail to cooperate in maintaining rest rooms and washrooms in a
neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age of six years
shall use the rest rooms and washrooms designated for the
opposite sex.
(3) Dig or remove any soil, rock, sand, stones, trees, shrubs or plants
or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool,
equipment, blasting or other means or agency.
(4) Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind,
whether permanent or temporary, or run or string any public
service utility into, upon or across such lands, except on special
written permit issued hereunder.
(5) Damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or
injure the ark, or pick flowers or seed of any tree or plant, dig in or
otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure the
natural beauty or usefulness of any area.
(6) Climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases,
planters, fountains, railings, fences or upon any other property not
designated or customarily used for such purposes.
(7) Tie or hitch an animal to any tree or plant.
(8) Hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, pursue, chase, tease, shoot
or throw missiles at any animal, wildlife, reptile or bird; nor shall be
remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or
the eggs, nest or young of any reptile or bird. Exception to the
foregoing is made in that snakes known to be deadly poisonous or
other deadly reptiles may be killed on sight.
§ 285-3 LAWRENCE CODE § 285-4
1:358
(9) Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in
or adjacent to any park or any tributary stream, storm sewer or
drain flowing into such water, any substance, matter or thing,
liquid or solid, which shall or may result in the pollution of such
waters.
(10) Have brought in or shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken
glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage,
refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be placed in any
waters in or contiguous to any park, or left anywhere on the
grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles
where these are provided. Where receptacles are not provided, all
such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence, and shall be properly disposed
of elsewhere.
(11) Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or
parking areas, or such areas as may on occasion specifically be
designated as temporary areas by the Department of Recreation.
(12) Park a vehicle in other that an established or designated parking
area, and such parking shall be in accordance with posted
directions and the instruction of any attendant who may be present.
(13) Leave a vehicle standing or parked at night in established parking
areas or elsewhere in the park areas.
(14) Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is
provided and there is space available.
(15) Ride a bicycle with unreasonable disregard for the safety of others.
(16) Leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving, or set against trees
or in any place or position where other persons may trip over or be
injured by them.
(17) Swim, bathe or wade in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to
any park, except in such waters and at such places as are provided
therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are herein set
forth or may be hereinafter adopted. Nor shall any person frequent
any waters or places customarily designated for the purposes of
swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat when such activities
are prohibited by the Department of Recreation upon a finding that
such use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable.
(18) Frequent any waters or places designated for the purposes of
swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, except between such
hours of the day as shall be designated by the Department of
Recreation for such purposes for each individual site.
§ 285-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-4
1:359
(19) Erect, maintain, use or occupy on or in any beach or bathing area
any tent, shelter or structure of any kind unless there shall be an
unobstructed view into the tent, shelter or structure from at least
two sides, nor shall any guy wire, rope extension brace or support
be connected or fastened from any such structure to any other
structure, stake, rock or other object outside thereof.
(20) Allow himself to be so covered with a bathing suit so as to
indecently expose his person.
(21) Dress or undress on any beach or in any vehicle, toilet or other
place, except in such bathing houses or structures as may be
provided for that purpose.
(22) Bring into such park or operate any boat, raft or other water craft,
whether motor-powered or not, upon any waters, except at places
designated for boating by the Department of Recreation. Such
activity shall be in accordance with applicable regulations as are
now or hereafter shall be adopted.
(23) Navigate, direct or handle any boat in such a manner as to
unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy or frighten or endanger the
occupant of any other boat.
(24) Launch, dock or operate any boat of any kind on any water between
the closing hour of the park at night and the opening hour of the
park the following morning, nor shall any person remain on or in
any boat during such closed hours of the park.
(25) Fish in any waters except those designated by the Department of
Recreation for such use and under such regulations and
restrictions as have or may be prescribed by the Department.
(26) Fish in any area where bathing is permitted.
(27) Carry or possesses firearms of any description or air rifles, spring
guns, bows and arrows, slings, paint ball rifles or guns or any other
forms of weapons potentially inimical to wildlife and dangerous to
human safety, or any instrument that can be loaded with and fire
blank cartridges, or any kind of trapping device, nor shall any
person shoot into park areas from beyond park boundaries.
(28) Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for such
purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate activities
in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure
the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all persons.
Visitors shall comply with any directions given to them to achieve
such maximum use.
(29) Violate the regulation that use of individual fireplaces, together
with tables and benches, follows the generally accepted rule of
"First come, first served."
§ 285-4 LAWRENCE CODE § 285-4
1:360
(30) Use any portion of the picnic area or any of the buildings or
structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the
exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such areas and
facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded.
(31) Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and
before all trash is placed in the disposal receptacles where
provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then trash
shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be
properly disposed of elsewhere.
(32) Set up tents, shacks or any other temporary shelter for the purpose
of overnight camping, nor shall any person leave in a park after
closing hours any movable structure or special vehicle to be used
or that could be used for such purpose, such as a house-trailer,
camp-trailer, camp-wagon or the like except in areas designated by
the Department of Recreation for such purposes.
(33) Take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or
otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrow, javelins,
horseshoes, quoits or model airplanes except in those areas set
apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or
comparatively dangerous games such as football, baseball and
lacrosse is prohibited except on the fields and courts or areas
provided therefor. Roller-skating shall be confined to those areas
specifically designed for such pastime.
(34) Ride a horse except on designated bridle trails. Where permitted,
horses shall be thoroughly broken, properly restrained and ridden
with due care, and shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended,
nor shall they be hitched to any rock, tree or shrub.
(35) Bring alcoholic beverages, drink same at any time or be under the
influence of intoxicating liquor in a park unless express prior
authorization and required permits have been secured from the
Recreation Department, Municipal Clerk and the State of New
Jersey, Department of Law and Public Safety, Division of Alcoholic
Beverage Control.
(36) Have in his possession, or set or otherwise cause to explode or
discharge or burn, any firecrackers, torpedo rockets or other
fireworks or explosives of inflammable material, or discharge them
or throw them into any such areas from lands or highways adjacent
thereto. Also prohibited is any substance, compound, mixture or
article that, in conjunction with any other substance or compound,
would be dangerous from any of the foregoing standpoints. At the
discretion of the Department of Recreation, permits may be given
for conducting properly supervised fireworks in designated park
areas.
(37) Allow a dog or other domestic animal to enter into areas clearly
marked by the Department of Recreation by signs bearing the
§ 285-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-4
1:361
words "Domestic Animals Prohibited in this Area." Nothing herein
shall be construed as permitting the running of dogs at large. All
dogs in areas where such animals are permitted shall be restrained
at all times on adequate leashes not greater than six feet in length.
(38) Occupy any seat or bench, or enter into or loiter or remain in any
pavilion or any other park structure or section thereof which may
be reserved and designated by the Department of Recreation for
the use of the opposite sex. Exception is made for children under
six years of age.
(39) Appear at any place in other than proper clothing.
(40) Solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or
private.
(41) Build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such
regulations as may be designated by the Department of Recreation,
nor shall any person drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted
matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other
inflammable material within any park or on any highways, roads or
streets abutting or contiguous thereto.
(42) Enter an area posted as "Closed to the Public," nor shall any person
use or abet the use of any area in violation of posted notices.
(43) Gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance except in such
areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the
Department of Recreation.
(44) Go on the ice on any of the waters except where designated as
skating fields; provided, that a safety signal must be displayed.
(45) Sleep or protractedly lounge on the seats, benches or other areas,
or engage in loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting or
indecent language, or engage in any disorderly conduct or behavior
tending to breach the public peace.
(46) Fail to produce and exhibit any permit from the Department of
Recreation he claims to have upon request of any authorized
person who shall desire to inspect the same for the purpose of
enforcing compliance with any ordinance or rule.
(47) Disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or party
occupying any area or participating in any activity under the
authority of a permit.
(48) Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, or station or place any
stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of any
such article or thing. Exception is here made as to any regularly
licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and
regulation of the Department of Recreation.
§ 285-4 LAWRENCE CODE § 285-4
1:362
§ 285-5. Motor vehicles in park areas. [Amended by Ord. No.
1954-07]
§ 285-6. Enforcement. [Amended by Ord. No. 1954-07]
The Department of Recreation and park attendants shall:
§ 285-7. Agreement with board of education concerning use.
The Township reserves the right with respect to any or all of the public
park and recreation areas, and any facilities located therein, to enter into
any agreement with the Board of Education of the Township concerning
the control and use thereof, and, anything contained in this chapter to the
contrary notwithstanding, any use of such premises or such facilities by the
Board of Education pursuant to any agreement with the Township Council
or Department of Recreation heretofore or hereafter entered into shall be
free and exclusive from any control or supervision of or by the Department.
(49) Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement
or inscription whatsoever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be
erected any sign whatsoever on any public lands or highways or
roads adjacent to a park.
(50) Hit golf balls using golf equipment unless in attendance at an
organized activity approved by the Superintendent of Recreation.
A. No owner or driver shall cause or permit his vehicle to remain outside
of designated parking spaces, except for a reasonable time to take up or
discharge passengers or equipment. No motor vehicle shall be parked
in such park areas from 1/2 hour after sunset until sunrise, except as
otherwise permitted.
B. No motor vehicles, including automobiles, motorcycles, all terrain
vehicles (ATVs), trucks, vans and campers, except Township vehicles or
Township authorized vehicles conducting park maintenance activities
or emergency service functions, shall be permitted to operate or be
parked on Township parkland, playgrounds, or trolley right-of-way,
except in designated driveways and parking lots.
A. Diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter.
B. Have the authority to eject from the park area any person or persons
acting in violation of this chapter.
C. Have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing, or device
in the park used in violation of this chapter.
D. Any motor driven vehicle or device seized pursuant to Subsection C of
this subsection will be towed at owner's expense and shall be only
returned upon payment of the fees and fine or by order of the court.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Police Department.
§ 285-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 285-8
1:363
§ 285-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended by Ord. No. 1535-98]
A violation of any provision of this chapter will subject the violator to the
fines and penalties prescribed for ordinance violations under Chapter 1,
Article III, General Penalty, of the Township Code.
Chapter 293
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
§ 285-8 LAWRENCE CODE § 285-8
1:364
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 9-17-2013 by Ord. No. 2164-13]
§ 293-1. Prohibited activities.
No person shall, within the boundaries of the Township, by any means or
instrumentality:
§ 293-2. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for the first violation of this article shall be a fine not to exceed
$2,000 and/or a period of community service not to exceed 30 days; for a
subsequent offense within a one-year period from the initial violation, the
penalty shall be a fine not to exceed $2,000 and/or a period of community
service not to exceed 60 days.
A. Interfere with or annoy the comfort or general well-being of the
inhabitants of the Township;
B. Disturb the public peace and quiet by loud, boisterous or vulgar
conduct;
C. Create or participate in a diversion, disturbance or disorderly
assemblage, in any public place, tending to breach the peace;
D. Engage in acts of vice and immorality in any public place; or
E. Obstruct or interfere with any person lawfully being in a public place.
§ 293-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-2
1:365

ARTICLE II
Aggressive Panhandling
[Adopted 4-16-2014 by Ord. No. 2182-14]
§ 293-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGGRESSIVE MANNER —
INTERSECTION — The intersection of the lateral curblines, or if none, the
lateral boundary lines of the roadway, of two roads that join one another at
approximately right angles.
PANHANDLING — Asking for money or objects of value, with the intention
that the money or object be transferred at that time, and at that place.
Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person before,
during or after panhandling, if that conduct is likely to cause a
reasonable person to:
Fear bodily harm to oneself or is another, damage to or loss of
property; or
(1)
Otherwise be intimidated into giving money, goods or other things
of value.
(2)
A.
Approaching an occupied vehicle by entering into the roadway when
traffic is either stopped or moving, before, during or after panhandling;
B.
Knocking on the window of, or physically reaching toward or into an
occupied vehicle before, during or after panhandling;
C.
Continuing to solicit from a person after the person has given a
negative response to such panhandling;
D.
Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person
without that person's consent in the course of panhandling;
E.
Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a
pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including causing a pedestrian or
vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact before,
during or after panhandling;
F.
Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person before, during
or after panhandling;
G.
Using profane, offensive or abusive language which is inherently likely
to provoke an immediate violent reaction, either before, during or after
panhandling;
H.
Following a person while panhandling with the intent of asking that
person for money, goods or other things of value.
I.
§ 293-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 293-3
1:367
Panhandling shall include using the spoken, written, or printed words,
bodily gestures, signs, or other means with the purpose obtaining an
immediate donation of money or other thing of value.
PUBLIC PLACE — A place where a governmental entity has title or to which
the public or a substantial group of persons has access, including, but not
limited to, any street, highway, parking lot, transportation facility, shopping
center, school, place of amusement, park or playground.
§ 293-4. Unlawful panhandling.
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to:
§ 293-5. Exceptions.
This article shall not affect the individuals, groups, sporting organizations,
military organizations, religious groups and any other organization that
completes an application to solicit with the Lawrence Township Municipal
Clerk in an effort to raise money for their said groups.
§ 293-6. Enforcement.
§ 293-7. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for the first violation of this section shall be a fine not to exceed
$2,000 and/or a period of community service not to exceed 30 days; for a
subsequent offense within a one-year period from the initial violation, the
penalty shall be a fine not to exceed $2,000 and/or a period of community
service not to exceed 60 days.
§ 293-8. Severability.
If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this article shall be
declared invalid for any reason the remaining portions of this article shall
not be affected thereby and shall remain in full force and effect.
A. Panhandle in an aggressive manner in any public place; any
supermarket, mall, retail store, restaurant or bar; any public
transportation vehicle or at any bus stop; any parking lot or parking
structure accessible to the general public and within any intersection in
the Township.
A. The Chief of Police or his designee is authorized to enforce this article.
B. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this article.
§ 293-3 LAWRENCE CODE § 293-8
1:368
Chapter 300
PEDDLING, SOLICITING AND RELATED ACTIVITIES
§ 300-1. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are to:
§ 300-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, wherever used herein, shall have the
following meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the
context:
BUSINESS — Includes businesses, trades, callings, vocations, operations of
any kind, other than those specifically excluded from regulations by state
statute or case law of the State of New Jersey or other specific municipal
ordinance or license requirements.
CANVASSER — Any person who goes from house to house or business to
business for the purpose of distributing literature, pamphlets, handbills,
and the like or for the purpose of distributing information or seeking
support for a cause, specifically including, but not limited to, political
campaigning, circulation of a petition or the seeking of contributions for a
cause.
COMMERCIAL — Pertaining to, or engaging in, commerce, or prepared,
done, or acting with the sole emphasis on salability or profit. The term
"commercial" shall not include charitable speech.
FLEA MARKET/CRAFT OR HOME SHOW/EXPOSITION — Any event
sponsored or promoted by any person as defined herein, where one or more
vendors pay a fee to the owner/operator/promoter of said event for the
use of space for the purpose of selling, displaying or promoting the sale of
any goods, materials, merchandise or services by and for the profit of said
vendor(s).
A. Prevent dishonest business practices;
B. Provide for traffic and pedestrian safety by regulating the use of the
streets and property adjacent thereto by itinerant or transient
merchants;
C. Prevent extended parking or trespassing on private or public property
to prevent violations of the Township's Land Use Ordinance;
D. Protect traffic and pedestrian safety;
E. Generally, to provide for the safety of the residents of the Township of
Lawrence; and
F. Deter the use of canvassing, peddling, or soliciting as a means of
gaining access to homes or other premises for criminal purposes.
§ 293-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-2
1:369
INDIVIDUAL — Any natural person.
MERCHANDISE — All goods, wares, food, drinks, fruits, vegetables,
magazines, subscriptions, periodicals, printed material, farm products, all
types of articles of personal property, all types of orders or contracts for
services, home improvements or alterations, and anything that may be sold
or distributed.
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION —
PEDDLER — Any person who goes from house to house or place to place
by any means of conveyance, carrying or transporting merchandise, goods,
articles, or property of any kind or description for the purpose of selling and
delivering the same to customers, or offering to render immediate services
of any kind or description, and shall include the words "hawker," "huckster"
or "itinerant vendor."
PERSON — Includes individuals, firms, partnerships, corporations,
organizations, clubs, associations, or other entity, or any principals, agents,
employees or representatives thereof.
SOLICITOR — Any person who goes from house to house or from place to
place by any means of conveyance, who sells or offers to sell goods, articles
or property of any kind or description by sample or otherwise for future
delivery, or who offers to render services at some time in the future, with or
without accepting payment or partial payment for the same.
TRADE SOLICITATION — The practice of going from house to house for
the purpose of seeking orders, subscriptions or the purchase of any goods,
wares or merchandise, including, but not limited to, direct sales and taking
orders for future deliveries. For the purposes of this chapter, a trade
solicitor shall also be deemed to be one who makes surveys for research
purposes, analysis, opinion polls, rating data and any such similar work by
which its nature involves a door-to-door or place-to-place activity. Unless
Any organization that is tax exempt under § 501(c)(3) of the Internal
Revenue Code;
A.
Any organization created under or otherwise subject to the provisions
of Title 15A of the New Jersey Statutes;
B.
Any organization, whose primary purpose it to benefit the school-age
children of Lawrence Township, including, but not limited to, schools,
school clubs and organizations, Cub Scouts, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts,
Brownies, and similar youth groups [irrespective of their § 501(c)(3) or
Title 15A status];
C.
Any organization, whose primary purpose is to advocate for religious or
political causes [irrespective of their § 501(c)(3) or Title 15A status]; or
D.
Any department within Lawrence Township's municipal governmental
structure, including, but not limited to, the Police Department and any
volunteer fire company that is located in, has a substantial membership
from, or serves Lawrence Township.
E.
§ 300-2 LAWRENCE CODE § 300-2
1:370
otherwise distinguished herein, the term "trade solicitation" or "trade
solicitor" shall also include and encompass the terms "peddler" and/or
"solicitor."
TRANSIENT MERCHANT —
§ 300-3. Trade solicitation by invitation only; exceptions.
§ 300-4. Permit required for canvassing, peddling, soliciting.
A person who, whether a resident of the Township of Lawrence or
not, engages in a temporary business (i.e., less than six months in
each year) within the Township of selling and delivering goods, wares,
merchandise or services within the Township and who in furtherance
of such purpose hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure,
motor vehicle, tent, railroad, boxcar or boat, public room in hotels,
lodging houses, apartments or shops, parking lot, sidewalk, street alley
or other place within the Township for the exhibition and sale of such
goods, wares or merchandise, either privately or at public auction.
A.
Unless otherwise distinguished herein, the term "transient merchant"
shall also include and encompass the terms "roadside vendors,"
"peddlers," "hawkers" and "auctioneers," as well as operators of
circuses, tent shows and carnivals, flea markets, craft/home shows, and
expositions.
B.
A. No person may engage in trade solicitation in the Township of
Lawrence without first presenting to the Township Clerk of the
Township of Lawrence an invitation from the respective householders
to be solicited.
B. Local educational and charitable organizations may engage in trade
solicitation in the Township of Lawrence, provided that they obtain a
permit therefor from the Township Clerk of the Township of Lawrence.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in canvassing, peddling, or
soliciting in the Township of Lawrence without obtaining a permit
therefor from the Township Clerk of the Township of Lawrence.
B. Permits shall not be transferrable.
C. Upon obtaining a permit as hereinafter provided, a canvasser, peddler,
solicitor, or transient merchant may conduct permitted activities within
Lawrence Township only as long as he or she adheres to the regulations
set forth in this chapter and carries the permit upon his or her person or
displays the permit in a conspicuous place at all times during the
conduct of the permitted activities. The permit shall be shown to any
individual upon request.
§ 300-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-5
1:371
§ 300-5. Exceptions.
The following persons shall not be subject to the requirements of §§ 300-3
and 300-4 of this chapter:
A. Any nonprofit organization as defined in § 300-2 of this chapter,
provided that the means of identification assigned by such organization,
if any, is carried by the canvasser, peddler, solicitor, or transient
merchant. If no means of identification is assigned by such
organization, the canvasser, peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant
shall be required to carry a bona fide means of identification, including,
but not limited to, a valid driver's license or other government-issued
identification.
B. Any individual 18 years of age and under.
C. Any person honorably discharged from the military of the United States
as defined by N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and 45:24-10, possessing corresponding
identification in conformity with said statute(s).
D. Any person who is an exempt fireman as defined by N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 and
45:24-10, possessing corresponding identification in conformity with
said statute(s).
E. Any public utility or its employees, where said public utility is subject to
regulation by the New Jersey Board of Public Utilities Commission.
F. Any person who is: (a) campaigning for any elected public office or
public question, which is to be voted upon in Lawrence Township at a
general, special, primary, or school board election, or in a national or
state election; (b) distributing handbills, pamphlets, leaflets, circulars,
advertisements, or printed materials with respect thereto; (c)
canvassing for or against any political candidate or any political
question; or (d) otherwise engaging in political speech.
G. Any person intending to distribute noncommercial or not-for-profit
handbills, pamphlets, leaflets, circulars, advertisements or printed
material.
H. Any person engaging in the advocacy of noncommercial or not-for-profit
causes, whether or not in connection with a larger organization, or
engaging in spontaneous speech, including, but not limited to, speech
between neighbors.
I. Any person conducting a sale pursuant to a statute or a court order.
J. Any person who is engaged in the sale of any article at wholesale to
dealers in such articles or the delivery of milk, eggs, bread, newspapers
or such other necessary and perishable articles of food or merchandise
of the type commonly delivered on a house-to-house basis at intervals of
less than one week.
§ 300-5 LAWRENCE CODE § 300-5
1:372
§ 300-6. Notices regulating canvassing, peddling, and soliciting.
§ 300-7. Hours of operation.
Every trade solicitor or canvasser shall restrict his or her door-to-door
activities to the hours between 10:00 a.m. and dusk, on Mondays through
Saturdays. No such activities shall be permitted on Sundays or state or
national holidays.
K. Federal census takers and polls or surveys taken pursuant to federal,
state or local laws.
L. Any person holding a solicitation license or permit issued under any
legislation of the United States government or by a state agency
pursuant to statute.
M. Any person: (1) holding a general sale, fair, auction or bazaar sponsored
by any church or religious organization; (2) holding a garage sale on
premises devoted to residential use; and (3) selling crafts or similar
items made by hand and sold or offered for sale by the person making
such crafts or handmade items.
A. No canvasser or trade solicitor shall enter into any property on which it
is located a sign or signs stating "No Solicitors" or carrying a similar
message forbidding the entry of any persons onto the property. Such
sign so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any trade solicitor
or canvasser of the determination by the occupant of the residence of
the information contained thereon.
B. Duty of canvassers and trade solicitors.
(1) It shall be the duty of every canvasser and trade solicitor, upon
going onto any premises in the Township of Lawrence on which a
residence is located, to examine and look for the notice provided
for in Subsection A of this section, if any is posted, and be governed
by the statement contained on the notice.
(2) Any trade solicitor or canvasser who has gained entrance to any
residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully
depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant.
C. Uninvited soliciting prohibited. It is hereby declared to be unlawful and
shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and
ring a doorbell upon or near any residence or create any sound in any
other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such
residence for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant
thereof and engage in canvassing or trade solicitation as herein defined
in defiance of the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with
the provision of Subsection A of this section.
§ 300-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-8
1:373
§ 300-8. Transient merchants.
A transient merchant shall not be relieved from complying with the
provisions of this chapter merely by reason of associating temporarily with
any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer or by conducting such
transient business in connection with, as part of or in the name of any local
dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer.
§ 300-9. Prohibitions for transient merchants; exceptions.
A. It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant to sell, buy, dispose of or
offer to sell or dispose of any goods, wares, merchandise or other things
of value or services or to solicit contributions, gifts, pledges or
subscriptions for money or goods in or on any portion of a public rightof-
way or on private property, unless said business has received
Planning Board approval for the use respecting the specific location.
B. The following exceptions shall apply to transient merchant businesses:
(1) Transient merchants leasing spaces within an existing, conforming
commercial structure, provided that the space was designated for
the intended use and had received the necessary development
approvals prior to transient merchant use or occupancy. Such use
shall be temporary in nature, not to exceed a maximum of 14
consecutive days.
(2) Transient merchants leasing a portion of a developed commercial
site outside of a building, provided that the use is permitted and the
area where the business is located has been designated for such
activity pursuant to the appropriate site plan approval process.
Such use shall be temporary in nature, not to exceed a maximum of
14 consecutive days.
(3) Home occupations as defined in the Land Use Ordinance and as
otherwise permitted pursuant to the terms and provisions of said
ordinance.
(4) Transient merchant uses by veterans and firemen permitted by
N.J.S.A. 45:24-9 et seq. shall be permitted in commercial zones as
established by the Lawrence Township Land Use Ordinance, and
the actual location of such vending must be 75 feet away from any
intersection. The display of all goods and/or wares is limited to the
vehicle utilized to transport said goods/wares and shall not be
displayed on the ground or attached in any other way to any items
other than said vehicle.
C. Transient merchant activity shall not negatively interfere with the safe
operation of any existing businesses, and such activity shall not hinder
or interfere with approved ingress and egress, sufficient parking, and
pedestrian passageways. The Municipality (i.e., any Municipal Official)
reserves the right to refer any applicant to the Township of Lawrence
Planning Board, Zoning Board, or similar department for an approval in
§ 300-8 LAWRENCE CODE § 300-9
1:374
§ 300-10. Application for permit.
the event that the Municipality, in its discretion, determines that the
same is necessary in order to properly fulfill the intent and purpose of
the New Jersey Municipal Land Use Law and the Lawrence Township
Land Use Ordinance.
A. An application for a permit, for any business requiring a permit under
this chapter, shall be made to the Township Clerk of the Township of
Lawrence, on forms to be provided by the Township, and shall contain
information as follows.
(1) Peddlers, solicitors and canvassers.
(a) The applicant's name, a permanent address, a local address (if
different than a permanent address), a telephone number, and
an emergency telephone number.
[1] If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant shall submit
a copy of its certificate of incorporation, the names and
addresses of each person owning 10% or more of the
shares of stock issued by said corporation, specifying the
office held by each person, together with the name and
address of the registered agent for said corporation. In the
event that the applicant is a partnership, the applicant
shall supply the Township with the name and address of
each partner, general or limited, and the percentage of
interest in said partnership held by each.
(b) The business for which the permit is being granted, including a
complete description of the proposed business (e.g., nature of
the merchandise), and identification on whose behalf the
business is being conducted if different than that of the
applicant, including an address and telephone number.
(c) The location on which said business is to occur. In the event the
applicant is not the owner of said property, the applicant must
provide a written form granting permission form the owner of
record or his or her lawful designee. Each application for a
permit shall also be accompanied by a certification that
property taxes are current with respect to the property on
which the business operation is to occur.
(d) The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
(e) A statement as to whether or not the applicant, or the persons
having the management or supervision of the applicant's
business, have been convicted of any crime, disorderly persons
offense or petty disorderly persons offense involving deceptive
business practices or fraud, or a violation of any ordinance
enacted in other municipalities concerning peddling,
solicitation, or transient merchandising, when and where the
§ 300-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-10
1:375
offense(s) occurred and the penalty imposed, if any. Said
statement shall also contain reasonable information as to the
identity or character of the person or persons having the
management or supervision of the applicant's business or the
method or plan of doing such business as the Chief of Police
of the Township of Lawrence may deem proper to fulfill the
purpose of this chapter and in the protection of the public
good.
(f) Fingerprints of the applicant and a photograph of the applicant
taken within 60 days prior to having filed the application.
(g) Motor vehicle registration number, make and model of any
motor vehicle used by the applicant in connection with his or
her peddling or soliciting.
(h) If the applicant is an agent, employee or representative, he or
she shall attach to the application a letter from the person or
organization for which the applicant works or represents,
authorizing the applicant to act as its agent, employee or
representative and assuming responsibility for the applicant's
conduct.
(i) Each applicant shall furnish its New Jersey Sates Tax
identification number. In addition, each corporation shall
furnish a federal identification number, each partnership shall
furnish the social security numbers and/or federal
identification numbers of the partners, as applicable, holding a
10% or greater interest; each sole proprietorship shall furnish
the social security number of the proprietor.
(j) The Township shall not issue or authorize the issuance of a
permit to any vendor of tangible personal property, other than
property exempted from sales and use taxation pursuant to
state statute, having no fixed place of business within the
municipality without the submission of a copy of a valid
certificate of authority issued to the vendor empowering said
vendor to collect sales tax. The provisions set forth herein are
set forth in accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:32B-15 et seq. All
applicants selling merchandise subject to sales tax shall attach
the original certificate of authority issued by the Director of the
New Jersey Division of Taxation to their cart, stand, truck or
other merchandising device, as required by N.J.S.A. 54:32B-15.
(k) All applicants selling food items for immediate consumption
shall submit a copy of the Board of Health license.
(2) Transient merchants.
(a) The applicant's name, a permanent address, a local address (if
different than a permanent address), a telephone number, and
an emergency telephone number.
§ 300-10 LAWRENCE CODE § 300-10
1:376
(b) Description of the nature of the business or activity including
the average quantity, kind and value of the merchandise to be
sold.
(c) The days during which the business is to be conducted.
(d) The name and addresses of the persons from whom the goods
making up the stock were or are to be purchased by the
applicant.
(e) A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been
convicted of any crime, disorderly persons offense or petty
disorderly persons offense involving deceptive business
practices or fraud, or a violation of any ordinance enacted in
other municipalities concerning peddling, solicitation, or
transient merchandising, when and where the offense(s)
occurred and the penalty imposed, if any. Said statement shall
also contain reasonable information as to the applicant's
business or the method or plan of doing such business as the
Chief of Police of the Township of Lawrence may deem proper
to fulfill the purpose of this chapter and in the protection of the
public good.
(f) Fingerprints of the applicant and a photograph of the applicant
taken within 60 days prior to having filed the application.
(g) A bond in accordance with N.J.S.A. 45:24-5 in an amount equal
to 25% of the value of the personal property shown in the
disclosures required above but in no event less than $1,000.
The bond shall be in effect for a period of one year from the
date the permit is issued, shall indemnify and pay Lawrence
Township any penalties and costs incurred in the enforcement
of this section and the purchaser of personal property a sum
equal to at least the amount of any payment such purchaser
may have been induced to make through the misrepresentation
of the applicant, its agents, servants, or employees. The bond
shall be in the form approved by the municipal attorney.
(h) An instrument in accordance with N.J.S.A. 45:24-6 appointing
the Township Clerk as the applicant's true and lawful agent for
service of process.
(i) If the applicant is an agent, employee, or representative, he or
she shall attach to the application a letter from the person or
organization for whom the applicant works or represents,
authorizing the applicant to act as its agent, employee, or
representative and assuming responsibility for the applicant's
conduct.
(j) All transient merchants are subject to the statutory
requirements set forth in N.J.S.A. 45:24-1 et seq., and shall be
§ 300-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-10
1:377
§ 300-11. Certain items prohibited.
The sale of drug paraphernalia, fireworks, illegal knives, weapons, or
devices shall be prohibited. The sale of adult items is strongly discouraged;
however, if sold, they shall not be openly displayed and shall be completely
covered and out of the reach of the general public. The sale of patent
infringement items is also prohibited by this chapter.
§ 300-12. Issuance or denial of permit; hearing; expiration.
subject to the penalties set forth therein in the event of a
failure to comply with any of said requirements.
(k) Each applicant shall furnish its New Jersey Sales Tax
identification number. In addition, each corporation shall
furnish a federal identification number; each partnership shall
furnish the social security numbers and/or federal
identification numbers of the partners, as applicable, holding a
10% or greater interest; each sole proprietorship shall furnish
the social security number of the proprietor.
(l) The Township shall not issue or authorize the issuance of a
permit to any vendor of tangible personal property, other than
property exempted from sales and use taxation pursuant to
state statute, having no fixed place of business within the
municipality without the submission of a copy of a valid
certificate of authority issued to the vendor empowering said
vendor to collect sales tax. The provisions set forth herein are
set forth in accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:32B-15 et seq. All
applicants selling merchandise subject to sales tax shall attach
the original certificate of authority issued by the Director of the
New Jersey Division of Taxation to their cart, stand, truck or
other merchandising device, as required by N.J.S.A. 54:32B-15.
(m) All applicants selling food items for immediate consumption
shall submit a copy of the Board of Health license.
A. Upon receipt of a complete application by the Township Clerk or his or
her designee, the Clerk shall refer the application to the Chief of Police
who shall make or cause an investigation to be made of the applicant's
business responsibility and character as he or she deems necessary for
the protection of the public welfare and as is consistent with the
purpose of this chapter. Said application shall be reviewed within 30
days from the day of the filing of the application and the completion of
all forms as requested by the Township, including but not limited to
Online Form 212A (https://www.njportal.com/njsp/criminalrecords/). If
it is determined that the applicant's character and business
responsibility are found to be satisfactory and the business operation
does not create a safety hazard and that the activity complies with all
applicable statutes, regulations or ordinances, the Chief of Police shall
endorse his or her approval on the application, and return it to the
§ 300-10 LAWRENCE CODE § 300-12
1:378
§ 300-13. Revocation of permit.
§ 300-14. Payment of permit fees.
Township Clerk, who so shall certify and then issue a permit to the
applicant. The Township Clerk shall keep a record of all permits issued.
B. In the event that the aforementioned requirements are not met, the
permit shall be denied, and, in the event of such denial, the Township
Council may, upon written request of the applicant, establish a hearing
date, which date shall not be more than 45 days from the date of receipt
of said denial from the Township Clerk or designee. The applicant shall
receive at least seven days' notice of the scheduled hearing date and be
permitted to present evidence on behalf of said application. If the
Township Council determines that the permit should not be issued, it
shall specifically set forth reasons for such denial, a copy of which shall
be mailed to the applicant and/or applicant's duly authorized
representative.
C. All permits shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year in which
they are issued unless, by their terms, they expire prior to that time,
and shall be limited to the express purpose set forth therein. With
respect to transient merchants, the permit shall expire no later than
180 days after its issuance.
A. The permits issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the
Township Clerk or the Clerk's designee for any of the following causes:
(1) Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statements contained in the
application for a permit.
(2) Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statements made in
connection with the selling of goods, wares, or merchandise.
(3) Any violation of this chapter or another Lawrence Township
ordinance.
(4) Conviction of the permittee of any felony or of a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude, deceptive business practices or fraud.
(5) Violation of ordinances enacted in other municipalities concerning
peddling, solicitation or transient merchandising.
(6) Conducting the business permitted under this chapter in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a menace to
the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
B. An appeal from such revocation may be made to the Township Council
within 10 days of the date of the revocation; it shall forthwith schedule
a hearing on the appeal. The Township Council shall hear such appeal
and render its decision within 45 days from the date of the hearing.
§ 300-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-14
1:379
§ 300-15. License or permit pursuant to other ordinances;
additional fee not required.
Those businesses which are otherwise licensed pursuant to other
ordinances of the Township of Lawrence may be required to file an
application hereunder to the extent that another regulatory or licensing
application does not contain the requisite information required hereunder.
However, in the event that such application is required hereunder, no
additional license or permit fee pursuant to this chapter shall be required of
the applicant.
§ 300-16. General requirements.
It shall be unlawful for a person to:
A. The nonrefundable permit fees to be paid at the time of the application
and annually thereafter, as above provided, to the Township of
Lawrence, for conducting the following business shall be as follows:
(1) Circus, tent shows, and carnivals: $500.
(2) Auctioneers: $75.
(3) Flea markets, craft/home shows, expositions, etc.:
(a) One to 25 vendors: $250.
(b) Twenty-six to 50 vendors: $500.
(c) Fifty-one to 100 vendors: $750.
(d) One-hundred-one or more vendors: $1,000.
(4) Peddlers, hawkers, canvassers, trade solicitors, etc.: $100.
(5) All others: $25.
B. No pro rata fees shall be permitted, and the establishment of these fees
is to help defray the Township's administrative and investigative costs
for the enforcement and implementation of this chapter, and not to
produce revenue therefrom.
C. All nonprofit organizations and/or associations must apply for a
business registration license and submit with said application proof of
the not-for-profit status. After receipt of the appropriate proofs, the
Township Council may waive any and all fees relevant to this chapter.
A. Attempt to peddle or distribute merchandise or printed material, or
solicit funds or canvass for information, without first having identified
himself or herself as a peddler, solicitor, transient merchant, or
canvasser registered with the Township and displaying the permit
issued therefor.
B. Have exclusive right to any location on public property.
§ 300-14 LAWRENCE CODE § 300-16
1:380
C. Refuse to leave a private dwelling or property after having been once
requested to do so by the owner or occupant thereof.
D. Shout, cry out, blow a horn, ring a bell, or use any sound making or
amplifying device on any streets, parks, or in public places of the
Township, or upon private property, that would create or become a
nuisance or noise disturbance as prohibited elsewhere in this Code.
E. Distribute obscene merchandise or printed material, or printed
material that advocates unlawful conduct.
F. Litter the streets, public places or other property within the Township
by any merchandise or printed material.
G. Station, place, set up or maintain a cart, wagon, motor vehicle or other
vehicle, or allow it to remain on any sidewalk in a way that would:
(1) Restrict, obstruct, interfere with, or impede any pedestrian's rightof-
way;
(2) Restrict, obstruct, interfere with, or impede the ingress or egress
from the abutting property;
(3) Create or become a nuisance;
(4) Increase traffic congestion; or
(5) Cause or create or constitute a danger to life, health, or property.
H. Peddle using a cart of the dimensions which exceed two feet in width,
four feet in length and four feet in height, including wheel height, while
conducting business on any sidewalk.
I. Use any cart which, when fully loaded with merchandise, cannot be
easily moved and maintained under control by the permittee only.
J. Use, set up, attach, place or permit the use of any table, crate, carton,
rack, device, or structure of any kind to increase the selling or display
capacity of the peddler's cart.
K. Station, place, set up, or maintain a peddler's cart or allow it to remain
on any sidewalk if to so would reduce the unobstructed pedestrian
right-of-way.
L. Engage in the business of peddling within 10 feet of any location where
the curb has been depressed to facilitate pedestrian or vehicle
movement.
M. Engage in the business of peddling on any sidewalk or along any street
within 15 feet of any fire hydrant, crosswalk, or driveway.
N. Station, place, set up, or maintain a peddler's cart or goods against
display windows of fixed location businesses, nor shall they be within 20
feet from an entranceway to a building, store, library, school, or other
§ 300-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-16
1:381
§ 300-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon the
first conviction in the Municipal Court of the Township of Lawrence, be
punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $100; for a second
offense within a twelve-month period, by a fine of not less than $300
place of public assembly, without the permission of the property owner
and in such a manner as to restrict, obstruct, interfere with or impede
pedestrian or vehicular right-of-way.
O. Engage in the business of peddling on any sidewalk or along any street
within 10 feet from intersecting streets or sidewalks.
P. Engage in the business of peddling within 30 feet of any location where
another peddler is engaged in the business of peddling.
Q. Engage in the business of selling at any location without giving a
written receipt to each customer for any sale in excess of $20. The
receipt shall show clearly the seller's name, business address, permit
number, a description of the merchandise sold, and the purchase price,
and shall be sequentially numbered.
R. Engage in the business of peddling on any sidewalk or along any street
within 10 feet of a bus stop. For purposes of this section, the words "bus
stop" shall include the sidewalk and the adjoining street where there is
a designated bus stop.
S. Sell food, drinks, ice cream, confections or other items for immediate
consumption unless the peddler has available for public use a litter
receptacle which shall be clearly marked and maintained for patronage
use, nor shall any peddler leave any location without first picking up,
removing and disposing of any trash or refuse remaining from the sales
made by him or her; nor shall any person sell food, drinks, ice cream,
confections or other food items for consumption without having first
received any permit or license required by the Township or the Board of
Health for food handling.
T. Leave any cart unattended at any time or place or leave the same
overnight on any sidewalk.
U. Stop, stand or park any vending cart or motorized vehicle used for
vending purposes for more than five minutes for the purpose of selling
food and merchandise.
V. Station, place, set up, or maintain a cart, wagon, table, stand, display or
vehicle on private property unless the owner has previously secured
approval for such use of the property pursuant to the provisions of Code
governing land use.
W. Use of any motorized vending carts and/or motorized vehicles for
vending purposes in any location except on the street.
§ 300-16 LAWRENCE CODE § 300-17
1:382
nor more than $500; for a third or subsequent offense within a twelvemonth
period, by a fine of not less than $500 nor more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days in the county jail. For the
purpose of this chapter, the twelve-month period shall be based upon the
date of issuance of the first and any subsequent complaints.
Chapter 309
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
§ 300-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-17
1:383

ARTICLE I
Nonresidential Property Maintenance Code
[Derived from Ch. 14B of the 1971 Code]
§ 309-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Nonresidential Property Maintenance
Code of the Township of Lawrence," referred to in this chapter as "this
Code."
§ 309-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this Code is to protect the public health, safety and welfare
by establishing minimum standards governing the maintenance,
appearance and condition of nonresidential premises and industrial
premises, and shopping centers; to fix responsibilities and duties upon
owners, operators and occupants; to authorize and establish procedures
for the inspection of such nonresidential premises; to fix penalties for the
violations of this Code; and to provide for the right to access by the agents
and employees of the Township to enforce compliance with the provisions
hereof whenever necessary. This Code is hereby declared to be remedial
and essential for the public interest and it is intended that this Code shall
be liberally construed to effectuate the purpose as stated herein.
§ 309-3. Conflict with other laws.
In any case where the provisions of this chapter impose a higher standard
than is set forth in any other ordinance of the Township or under the laws of
the State of New Jersey, then the standards as set forth herein shall prevail,
but if the provisions of this chapter impose a lower standard than any other
ordinances of the Township or the laws of the State of New Jersey, then the
higher standard contained in any such other ordinance or law shall prevail.
§ 309-4. Issuance of permits and licenses conditional on
compliance.
All licenses and permits pertaining to use and occupancy of a premises shall
be issued upon compliance with this chapter as well as compliance with any
other ordinances under which licenses and permits are granted.
§ 309-5. Effect on other laws.
No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this chapter
shall constitute a defense against any violation of any other ordinances of
the Township applicable to any structure or premises.
§ 309-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
§ 309-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-6
1:385
COMMERCIAL PREMISES — A building or buildings, or any part thereof,
and the lot or tract of land upon which the building or buildings are
situated, where commercial activity of any kind takes place. Commercial
activity shall include, but is not limited to, gasoline service stations; motor
vehicles sales agencies; research and development uses; stores for retail
sales; liquor stores, taverns and inns; restaurants, including, but not limited
to, drive-in restaurants, snack bars, hot dog, hamburger or ice cream
stands; professional activities, including, but not limited to, medical, dental,
legal, architectural, accounting; personal services, including, but not
limited to real estate, insurance, barbershops, hairdressers; repair shops
of all kinds; and amusements, including but not limited to, movies, skating
rinks, bowling alleys; whether part of a shopping area or not. Commercial
activity shall not include sale of agricultural products on the premises.
DAY — Calendar day.
EXTERIOR OF THE PREMISES — Those portions of a building which are
exposed to public view and the open space of any premises outside of any
building erected thereon.
HARBORAGE — Any condition, man-made or natural, which affords a
breeding place or hiding place for rodents, insects or other pests.
INDUSTRIAL PREMISES — A building or buildings, or any part thereof, and
the lot or tract of land upon which the building or buildings are located and
used for nonresidential purposes other than commercial. Industrial activity
shall include, but is not limited to, the production, storage, and distribution
of raw materials, semiprocessed or processed materials, supplies or parts
used or intended to be used in the assembly or manufacture of finished
goods or components thereof and intended to be sold as articles of
commerce.
INFESTATION — The presence of insects, rodents, vermin or other pests on
the premises which constitute a health hazard.
NUISANCE —
Any common-law nuisance or as provided by the laws of the State of
New Jersey or the ordinances of the Township of Lawrence.
A.
Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to the health or
safety of children, whether in a building or upon a lot. This includes, but
is not limited to, any structurally unsound fences or structures, lumber,
trash, fences, debris or vegetation such as poison ivy, poison oak or
poison sumac, which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors.
B.
Abandoned vehicles, trailers, carts, wagons, vessels or other things.
Any vehicle, trailer, cart, wagon, vessel or other thing which is
inoperable, physically or by operation of law, or which remains outside
for a period of more than five days in an unfenced area of premises
which are not used or maintained for the sale of motor vehicles, trailers,
campers or boats, shall be deemed to have been abandoned.
C.
§ 309-6 LAWRENCE CODE § 309-6
1:386
OCCUPANT — Any person having actual possession of the premises or any
part thereof.
OPERATOR — Any person having charge, care or control of the premises or
any part thereof, whether with or without the consent of the owner.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others, shall
have legal or equitable title to any premises with or without accompanying
actual possession thereof, or shall have charge, care or control of any
premises as owner or agent of the owner or as fiduciary, including, but
not limited to, executor, executrix, administrator, administratix, trustee,
receiver or guardian of the estate, or as mortgagee in possession regardless
of how such possession was obtained. Any person who is a lessee subletting
or reassigning any part or all of any premises shall be deemed to be a co-
Any physical condition dangerous to human life or detrimental to the
health of persons on or near the premises where the condition exists.
This includes, but is not limited to: harborage, as defined above;
existence or presence of any water or other liquid in which mosquito
larvae breed or exist; any deposit or accumulation of trash, litter,
garbage, refuse, debris or any organic or inorganic matter which may
attract flies and to which flies may have access or in which fly larvae
or pupae breed or exist; the existence, presence or maintenance of any
brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, limbs, obnoxious
growth, filth, garbage, trash, refuse and debris which is or may become
a fire hazard or otherwise detrimental to the health, safety and welfare
of persons; the existence or presence of any ragweed, poison ivy, poison
sumac or other noxious growth of any kind; the presence, existence
or maintenance of any holes, excavations, breaks, projections,
obstructions, accumulations of ice, snow or water and excretion of pets
and other animals on paths, walks, driveways, parking lots and parking
areas and other parts of the exterior of the premises which are intended
for use by persons or which are accessible to and likely to be used by
such persons.
D.
The escape into the open air from any stack, vent, chimney or any
other entrance to the open air of such quantities of smoke, fly ash,
dust, fumes, vapors, mists or gases as to endanger or interfere with the
health, safety and general welfare of persons. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
E.
Any act or maintenance of any condition which causes or threatens
pollution, as defined by the laws of the State of New Jersey, of any
waters in this Township in such a manner as to endanger the health,
safety or general welfare of persons upon any premises within this
Township.
F.
Unsanitary conditions or anything unreasonably offensive to the senses
or dangerous to health, in violation of this chapter.
G.
Whatever renders air, food or drink unwholesome or detrimental to the
health of human beings.
H.
§ 309-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-6
1:387
owner with the lessor and shall have joint responsibility over the portion of
the premises sublet or assigned by said lessee.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of commercial establishments built on one
tract that is planned and developed as an operating unit: it provides onsite
parking in definite relationship to the type and total size of the stores.
The commercial establishments may be located in one or several buildings,
attached or separated.
§ 309-7. Scope and application.
All nonresidential premises and any buildings situated thereon in the
Township of Lawrence shall comply with the provisions of this chapter,
whether or not such building shall have been constructed, altered or
repaired before or after the enactment of this Code. This chapter
establishes minimum standards for the initial and continued occupancy and
use of all such buildings and premises and does not replace or modify
standards otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or
use of such buildings or premises contained therein. Where there is a mixed
occupancy with residential and other uses on the same premises, all such
uses shall be nevertheless regulated by and subject to the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 309-8. Owner's and operator's liability.
Owners and operators shall have all the duties and responsibilities
prescribed in this chapter, and no owner or operator shall be relieved from
any such duty and responsibility nor be entitled to defend against any
charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact that the occupant is also
responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
§ 309-9. Occupant's liability.
Occupants shall have all the duties and responsibilities as prescribed in
§ 309-47 and §§ 309-50 through 309-53 of this chapter, and the occupant
shall not be relieved from any such duty and responsibility nor be entitled
to defend against any charge of violation thereof by reason of the fact that
the owner or operator is also responsible therefor and in violation thereof.
§ 309-10. Duty of perspective occupant/tenant to report.
Upon discovery by a perspective occupant/tenant of any condition of the
premises which constitutes a violation of this chapter by the owner or
operator, the perspective occupant/tenant shall report same to the Public
Officer, who shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 309-11. Designation of Public Officer; powers and duties.
The Health Officer is hereby designated to serve as the Public Officer
under this chapter. All inspections, regulations, enforcement and hearings
§ 309-6 LAWRENCE CODE § 309-11
1:388
on violations of the provisions of this chapter, unless expressly stated to
the contrary, shall be under his direction and supervision. He may appoint
or designate such other public officials or employees of the Township to
perform duties as may be necessary to the enforcement of this chapter,
including the making of inspections and holding of hearing.
§ 309-12. Supplementary regulations; formulation and approval
effect.
The Public Officer is authorized to promulgate such written rules and
regulations as may be necessary for the proper interpretation and
administration of the provisions of this chapter, provided that such rules
and regulations do not conflict with this chapter but conform to the general
standards prescribed by this chapter. The Public Officer shall file copies
of such rules and regulations with the Municipal Clerk, Health Officer,
Municipal Engineer and Fire Marshal and shall make available in the Public
Officer's office a copy for inspection by members of the public during
regular business hours. Such rules and regulations shall have the approval
of the Health Officer, Municipal Engineer and Fire Marshal respectively,
where the provisions thereof relate to matters which are also in the
jurisdiction of and supervision of each Officer. In case of conflict, the rule or
regulation may be promulgated by direction of the Township Manager and
Council. Such rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect as
the provisions of this chapter, and the violation thereof shall be enforced as
violations of the express provisions of this chapter.
§ 309-13. Annual review of provisions by officials.
The Public Officer shall, in the month of December of each year, review with
the Fire Marshal, Health Officer, Municipal Engineer, Township Manager,
CD Director and Township Council the procedure and operation of this
chapter and report to the Mayor and Township Council on or before January
1:
§ 309-14. Inspections: nonresidential buildings and premises.
All nonresidential buildings and premises subject to this chapter are subject
to inspection annually and upon complaints by the enforcing officer, and
A. Any recommended amendment, addition or modification of provisions
of this chapter consonant with the filed experience of the personnel
charged with enforcement.
B. A summary of the enforcement experience indicating number of cases
processed in the municipal court, number of inspections made and such
other and further pertinent information as will provide the Mayor and
Council with an annual account of progress in securing the standards
required by this chapter.
C. Any further recommendation as to how this chapter and the procedure
and operations thereunder can be improved.
§ 309-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-14
1:389
such other times as are deemed necessary by the Public Officer. At the
time of such inspections, all rooms and parts of the premises shall be
available and accessible for such inspections, and the owner and operator
are required to provide the necessary arrangements to facilitate such
inspections. Such inspections shall be made during regular open hours of
the business occupying the premises unless there is reason to believe a
violation exists of a character which is an immediate threat to health or
safety, requiring inspection and abatement without delay.
§ 309-15. Inspectors; identification and conduct.
Inspectors shall be supplied with official identification and, shall exhibit
such identification when entering any nonresidential property or any part
of any premises subject to this chapter. Inspectors shall conduct themselves
so as to avoid intentional embarrassment or inconvenience to occupants.
§ 309-16. Refusal of entry for inspection; use of search warrants.
A. Where the Public Officer or his agent is refused entry or access or is
otherwise impeded or prevented by the owner, occupant or operator
from conducting an inspection of the premises, such person shall be in
violation of this chapter and subject to the penalties hereunder.
B. Emergency inspections may be authorized without warrant if the Public
Officer has reason to believe that a condition exists which poses an
immediate threat to life, health or safety. Such procedure shall only
take place where the time taken to apply for and secure the issuance of
a warrant would render ineffective the immediate action necessary to
abate the condition.
C. The Public Officer may, upon affidavit, apply to the Judge of the
Municipal Court of the Township for a search warrant, setting forth
factually the actual conditions and circumstances that provide a
reasonable basis for believing that a nuisance or violation of this
chapter may exist on the premises, including, but not limited to one or
more of the following:
(1) The premises require inspection according to the cycle established
by the Township for periodic inspections of premises of the type
involved.
(2) Observation of the external condition of the premises and its public
areas has resulted in the belief that violations of this chapter exist.
(3) Circumstances such as age of building, type of building, particular
use of premises or other such factors rendering systematic
inspections of such buildings necessary in the interest of public
health and safety.
D. If the Judge of the Municipal Court of the Township is satisfied as the
matter set forth in such affidavit, the Court shall authorize the issuance
of a search warrant permitting access to and inspection of that part of
§ 309-14 LAWRENCE CODE § 309-16
1:390
§ 309-17. Modifications or variances.
the premises on which the nuisance or violation may exist. Warrant for
access may be issued by the Judge of the Municipal Court upon affidavit
of the Public Officer, or designees, establishing grounds.
A. The Public Officer shall have the power to withhold strict enforcement
of the requirements of this chapter upon written application therefor by
an owner, operator or occupant, after making determination that:
(1) Any variation or modification of structure or use approved by the
Public Officer will not in any material way alter the standards of
this chapter and cannot affect detrimentally the health or safety of
occupants of the premises or the health, safety or welfare of the
occupants or owners of adjacent premises or of the neighborhood.
(2) Strict enforcement would constitute an undue and unnecessary
hardship on the owner, operator or occupant because it would
compel expenditures on the premises which would be substantially
disproportionate to any benefit to health, safety or welfare that
might be derived therefrom.
(3) The owner, operator or occupant is without any practical or feasible
means to comply with the strict provisions of this chapter.
(4) The strict enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would
require the installation of repairs and improvements estimated to
exceed $300 in cost, and the premises subject to this chapter are
contemplated for acquisition or are within an area where
acquisition is contemplated by a public agency having the power of
eminent domain and there is a reasonable likelihood that such
premises will be acquired within a period of two years; provided
that any waiver of the provisions of this chapter shall be cancelled
and the Public Officer shall strictly enforce this chapter if it shall be
ascertained subsequent to the granting of the waiver that the
premises are in fact not to be acquired for any public use or
purpose.
(5) Strict compliance with this chapter would require substantial
structural changes to the premises, and noncompliance will not
impair the health, safety or welfare of any person or persons.
(6) The nonconformity is of a technical and insubstantial character or
there is an alternative means, satisfactory to the Public Officer, to
be used which will eliminate violations of this chapter constituting
hazards to the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of the
premises and persons in the immediate vicinity thereof.
B. Upon denial of any such application the owner, operator or occupant
may request a hearing, which shall be held in accordance with the
provisions of § 309-24.
§ 309-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-17
1:391
§ 309-18. Record of modification and variances.
Where variations or modifications of any section of this Code are approved
by the Public Officer or by action of any Court, a written record thereof
stating the name of the applicant, the address of the premises, the variation
or modification approved, date of approval and the reasons therefor
satisfying the provisions contained in this section shall be prepared by the
Public Officer and filed both under the section or sections to which the
variation or modification applies and under the address of the premises, and
such files shall be available for public inspection in the office of the Public
Officer during regular business hours.
§ 309-19. Inspections and status reports on request; applications.
§ 309-20. Scope and effect of inspection and status reports.
No inspection report or status report issued under § 309-19 shall be
construed as providing a defense against any violation of this chapter, this
Code or any other ordinance of the Township which may be discovered
thereafter, whether or not the condition or violation existed at the time
of any such inspection or status report. The inspection or status report is
provided as a convenience to the public and shall not constitute a limitation
or waiver of the full enforcement of this chapter. The inspection or status
report shall include only such matters as are embraced in this chapter.
C. Such application shall not constitute a defense of any violation of this
chapter concerning which any proceedings are pending in the
municipal court when the application is filed nor shall any variance or
modification allowed under this section constitute a vested right
against any ordinance enacted by the Township Council compelling
strict enforcement of any provisions of this chapter.
A. Whenever an owner, operator, occupant, prospective purchaser,
mortgagee or prospective occupant shall apply to the Public Officer for
an inspection in order to ascertain if any section has been violated, the
Public Officer shall, upon payment of the required fee, cause an
inspection to be made of the premises and issue an informational
certificate or report of the inspection to the applicant, indicating
therein any violations on the premises. The applicant for such
inspection shall state in writing his full name, residence and the
reasons and basis for which the inspection is requested. The Public
Officer may deny the application for failure to comply with this
requirement.
B. Where, in lieu of an inspection, an owner, operator, occupant, lessee,
prospective purchaser, mortgagee or prospective occupant requests a
status report as to whether or not there are any known violations
presently pending on the premises, upon payment of the required fee, a
copy of any notice or order on any violation then pending shall be sent
to the applicant.
§ 309-17 LAWRENCE CODE § 309-21
1:392
§ 309-21. Notice of violation required.
Except as provided in § 309-26 where a violation of this chapter or the
regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter is found to exist, a written
notice from the Public Officer shall be served on the person responsible for
the correction thereof.
§ 309-22. Contents of notice.
The notice of violation required by § 309-21 shall specify the violation or
violations committed: the work required to be done to correct same; a
reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30 days, to correct or abate the
violation; the right of the person served to request a hearing; and that the
notice shall become an order of the Public Officer in 10 days after service
unless a hearing is requested pursuant to § 309-24.
§ 309-23. Service of notice.
§ 309-24. Notice of violation to become order unless hearing
requested.
Within 10 days of the date of service of a notice required by § 309-21 the
notice shall constitute a final order unless any person affected by the notice
requests a hearing thereon and serves a written request within the ten-day
period in person or by mail on the Public Officer. Such request for a hearing
shall set forth briefly the grounds or reasons on which the request for a
hearing is based and the factual matters contained in the notice of violation
which are to be disputed at the hearing. The Public Officer, upon receipt of
the request, shall, within 30 days therefrom and upon five days' notice to
the party aggrieved, set the matter down for hearing.
A. Notice required by § 309-21 shall be posted in a conspicuous location in
or on any nonresidential structure or premises in violation of
regulations of this chapter, such notice to state where and under what
conditions a copy of the notice may be obtained. Simultaneously with
posting, the notice shall be mailed to the responsible person, firm or
corporation at the last known address or principal place of business or
to the agent appointed by such person, firm or corporation pursuant to
these regulations.
B. Service may also be effected in person upon the individual owner,
operator, occupant or agent or upon a member of the family of such
persons over the age of 14.
C. Where service is by mail, the date of service shall be determined as
being on the day following the day of mailing to addresses within the
Township, and as on the fourth day after the day of mailing to addresses
outside the Township. Where the service would fall upon a Sunday or
other day when mail is not ordinarily delivered, then the day of service
shall be as of the next regular delivery day.
§ 309-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-25
1:393
§ 309-25. Hearing.
At any hearing provided pursuant to § 309-21, the Public Officer shall be
vested with all the powers provided by law to preside at hearings, compel
the attendance of witnesses and parties in interest by issuance and service
of subpoena, to require by subpoena the production of books, records or
other documents at any such hearing which may be pertinent to matters to
be determined by such officer, and to enforce any such subpoena or secure
any order for the enforcement of any such subpoena as provided by law.
Determination shall be made within 10 days from the completion of the
hearing. The Public Officer shall issue an order either incorporating the
determinations and directions contained in the notice, modifying the same
or withdrawing the notice.
§ 309-26. Notice and hearing not required under certain
circumstances.
A. Notwithstanding the requirements of §§ 309-21 to 309-25, violations of
the following sections may be prosecuted without notice by the filing of
a complaint by the Public Officer in the Municipal Court: §§ 309-16,
309-36 and 309-54D.
B. No notice shall be required on the enforcement of §§ 309-54D and
309-55D as to the removal of accumulated snow or ice from paths,
walks, driveways, parking lots and parking areas used by pedestrians
and automobiles where such snow or ice remains uncleared within
eight hours of daylight after the termination of the snowfall.
C. Where the Public Officer, after hearing, shall determine that there was
a violation and a notice was served upon the owner, operator or
occupant, whether or not the violation was abated prior to the issuance
of an order, if thereafter within the space of one year there shall be a
second violation by the same owner, operator or occupant of the same
provision of this chapter discovered on the same premises, the offender
may be prosecuted on the second violation, without the Public Officer
first giving notice and opportunity for a hearing to the owner, operator
or occupant, by the filing of a complaint by the Public Officer in the
Municipal Court. Where the Public Officer has on two different
occasions found violations by the same owner, operator or occupant on
the same premises and has issued notices on each and has held at least
one hearing and issued an order thereon upon discovering a third or
subsequent violation by the same owner, operator or occupant on the
same premises within the space of one year, whether the same sections
or of any other sections of this chapter, the Officer may thereupon
prosecute the offender by filing a complaint in the Municipal Court for
the third or subsequent violation occurring within the period of one
year without first providing notice and opportunity for a hearing by the
Public Officer.
§ 309-25 LAWRENCE CODE § 309-27
1:394
§ 309-27. Extension of time for compliance.
The Public Officer may extend the time for correction or abatement of the
violations of this chapter for an additional period of time not to exceed 30
days, except where major capital improvements or renovations are involved,
in which instance the time for completion may be extended for a period not
to exceed 90 days beyond the expiration date of the original notice.
§ 309-28. Summary abatement under certain conditions.
§ 309-29. Abatement by Township; cost.
Where abatement of any nuisance as defined in this chapter, correction
of a defect in the premises or bringing the premises into compliance with
the requirements of this Code or any municipal ordinance or State law
applicable thereto requires expending Township funds therefor, the Public
Officer shall present a report of work proposed to be done to accomplish
the foregoing to the Council with an estimate of the cost thereof, along with
a summary of the proceedings undertaken by the Public Officer to secure
compliance, including notices served upon the owners, operators, lessors
or agents, as the case may be, hearings, and orders of the Public Officer
with reference thereto. The Council may thereupon by resolution authorize
the abatement of the nuisance, correction of the defect or work necessary
to place the premises in proper condition and in compliance with the Code
or any ordinance of the Township and laws of the state. The Public Officer
may thereafter proceed to have the work performed in accordance with
the resolution at Township expense, not to exceed the amount specified in
the resolution, and shall, upon completion thereof, submit a report of the
funds expended and costs to the Council. After review of the same, the
Council may approve the expenses and costs, whereupon the same shall
become a lien against the premises, collectible as provided by law. A copy
A. Where the violation or condition existing on the premises under this
chapter is of such a nature as to constitute an immediate threat to the
health, safety, and welfare of person or persons unless abated without
delay, the Public Officer may either abate the violation or condition
immediately or order the owner, operator or occupant to correct the
violation or condition within a period of time not to exceed three days,
and upon failure to do so, the Public Officer may abate the condition
immediately thereafter.
B. The Public Officer shall submit to the Council a report of the work done
and expenses incurred to abate such condition and the Council may
thereupon, by resolution, approve the expenses and costs therefor,
whereupon the same shall become a lien against the premises,
collectible as provided by law. Copy of such resolution shall be certified
by the Clerk and filed with the Collector of Taxes of the Township, who
shall be responsible for the collection thereof, and a copy of such report
and resolution shall be sent by certified mail to the owner of the
premises.
§ 309-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-29
1:395
of the resolution approving the expenses and costs shall be certified by
the Council and filed with the Tax Collector of the Township, who shall
be responsible for the collection thereof, and a copy of this report and
resolution shall be sent by certified mail to the owner.
§ 309-30. Violations of other regulations.
Any violation of this Code or any other ordinance other than this chapter
discovered by a duly authorized Municipal Officer shall be reported to the
Public Officer, who shall refer the alleged violation to the official agency
responsible for the enforcement of such other ordinance.
§ 309-31. Eviction of unlawful occupants.
Where there exists a violation of occupancy standard under this chapter,
an owner or operator, upon receipt of a notice of violation, if unable to
eliminate the violation by peaceable means within the period of time
specified in such notice, shall commence within such period legal action
to dispossess, evict or eject the occupants who cause the violation. No
further action shall then be taken against the owner or operator so long
as the action under this section is pending in the court and is prosecuted
expeditiously and in good faith.
§ 309-32. Effect of notice of violation on owner.
For the purpose of enforcement of this chapter, the service of a notice on
an owner, whether or not the owner is also the operator, shall constitute
notice of violations set forth therein until such violations are abated in
conformity with this chapter, this Code and other applicable ordinances of
the Township.
§ 309-33. Access to adjoining premises; application.
Where any owner, operator or occupant is required to make repairs or
otherwise improve his property and is unable to comply with this chapter
without having right of access to the building or premises through or across
adjoining premises not owned by him or under his control, and where right
of access has been refused the owner, operator or occupant, or where the
owner or person responsible for granting permission cannot be found or
located, then, upon the filing of affidavit setting forth the facts with the
Public Officer, the Public Officer shall serve a five-day written notice of a
hearing in accordance with the provisions for service contained in § 309-23
upon the owner, operator or occupant of any adjoining premises affected by
the application.
§ 309-34. Hearing on application for access.
On the day fixed for hearing on an application pursuant to § 309-33, the
Public Officer shall provide opportunity for the owner, operator or occupant
of the adjoining property or properties to state why access should not be
granted across the adjoining properties.
§ 309-29 LAWRENCE CODE § 309-35
1:396
§ 309-35. Issuance of certificates of necessity; conditions; bond
requirements.
If the Public Officer determines that access is necessary to accomplish
or complete repairs or improvements necessary for compliance with this
chapter, then the Public Officer shall issue a certificate of necessity, setting
forth therein the person or persons to whom the certificate shall apply,
such conditions as shall be necessary to protect the adjoining property,
reasonable time limits during which such certificate shall operate,
precautions to be taken to avoid damage and, where the Public Officer
deems proper, that a bond be procured at the expense of any of the persons
seeking access to secure the adjoining property against damage to persons
or property arising out of such rights of access. The bond shall not exceed in
amount $10,000 and the amount set shall take into consideration the extent,
nature and duration of the repairs, the proximity of the improvement on the
premises affected and potential risk of damage thereto. The bond shall be
filed with the Public Officer.
§ 309-36. Refusal to allow access.
Any refusal to comply with §§ 309-32 to 309-35 or any interference with
access to premises pursuant to a certificate issued under § 309-35 shall be
a violation of this chapter, and in addition to penalties provided for violation
of this chapter, the Public Officer may, upon affidavit, apply to the judge for
a warrant under the procedure set forth in § 309-16 authorizing access to
the premises under appropriate conditions and circumstances as provided
under § 309-35.
§ 309-37. Each violation separate; continuing violations.
Each violation of a provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation, independent of any other provision. Each day's failure
to comply with any such section or subsection shall constitute a separate
violation.
§ 309-38. Where violator is not a natural person.
Where a defendant charged with a violation of this chapter is other than a
natural person, any agent, superintendent, officer, member or partner who
shall, along or with others, have charge, care or control of the premises,
shall be liable for any penalty imposed upon conviction for such violation.
§ 309-39. Fine imposed to be a lien.
In the event of the imposition of a fine or penalty by the Municipal Court
or any other court of competent jurisdiction against the owner, operator or
lessor of any building or structure in the Township for violation of any part
of this chapter, the fine shall be collectible as a lien against the premises.
§ 309-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-40
1:397
§ 309-40. Lien for abatement.
Where abatement of any nuisance as defined herein or correction of any
unsanitary or unhealthy condition requires expenditure of the Township of
Lawrence moneys therefor, in addition to other remedies provided by law,
the Public Officer shall present a report of the work accomplished to the
of the Township of Lawrence along with a summary of the proceedings
undertaken to secure compliance, including notices served upon owners,
operators or occupants, as the case may be. The governing body may
then approve the expenses and costs, whereupon they shall become a lien
against the commercial premises, collectible as provided by law. A copy of
the resolution approving the said expense shall be certified to the Municipal
Clerk and filed with the Tax Collector of the Township of Lawrence, who
shall be responsible for the collection thereof, and a copy of the report and
resolution shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
owner of the commercial premises.
§ 309-41. Enforcing officials.
At the request of the Public Officer, any officer, agent or employee of the
Township of Lawrence shall assist in the enforcement, interpretation or
implementation of any provisions of this chapter.
§ 309-42. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty stated in
Chapter 1, Article III. The continuation of such violation on each successive
day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing
or permitting the continuation of the violation may be punished as provided
above for each separate offense.
§ 309-43. Certificates of conformity: application.
Any person who intends to sell, transfer or convey, by deed or otherwise,
any improved real property other than primarily residential premises, must
make application to the Public Officer or his designee, and the Construction
Official's office for an occupancy approval for inspection of the premises
in order that determination may be made whether or not such property
conforms to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 309-44. Inspections; issuance of certificate of conformity.
The Public Officer shall cause an inspection to be made within 15 days
after the request for same has been made to the Public Officer by the
proposed seller. If upon inspection of the property, it shall be determined
that no evidence of any violation of this chapter exists, the Public Officer
or his designee, and the Construction Official's office shall, within 15 days
after the inspection has been completed, cause to be issued a certificate of
conformity, and an occupancy permit, stating that said structure conforms
to the provisions of this chapter, and the New Jersey State Uniform
§ 309-40 LAWRENCE CODE § 309-44
1:398
Construction Code. If the time schedules set forth herein are not met by
the Township, the property may be transferred without the necessity of a
certificate of conformity.
§ 309-45. Conveyance of certificated premises: additional
inspections, new certificates.
If the premises are sold, transferred or conveyed within six months from the
date of the issuance of the certificate of conformity, no further inspection
shall be required. If sold, transferred or conveyed after six months from the
date of issuance, a further inspection shall be required and a new certificate
of conformity shall issue as set forth herein.
§ 309-46. Judicial sales.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to judicial sales, except that
after a title has been taken by the purchaser from such judicial offer,
then the purchaser shall make application for a certificate of conformity in
accordance with the provisions herein.
§ 309-47. Removal of refuse; receptacles required.
§ 309-48. Shopping centers: fire lanes, parking space, traffic lanes
and trash containers required.
The owner and operator of every shopping center shall be responsible for
providing and/or maintaining the following:
A. The owner and operator of every shopping center, and the owner and
operator of commercial and industrial premises shall have the duty and
responsibility of removing refuse and garbage at least twice per week,
but if twice weekly pickup is not sufficient to adequately remove
accumulated garbage, removal more often shall be required.
B. Every owner, operator and occupant shall have the duty and
responsibility of providing sufficient and suitable receptacles with
tightfitting covers for receiving and holding refuse and garbage. The
receptacles shall be maintained in a manner, with the cover in place, so
as to prevent the creation of a nuisance, and shall be kept in an
enclosed space separate and apart from sidewalks and other pedestrian
areas, except when set out for collection during the hours of a day
scheduled for such collection.
A. A fire lane, at least eight feet wide, adjacent to the public walkway or
sidewalk in front of the entrance to the commercial businesses and
running the entire length of the building or buildings occupied by said
businesses.
B. Means of ingress and egress shall be clearly marked by signs; and
concrete barriers, at least six inches high, shall be placed on each side
§ 309-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-48
1:399
§ 309-49. Maintenance of public ways on multifamily, commercial
and industrial properties.
The owner, operator and occupant shall maintain path, walks, driveways,
parking lots, parking areas and other parts of the premises which are
accessible to and used by persons on the premises, in good repair, free
of safety hazards and unsanitary conditions, including, but not limited to,
holes, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions, ice, uncleared snow,
litter and excretion of pets and other animals. All such holes and
excavations shall be filled and repaired, walks and steps repaired and other
conditions removed where necessary to eliminate hazards or unsanitary
conditions, with reason-able dispatch upon notification by the Public Officer.
§ 309-50. Duty to maintain free of nuisances and hazards.
Property owner, operator, and occupant shall be responsible that the
exterior of the premises and all structures thereon are kept free of all
nuisances and any hazards to the safety of occupants, pedestrians and other
persons utilizing the premises, and free of unsanitary conditions.
§ 309-51. Duty of occupant to keep premises sanitary.
All parts of the premises under the control of the occupant shall be kept
in a clean and sanitary condition, and the occupant shall refrain from
performing any acts which would render other parts of the premises
unclean or unsanitary or which would obstruct the owner or operator from
performing any duty required hereunder, or maintaining the premises in a
clean and sanitary condition.
§ 309-52. Duty to keep premises free of infestation.
Every owner, operator and occupant shall be responsible for the elimination
of infestation in and on the premises subject to his control.
§ 309-53. Outside storage.
of said means of ingress and egress in order to provide a safe method
of ingress and egress.
C. Parking spaces shall be clearly indicated by painted lines, white on dark
surfaces or black on light surfaces.
D. Lanes for the movement of traffic, at least 12 feet wide in each
direction, shall be clearly marked, and arrows indicating one-way traffic
shall be painted in these lanes at both ends, white on dark surfaces or
black on light surfaces.
E. A covered trash basket with at least a twenty-gallon capacity shall be
provided for each 150 feet of store frontage in the shopping areas. Such
baskets may be placed in the walking or pedestrian area.
§ 309-48 LAWRENCE CODE § 309-53
1:400
§ 309-54. Maintenance of exterior of premises.
The exterior of the premises and all nonresidential structures thereon shall
be kept free of all nuisances and of any hazards to the safety of occupants,
pedestrians and other persons utilizing the premises; and free of unsanitary
conditions, and any of the foregoing shall be promptly removed and abated
by the owner or operator. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator to
keep the premises free of hazards, which include but are not limited to the
following:
A. Outside storage or display of merchandise or equipment shall be
forbidden. However, this subsection shall not apply to outside storage
of motor vehicles, trailers, campers, boats or other similar merchandise
held for retail sale. This subsection shall apply, but not be limited to,
storage of merchandise or equipment in trailers, motor vehicles,
shacks, sheds or other outside containers.
B. Waiver of this provision may be applied for by written request to the
Township Council and granted, based on the size and kind of
merchandise or equipment, duration and location of the outside storage
and the purpose of this section. A waiver for the outside storage of not
more than one boat, trailer, camper, or recreational vehicle per dwelling
unit may be obtained by the owner thereof upon application to the
Public Officer, provided, however, that on-street parking, in areas
where otherwise permitted, shall not be permitted for more than 48
hours.
A. Refuse. The exterior of all premises shall be kept free of brush, weeds,
broken glass, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash,
refuse and debris.
B. Natural growth. The exterior of all premises shall be kept free of all
dead and dying trees and limbs or other natural growth which by
reason of rotting or deteriorating conditions or storm damage
constitute a hazard to persons in the vicinity thereof. Trees shall be
kept pruned and trimmed to prevent such conditions. All brush, hedges
and other plant life growing within 10 feet of any roadway and within
20 feet of highways shall be cut to a height of not more than 2 1/2 feet.
C. Landscaping. Premises shall be kept landscaped and lawns, hedges and
bushes shall be kept trimmed and free from becoming overgrown and
unsightly where exposed to public view and where the same constitute
a blighting factor depreciating adjoining property. Plantings required
by site plan approval shall be replaced if they should die.
D. All fences, brush, hedges and other plant life located on corner
properties at street intersections shall be restricted to a height of not
more than 30 inches for a distance of at least 20 feet from the
intersection and shall be set back at least 10 feet from the edge of the
pavement in order not to interfere with the vision of automobile drivers
using the intersection.
§ 309-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-55
1:401
§ 309-55. Signs; advertising material; billboards.
A. Signs and billboards. All permanent signs and billboards exposed to
public view, permitted by reason of other regulations as a lawful
nonconforming use, shall be maintained in good repair. Any signs which
have excessively weathered or faded or those upon which the paint has
excessively peeled or cracked shall, with their supporting members, be
removed forthwith or put into a good state of repair. All nonoperative or
broken electrical signs shall be repaired or shall, with their supporting
members, be removed forthwith. Except for "for rent" or "for sale"
signs, any temporary sign or other paper advertising material glued or
otherwise attached to a window or windows or otherwise exposed to
public view shall be removed at the expiration of the event or sale for
which it is erected, or within 60 days after erection, whichever shall
occur sooner. Except during the course of repairs or alterations, no
more than 33 1/3 of the square footage of any single window or single
window display area shall be devoted to signs or other temporary
advertising material attached to such window or windows or otherwise
exposed to public view.
B. Windows. All windows exposed to public view shall be kept clean and
free of marks or foreign substances, except when necessary in the
course of changing displays. No storage of materials, stock or inventory
shall be permitted in window display areas ordinarily exposed to public
view unless such areas are first screened from the public view by
drapes, venetian blinds, or other permanent rendering of the windows
opaque to the public view. All screening of interiors shall be maintained
in a clean and attractive manner and in a good state of repair.
C. Front yard parking. No person shall park, stop or stand any motor
vehicle, or permit or suffer the same to be done, in any front yard areas
of premises occupied by a residential building, except on driveways and
parking areas constructed and installed in compliance with this chapter
and other applicable Township ordinances and not less than three feet
from the interior front sidewalk line adjacent to such premises.
D. Storefronts. All storefronts shall be kept in good repair, painted, where
required, and shall not constitute a safety hazard or nuisance. In the
event repairs to a store front become necessary, such repairs shall be
made with the same or similar materials as used in the construction of
the storefront and in such a manner as to permanently repair the
damaged area or areas. Any cornice visible above a storefront shall be
kept painted, where required, and in good repair.
E. Awnings and marquees. Any awning or marquee and its accompanying
structural members which extend over any street, sidewalk or other
portion of the premises shall be maintained in good repair and shall not
constitute a nuisance or a safety hazard. In the event such awnings or
marquees are not properly maintained in accordance with the
foregoing, they shall, together with their supporting members, be
removed forthwith. In the event such awnings or marquees are made of
§ 309-55 LAWRENCE CODE § 309-55
1:402
§ 309-56. Nonresidential areas: exterior structural soundness and
general maintenance.
The exterior of the premises and the condition of accessory structures shall
be maintained so that the appearance of the premises and all buildings
thereon shall reflect a level of maintenance in keeping with the standards
of the neighborhood or such higher standards as may be adopted in the
future by the Township and such that the appearance of the premises and
structures shall not constitute a blighting factor for adjoining property
owners nor an element leading to the progressive deterioration and
downgrading of the neighborhood with the accompanying diminution of
property values, including the following:
cloth, plastic or of similar materials, such cloth or plastic where
exposed to public view shall be maintained in good condition and
shall not show evidence of excessive weathering discoloration, ripping,
tearing or other holes. Noting in this subsection shall be construed to
authorize any encroachment on streets, sidewalks or other parts of the
public domain.
F. Unoccupied buildings. All unoccupied buildings, including those areas
visible by the public from the public street or sidewalk, must be
maintained in broom-clean condition and free of litter.
A. Painting, deterioration, etc. The exterior of every structure or accessory
structure, including fences, signs and storefronts, shall be maintained
in good repair and all surfaces thereof shall be kept painted or
whitewashed where necessary for purposes of preservation and
appearance. All surfaces shall be maintained free of broken glass, loose
shingles, crumbling stone or brick, excessive peeling paint or other
condition reflective of deterioration or inadequate maintenance, to the
end that the property itself may be preserved, safety and fire hazards
eliminated and adjoining properties and the neighborhood protected
from blighting influences.
B. All reconstruction of walls and sidings shall be of standard quality and
appearance commensurate with the character of the properties in the
same block and on both sides of the street on which the premises front,
such that the materials used will not be of a kind that by their
appearance under prevailing appraisal practices and standards will
depreciate the values of neighboring and adjoining premises.
C. Exterior walls, roofs, etc. Exterior walls, roofs, windows, window
frames, doors, door frames, foundations and other parts of the
structure shall be so maintained as to keep water from entering the
structure and to prevent excessive drafts. Damaged or missing shingles
or other materials shall be repaired or replaced promptly; places
showing signs of rot, leakage, deterioration or corrosion shall be
restored and protected against weathering and seepage.
§ 309-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 309-56
1:403
§ 309-57. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this
chapter should be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter which shall remain
in full force and effect; and to this end the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 309-58. Effect of partial invalidity.
No license or permit or other certification of compliance with this Code
shall constitute a defense against violation of any other local ordinance
applicable to any structure or premises, nor shall any provision herein
relieve any owner, operator, or occupant from complying with any such
other provision, nor any official of the Township of Lawrence from enforcing
any such other provision.
D. Overhangings. The exterior of all premises shall be kept free of loose
and overhanging objects and accumulations of ice and snow which by
reason of location above ground level constitute a danger of falling on
persons in the vicinity thereof.
E. Ground surface hazards or insanitary conditions. The exterior of all
premises shall be kept free of holes, excavations, breaks, projections,
obstructions, icy conditions, uncleared snow and excretion of pets and
other animals on paths, walks, driveways, parking lots, and parking
areas and other parts of the premises which are accessible to and used
by persons on the premises. All such holes and excavations shall be
filled and repaired, walks and steps replaced and other conditions
removed where necessary to eliminate hazards or insanitary conditions
with reasonable dispatch upon their discovery.
F. Recurring accumulations of stormwater. Adequate runoff drains shall
be provided and maintained in accordance with applicable Township
and ELSA regulations to eliminate any recurrent or excessive
accumulation of stormwater.
G. Sources of infestation. The exterior of all premises shall be kept free of
sources of infestation.
H. Foundation walls. Foundation walls shall be kept structurally sound,
free from defects and damage and capable of bearing imposed loads
safely.
§ 309-56 LAWRENCE CODE § 309-58
1:404
Chapter 316
REDEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
§ 316-1. Prohibition on awarding public redevelopment agreements
to contributors to political campaigns.
A. Prohibition; definitions.
(1) Any other provision of law to the contrary notwithstanding, the
Township, or the Township's Redevelopment Agency, as the case
may be, shall not enter into a redevelopment agreement, or
otherwise contract with any redeveloper concerning the
redevelopment of any area within the Township pursuant to the
Local Redevelopment and Housing Law, N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.,
as same may be amended, if that redeveloper has made or solicited
any contribution of money, loans of any kind, pledge of a
contribution, including in-kind contributions, to a municipal
campaign committee or fund of any candidate for, or holder of,
public office within the Township having responsibility for entering
into or awarding a redevelopment agreement, or for appointing
those who enter into the agreement on behalf of the Township or to
any Lawrence Township municipal or County party committee,
continuing political committee, candidate committee or to any
political action committee (PAC) which engages in the support of
Township municipal elections and/or Township municipal parties or
which engages in the support of Township municipal campaigns,
within two calendar years immediately preceding the date of the
redevelopment agreement and for two years after the completion of
the redevelopment project. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
(2) All redevelopment agreements or amendments thereto entered into
by the Township or the Township's Redevelopment Agency, as the
case may be, shall contain a provision prohibiting redevelopers as
defined in Subsection A(3) below from soliciting or making any
contributions of money or pledge of a contribution, including inkind
contributions, and loans of any kind, to a campaign committee
of any Township candidate or holder of public office within the
Township having responsibility for arranging, entering into or
approving the redevelopment agreement, or for appointing those
who enter into the agreement on behalf of the Township, or to any
Township political campaign committee (PAC) or to any Township
or County party, committee, to any political action committee which
regularly engages in the support of municipal elections and/or
municipal parties or which engages in the support of municipal
campaigns, from the time of first communication between the
redeveloper and the Township regarding a specific redevelopment
project and the later of the termination of negotiations or the
completion of the terms of the redevelopment agreement.
§ 309-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-1
1:405
§ 316-2. Contributions made prior to the effective date.
No contribution of money or any other thing of value, including in-kind
contributions, made by a redeveloper to the municipal campaign committee
or fund of any Township municipal candidate or office holder, or any
Township municipal or County party committee, shall be deemed a violation
of this chapter, nor shall an agreement for a redevelopment project of any
kind whatsoever be disqualified thereby, if the contribution was made by the
redeveloper prior to the effective date of this chapter.
§ 316-3. Contribution statement by redeveloper; reporting.
[Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. I)]
(3) The term "redeveloper" as used in this chapter shall include the
definition set forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-3, Definitions. The term
"redeveloper" shall also include all "subdevelopers" who are under
contract with a redeveloper to perform redevelopment or
rehabilitation work at any redevelopment project within the
Township. Furthermore, the definition of "redeveloper shall include
the corporation, business trust or other entity that is performing
the redevelopment project within the Township, as well as all
partners and/or officers therein, and all principals who own 10% or
more of the equity in the corporation, business trust or other entity
as well as any subsidiaries owned or controlled by the redeveloper.
(4) The term "redevelopment project" shall include the definition set
forth in N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-3, Definitions.
A. Prior to arranging, entering into or approving a redevelopment
agreement with any redeveloper, the Township or the Township's
Redevelopment Agency as the case may be, shall receive a certification
from the redeveloper that the redeveloper has not made any
contributions in violation of this chapter.
B. The redeveloper shall have a continuing duty to report any violations of
this chapter that may occur during the negotiation or duration of the
redevelopment agreement and until all specified terms of the
agreement have been completed. The certification required under this
subsection shall be made prior to entry into the redevelopment
agreement with the Township, or the Redevelopment Agency, as the
case may be, and shall be in addition to any other certifications that
may be required by any other provision of law.
C. Application checklist.
(1) An Application Checklist ordinance is hereby adopted pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10.3 to require that the Contribution Disclosure
Statements specified in paragraph d. of this subsection be
submitted by the applicant for all applications to Township
§ 316-1 LAWRENCE CODE § 316-3
1:406
§ 316-4. Return of contributions.
A redeveloper may cure a violation of this article if, within 30 days after
a general election, the redeveloper notifies the Town Council, in writing,
and seeks and receives reimbursement of a contribution from the municipal
committee or fund of a Lawrence Township candidate or office holder, any
Lawrence Township municipal or County party committee.
§ 316-5. Penalty.
legislative or administrative authorities for approvals within the
subject matter of this chapter.
(2) The Municipal Planning Board shall amend its Application
Checklist for applications for site plan and subdivision approvals
within the scope of this chapter to include required submission of
the Contribution Disclosure Statements specified in Subsection D
of this subsection.
(3) An application shall not be deemed complete by the Administrative
Official or accepted for public hearing by the Municipal Agency
until the required Contribution Disclosure Statements are
submitted.
D. The term "Contribution Disclosure Statement" shall mean a list
specifying the amount, date, and the recipient of any and all
contributions made to or on behalf of any candidate, candidate
committee, joint candidate committee, political committee, continuing
political committee or political party committee of, or within Mercer
County, made up to two years prior to filing the redevelopment or
variance application, and/or two years after the completion of the
redevelopment project.
A. It shall be a breach of the terms of a Township redevelopment
agreement for a redeveloper to:
(1) Make or solicit a contribution in violation of this chapter;
(2) Knowingly conceal or misrepresent a contribution given or
received;
(3) Make or solicit contributions through intermediaries for the
purpose of concealing or misrepresenting the source of the
contribution;
(4) Make or solicit any contribution on the condition or with the
agreement that it will be contributed to a campaign committee of
any candidate or holder of the public office of the Township;
(5) Engage or employ a lobbyist or consultant with the intent or
understanding that such lobbyist or consultant would make or
solicit any contribution which, if made or solicited by the
§ 316-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 316-5
1:407
Chapter 322
RENTAL PROPERTY
redeveloper itself, would subject that entity to the restrictions of
this chapter; [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
(6) Fund contributions made by third parties (including, but not
limited to, subcontractors, consultants, attorneys, family members
and employees;
(7) Engage in any exchange of contributions to circumvent the intent
of this chapter; or
(8) Directly, indirectly, through or by any other person or means, do
any act which would subject that entity to the restrictions of this
chapter.
B. Any redeveloper who knowingly and intentionally violates the terms of
Subsection B shall be disqualified from eligibility for any future
redevelopment agreements with the Township for a period of four
calendar years from the date of the violation.
§ 316-5 LAWRENCE CODE § 316-5
1:408
ARTICLE I
Minimum Space, Use and Location Requirements
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1931-07]
§ 322-1. Compliance required.
No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling
unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the
requirements in this article.
§ 322-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OCCUPANT — Refer to adult occupants 18 years or older.
§ 322-3. Floor space.
§ 322-4. Ceiling height.
§ 322-5. Basement use.
A. In all dwelling units other than rooming units, there shall be a minimum
usable floor area for the initial occupant of 150 square feet and 100
square feet additional space for each additional occupant provided,
however, that children under the age of two shall not be considered
additional occupants.
B. In every dwelling unit other than a rooming unit, every room occupied
or intended to be occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall
have a minimum usable floor area of 70 square feet and every room
occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping purposes by more than
one occupant shall have a usable floor area of at least 50 square feet for
each such occupant, provided, however, that children under the age of
two shall not be considered to be additional occupants.
C. Kitchens, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall not be used for sleeping
purposes.
A. At least half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a
ceiling height of at least seven feet and the floor area of that part of any
room where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be
considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of
the room for the purpose of determining the maximum permissible
occupancy thereof.
B. Every habitable basement shall have a minimum ceiling height of at
least seven feet.
A. No basement space shall be used as a sleeping room or dwelling unit
unless:
§ 322-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-5
1:409
§ 322-6. Location of sleeping rooms.
All sleeping rooms must have access via a common hallway.
§ 322-7. Smoke alarms and carbon monoxide alarms.
All rental units in the Township shall have at least one smoke detector on
each floor level and a carbon monoxide detector within 10 feet of each
bedroom. The carbon monoxide detector is not to be located in a bedroom,
but is to be located in the hallway area adjacent to the bedroom.
§ 322-8. Exitways.
(1) The space conforms to the requirements of the Uniform
Construction Code, N.J.A.C. 5:23–1.1 et seq.;
(2) The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness;
(3) There are no pipes, ducts or other obstructions less than six feet six
inches above the floor level;
(4) All furnaces or other heating facilities are so located, insulated and
separated from the living area by fire rated partitions or walls
necessary pursuant to the Uniform Construction Code so that the
same does not constitute an undue hazard to the safety and health
of the occupants. Storage of any materials or items shall not occur
within 36 inches of any heater or hot water heating unit.
(5) The means of egress conforms to the Uniform Construction Code,
including those requirements pertaining to sleeping purposes.
B. An interior room not having its own source of natural light and
ventilation may be used for living purposes, other than sleeping, only
where such room is adjacent to an outside room which has adequate
natural light and ventilation, calculated on the basis of the combined
floor area of the two rooms, and where the separating wall between the
two rooms has a clear horizontal opening, doorway or archway at least
six feet wide.
A. Safe exitway. Every dwelling unit shall have a safe and unobstructed
means of exit leading to a safe and open space at ground level
accessible to a street, conforming to the requirements of the Uniform
Construction Code.
B. Direct access to exitway. Access to any exit required by this article shall
not necessitate passage through any other dwelling unit or part thereof,
nor shall any exit be subject to locking by any device which impedes or
prohibits ready exit.
§ 322-5 LAWRENCE CODE § 322-8
1:410
ARTICLE II
Licensing of Residential Rental Units
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1932-07]
§ 322-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENT — The individual or individuals designated by owner as person(s)
authorized by the owner to perform any duty imposed upon the owner by
this article. They are defined by N.J.S.A. 45:15-3; however, such term may
include a licensed real estate broker or salesman if such person designated
by the owner as his agent is to licensed.
APARTMENT COMPLEX — Two or more buildings, each containing two or
more apartments, which are located within close proximity of each other
and are owned by the same owner.
APARTMENT or DWELLING — Any apartment, cottage, bungalow, singlefamily
dwelling, any room or rooms in a rooming/boarding house, or other
dwelling unit consisting of one or more rooms occupying all or part of a
floor or floors in a building, whether designed with or without housekeeping
facilities for dwelling purposes, except that this article shall not apply
to an owner-occupied residential dwelling in which up to two bedrooms
are rented, provided such rooms are not accessed by separate entrance,
not utilized by the other residents of the dwelling. This definition shall
apply notwithstanding whether the apartment be designed for residence,
for office, or the operation of any industry or business, or for any other type
of independent use.
CHANGE IN TENANCY — A change in the tenant renting a rental unit.
LICENSE — The license issued by the Municipal Clerk attesting that the
rental unit has been properly registered in accordance with this article and
inspected for a certificate of occupancy.
LICENSEE — The person to whom the license is issued pursuant to this
article. The term "licensee" includes within its definition the term "agent"
where applicable.
OWNER — Any person or group of persons, firm, corporation or officer
thereof, partnership, association or trust, who owns, operates, exercises
control over or is in charge of a rental facility.
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, trust
or other legal entity, or any combination thereof.
RENTAL FACILITY — Every building, group of buildings or a portion thereof
which is kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out to be a place where
living accommodations are supplied, whether furnished or unfurnished, for
pay or other consideration, to one or more individuals and is meant to
include apartments and apartment complexes.
§ 322-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-9
1:411
RENTAL UNIT — A dwelling unit which is available for lease or rental
purposes and is meant to include individual apartments located within
apartment complexes.
§ 322-10. Annual registration.
All rental units shall hereafter be registered with the Lawrence Township
Municipal Clerk on forms which shall be provided for that purpose and
which shall be obtained from the Municipal Clerk's office. Such registration
shall occur on an annual basis as provided herein.
§ 322-11. Registration and licensing: terms; initial registration
provisions.
§ 322-12. Registration forms; filing; contents.
Without in any way intending to infringe upon the requirements of N.J.S.A.
46:8-28, all rental units shall be registered and licensed as provided herein
with the Lawrence Township Municipal Clerk. Every owner shall file with
the Municipal Clerk a registration form for each unit contained within a
building or structure which shall include the following information, but in
no case shall a post office box be accepted in lieu of a street address where
an address is required:
A. Each rental unit shall be registered, inspected and licensed annually
and upon each change in tenancy. Any rental unit located in an
apartment complex with on-site maintenance personnel and on-site
management may, at the discretion of the Fire Official, submit an
affidavit in lieu of on-site inspection by the Fire Official.
(1) The Fire Official, under the Division of Housing, may designate
inspections and other functions under this article to a designee.
B. The license shall expire one year from the date of issuance. Any lease
which has been executed prior to the adoption of the section shall not
be affected, but the rental unit must nevertheless be registered,
inspected and licensed in accordance with this article. No rental unit
shall hereafter be rented unless the rental unit is registered and
licensed in accordance with this article.
A. The name, age and address, including the dwelling unit number, of each
occupant or tenant occupying the rental unit together with a copy of the
lease for the premises;
B. The name and address of the record owner or owners of the premises
and the record owner or owners of the rental business if not the same
persons. In a case of a partnership, the names and addresses of all
general partners shall be provided, together with the telephone
numbers for each of such individuals indicating where such individuals
may be reached, both during the day and evening hours. If the record
owner is a corporation, the name and address of the registered agent
§ 322-9 LAWRENCE CODE § 322-12
1:412
§ 322-13. Registration form; indexing and filing; public inspection;
fee.
The Municipal Clerk shall index and file the registration forms and make
them reasonably available for public inspection. In doing so, the Municipal
Clerk shall follow the mandates of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28.1 so that the filing of the
registration form will simultaneously satisfy the registration requirements
of N.J.S.A. 46:8-28 to the extent that it applies to the property being
registered and will also satisfy the registration requirements of this article.
and corporate officers of the corporation, together with the telephone
numbers for each of such individuals indicating where such individual
may be reached, both during the day and evening hours;
C. If the address of any record owner is not located in the Township, or in
Mercer County, the name and address of person who resides in Mercer
County and who is authorized to accept notices from a tenant and to
issue receipts therefore and to accept service of process on behalf of
the record owner;
D. The name and address of the agent of the premises, if any;
E. The names and address, including dwelling unit numbers of the
superintendent, janitor, custodian and other individual employed by the
owner or agent to provide regulate maintenance service, if any;
F. The name, address and telephone number of an individual
representative of the owner or agent who may be reached or contacted
at any time in the event of any emergency affecting the premises or any
unit of dwelling space therein, including such emergencies as the
future of any essential service or system, and who has the authority to
make emergency decisions concerning the building and any repair
thereto or expenditure in connection therewith;
G. The name and address of every holder of a recorded mortgage on the
premises;
H. If fuel oil is used to heat the building and the landlord furnishes the heat
in the building, the name and address of the fuel oil dealer servicing the
building and the grade of fuel oil used;
I. As to each rental unit, a specification of the exact number of sleeping
rooms contained in the rental unit. In order to satisfy the requirement
of this provision, an owner shall include a floor plan as a part of the
application, which shall be attached to the registration from the
Municipal Clerk; and
J. Such other information as may be prescribed by the Township.
§ 322-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-14
1:413
§ 322-14. Change in information; filing of amended registration
form.
Every person required to file a registration form pursuant to this article
shall file an amended registration form, with the Municipal Clerk, within 20
days after any change in the information required to be included therein.
No fee shall be required for the filing of an amendment except where the
ownership of tenancy of the premises is changed.
§ 322-15. Periodic inspections.
A. Each rental unit shall be inspected at least once in every twelve-month
period and upon each change in tenancy, for the purposes of the
issuance of a certificate of inspection, except that for the first year after
the effective date of this article, rental units having a valid certificate of
inspection issued within one year of registration will not be required to
obtain a new certificate of inspection until the first renewal unless there
is a change of occupancy during the year.
B. Inspections of rental units in apartment complexes with on-site
maintenance and on-site management may, in the discretion of the Fire
Official, submit a sworn affidavit instead of an on-site inspection.
(1) The sworn affidavit shall include, but is not limited to, information
determining that the apartment complex is in compliance with all
Township zoning ordinances, that the apartment complex is in
compliance with the International Property Maintenance Code and
any other information that the Fire Official believes is imperative.
Failure of the apartment complex to submit an affidavit after
request of the Fire Official will be considered an unsatisfactory
inspection of this chapter.
C. Such inspection shall be performed by such person, persons or agency
duly authorized and appointed by the Fire Official. Inspections made by
persons or an agency other than the duly authorized and appointed
person, persons or agency of the Township, shall not be used as a valid
substitute.
D. Such inspection shall be for the purpose of determining zoning
ordinance compliance, and to the extent applicable, to determine if the
property complies with the International Property Maintenance Code.
Upon compliance, the Fire Official shall cause to be issued a Certificate
of Inspection pursuant to Lawrence Township Code.
E. Unsatisfactory inspection. In the event that the inspection(s) of a rental
unit indicates the need for maintenance and/or repairs, such property
shall not thereafter be registered, nor shall a license issue and the
owner of the property, or his agent, shall not lease or rent such
property, nor shall any tenant occupy the property until the necessary
maintenance, repairs and corrections have been made so as to bring the
property and rental unit into compliance with the applicable code(s)
§ 322-14 LAWRENCE CODE § 322-15
1:414
§ 322-16. Access for inspections; repairs.
§ 322-17. Prohibitions on occupancy.
No person shall hereafter occupy any rental unit, nor shall the owner permit
occupancy of any rental unit with the Township, which is not registered and
licensed and for which a certificate of inspection has not been issued in
accordance with this article.
§ 322-18. License.
Upon the filing of a completed registration form, payment of the prescribed
fee and a satisfactory inspection, the owner shall be entitled to the issuance
of a license commencing on the date of issuance and expiring on the same
date of the next calendar year. A registration form shall be required for each
rental unit and a license shall be issued to the owner for each rental unit,
even if more than one rental unit is contained in the property.
and the property is thereafter subsequently reinserted, approved,
registered and licensed. In the event that the property is occupied
when such conditions are discovered, all such corrections shall be made
within 30 days, and if not made within that time period, the owner shall
be deemed in violation of this article and every day that the violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation, subject to
the penalty provisions stated in Chapter 1, Article III.
A. The Inspection Officers under the Division of Housing are hereby
authorized to make inspections to determine the condition of rental
facilities and rental units in order that they may promote the purposes
of this article to safeguard the health, safety and welfare of the
occupants of rental facilities and rental units and of the general public.
For the purpose of making such inspection the Inspecting Officers shall
be vested with the authority set forth in the Lawrence Township
Municipal Code. The owner or occupant of every rental facility and
rental unit shall give the inspecting officer free access to the rental unit
at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspections,
examinations and surveys.
B. Every occupant shall give the owner of the rental unit access to any part
of such rental facility and rental unit at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to affect
compliance with the provisions of this article or any lawful order issued
pursuant thereto.
C. Complaints. Within 10 days of receipt of a complaint alleging a reported
violation of this article, an Inspecting Officer shall conduct an
inspection as provided herein.
§ 322-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-19
1:415
§ 322-19. Fees.
At the time of the filing of the registration form, and prior to the issuance
of a license, the owner or agent of the owner must pay a fee in accordance
with the fee schedule in Chapter 156, Fees.
§ 322-20. Providing registration form to occupants and tenants.
Every owner shall provide each occupant or tenant occupying a rental unit
with a copy of the registration form required by this article. This particular
provision shall not apply to any hotel, motel or guesthouse registered with
the State of New Jersey pursuant to the Hotel and Multiple Dwelling Act as
defined in N.J.S.A. 55:13A-3. This provision may be complied with by posting
a copy of the registration certificate in a conspicuous place within the rental
unit(s).
§ 322-21. Maximum number of occupancy; posting.
§ 322-22. Taxes and other municipal charges; payment precondition
for registration and license.
No rental unit may be registered and no license shall be issued for any
property containing a rental unit unless all municipal taxes, water and
sewer charges and any other municipal assessments are paid on a current
basis.
§ 322-23. Other rental unit standards.
All dwelling units shall be maintained in accordance with Chapter 220,
Housing Standards, of the Code of Lawrence Township.
§ 322-24. Occupant(s) standards.
A. The maximum number of occupants shall be posted in each rental unit.
It shall be unlawful for any person, including the owner, agent, tenant
or registered tenant to allow a greater number of persons than the
posted maximum number of occupants to sleep in or occupy overnight
the rental unit for a period exceeding 21 days. Any person violating this
provision shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter.
B. Only those occupants, whose names are on file with the Township as
required by this article, may reside in the licensed premises. It shall be
unlawful for a nonregistered person to reside in the premises and any
owner, agent, tenant or registered tenant allowing a nonregistered
person to reside in the premises and the nonregistered person, shall be
in violation of this subsection.
A. Nuisance prohibited. No rental facility shall be conducted in a manner
which shall result in any unreasonable disturbance or disruption to the
surrounding properties and property owners or of the public in general,
§ 322-19 LAWRENCE CODE § 322-24
1:416
§ 322-25. Revocation of license; procedure.
such that it shall constitute a nuisance as defined in the ordinances of
the Township.
B. Compliance with other laws. The maintenance of all rental facilities and
the conduct engaged in upon the premises by occupants and their
guests shall at all times be in full compliance with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the Township with all applicable state
and federal law, including laws pertaining to underage drinking and
controlled substances.
A. Grounds. In addition to any other penalty prescribed herein, an owner
may be subject to the revocation or suspension of the license issued
hereunder upon the happening of one or more of the following:
(1) Conviction of a violation of this article in the municipal court or any
other court of competent jurisdiction;
(2) Determination of a violation of this article at a hearing held
pursuant to Subsection B;
(3) Repeated ("repeated" to be defined as two or more times) renting
the unit or units to a tenant or tenants who are convicted of a
violation of the Township's Noise Ordinance,8 the Township's
Ordinance Prohibiting Underage Drinking on Private Property,9
violations of any New Jersey Statutes relating to the use,
possession and distribution of controlled dangerous substances
(N.J.S.A. 2C:35-1 through 2C:35-28), the violation of the New Jersey
Criminal Code (Title 2C) related to prostitution, gambling,
maintaining a nuisance, weapons offenses, sexual offenses, hazing
incidents, dumping violations, obscenity and indecency statutes;
(4) Continuously permitting the rental unit to be occupied by more
than the maximum number of occupants as defined in this article;
(5) Maintaining the rental unit or units or the property in which the
rental unit is a part in a dangerous condition likely to result in
injury to person or property.
B. Procedure; written complaint; notice; hearing.
(1) A complaint seeking the revocation or suspension of a license may
be filed by any one or more of the following: Director of Public
Safety, Chief of Police, Construction Official, Fire Official, Housing
Inspector or the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Such complaint shall
be in writing and filed with the Municipal Clerk. The complaint
shall be specific and shall be sufficient to apprise the licensee of the
charges so as to permit the licensee to present a defense. The
8. Editor's Note: See Chapter 258, Noise.
9. Editor's Note: See Chapter 83, Alcoholic Beverages and Drugs, Article II.
§ 322-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-25
1:417
§ 322-26. Violations and penalties.
person filing the complaint may do so, on the basis of information
and belief and need not rely on personal information.
(2) Upon the filing of such written complaint, the Municipal Clerk shall
immediately inform the Township Council and a date for a hearing
shall be scheduled which shall not be sooner than 10 nor more than
30 days thereafter. The Municipal Clerk shall forward a copy of the
complaint and a notice as to due date of the hearing to the licensee
and the agent, if any, at the address indicated on the registration
form. Service upon the agent shall be sufficient.
(3) The hearing required by this subsection shall be held before the
Township Council unless, in its discretion, the Council determines
that the matter should be heard by a hearing officer who shall be
appointed by the Council. If the matter is referred to a hearing
officer, such officer shall transmit his/her findings of fact and
conclusions of law to the Council within 30 days of the conclusion
of the hearing. The Council shall then review the matter and may
accept, reject, or modify the recommendations of the hearing
officer based on the record before such hearing officer. In the event
that the matter is not referred to a hearing officer and is heard by
the Township Council, then the Council shall render a decision
within 30 days of the conclusion of the hearing. The decision shall
either dismiss the complaint, revoke or suspend the license or
determine that the license shall be renewed or reissued for one or
more subsequent license years.
(4) The hearing shall be taped. If determined to be necessary, the
Council may have a stenographic transcript prepared. All witnesses
shall be sworn prior to testifying. The strict rules of evidence shall
not apply. All relevant evidence shall be admissible. The burden of
proof shall be that which generally controls administrative
hearings.
(5) The Township Attorney or his designee shall appear on behalf of the
complaint in all hearings conducted pursuant to this article.
C. Defenses.
(1) It shall be a defense to any proceeding for the revocation,
suspension or other disciplinary action involving a rental license by
demonstrating that the owner has taken appropriate action and has
made a good faith effort to abate the conditions or circumstances
giving rise to the revocation proceeding, including but not limited
to, the institution of legal action against the tenant(s), occupants(s)
or guests for recovery of the premises; eviction of the tenant(s) or
otherwise.
§ 322-25 LAWRENCE CODE § 322-26
1:418
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, unless another
penalty is provided, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable for the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, Article III.
B. In a municipal court proceeding a landlord shall not be found to be in
violation of this article during such period of time as the landlord shall
be proceeding to evict the tenants in accordance with all statutory
procedures pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:18-61.1 et seq.
§ 322-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 322-26
1:419
Chapter 325
RENT CONTROL
§ 325-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and designated as the "Lawrence Township
Rent Control Regulations (1984)" and the definitions shall apply to all uses
of the following terms therein.
§ 325-2. Definitions. [Amended by Ord. No. 1315-92; Ord. No.
2003-09 § 1]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASE RENT — For a given apartment shall be the monthly rental for
that apartment as calculated by subsection 21-1.17 of this chapter, against
which monthly rental a permissible increase in rent is to be measured.
The term "base rent" does not include any supplemental charges except
increases as allowed by subsection 21-1.18 of this chapter.
CATEGORY OF APARTMENT UNITS — Similar rental units as categorized
below:
LANDLORD — The person or persons letting, owning or managing a
residential rental property situated within the Township.
RENT — The total sum of monies or things of value paid by a tenant to
a landlord during the course of a lease period, excluding monies paid as
security deposit, and monies paid to compensate a landlord for expenses
incurred as a result of damage to premises or breach of contract by tenant.
RESIDENTIAL MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — Any separately
administered building, structure or complex of one or more stories or a
portion thereof and any land appurtenant thereto containing 10 or more
residential multiple-family dwelling units. Excluded herefrom are motels,
hotels, school or college dormitories or other buildings or structures serving
transients.
TENANT — The person or persons to whom a unit of a residential multiplefamily
dwelling is let situated in the Township.
§ 325-3. Creation of Rent Stabilization Board.
There is hereby created a "Lawrence Township Rent Stabilization Board"
consisting of five members and six alternates appointed by the Council
selected on the basis of their qualifications and fitness for service on the
Board. Of the five members, one each shall be of the following two classes:
(1) a landlord as defined herein; (2) a tenant as defined herein, and (3) three
A. One bedroom units.
B. Two bedroom units.
§ 322-26 LAWRENCE CODE § 325-3
1:420
members who shall be of neither class and shall be interested citizens. All
members and alternates shall be residents of the Township of Lawrence
except those of the class of landlord.
§ 325-4. Conflicts of interest.
Any member shall disqualify himself or herself from participation in any
phase of any dispute, controversy or claim whatsoever, involving any
residential multiple-family dwelling in which he or she has or had any
security, ownership, management, leasehold, or other financial or property
interest of whatsoever nature. Such disqualification shall not be mandatory
if the member's interest in the residential multiple-family dwelling
terminated more than five years preceding his or her appointment. This
shall not prevent a member from being disqualified for any other reason
required by law or ordinance.
§ 325-5. Term of office.
Members and alternates shall be appointed for two years. There shall
likewise be appointed two alternates to each of the three classes of
members. An alternate may vote on matters in the absence and in place
of a member of the same class provided such alternate certifies that he
has reviewed all documents, tapes or transcripts pertaining thereto and is
familiar therewith.
§ 325-6. Funds.
There shall be appropriated in each annual budget of the Township such
sum as may be determined by the Township Council to be necessary for
the purpose of administering this chapter. The Board shall make annual
requests for appropriation, which requests shall be specific and submitted
to the Township Clerk for presentation to the Council on or before
November 1st of each year for the subsequent calendar year.
§ 325-7. Chairman, officers, organization meeting.
A. The Board shall organize annually at the first regular meeting of the
calendar year, and shall at each such meeting choose from among its
class 3 members: a Chairman, a Vice Chairman and such other officers
as it may deem necessary, and shall determine a schedule of meetings
not less frequently than quarterly in accordance with the "Open Public
Meetings Act." Alternate members shall be designated as "alternate 1,
alternate 2," etc., by the Council in advance of the annual
reorganization meeting.
B. There shall be a clerical assistant and an attorney to the Board
appointed by the Council for a term of one year on January 1st of each
year, upon terms as determined by the Council. The Board may request
Council to engage such other legal, professional or clerical assistance
as it deems necessary from time to time to properly implement this
chapter, within available appropriations.
§ 325-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-8
1:421
§ 325-8. Removal.
Any member or alternate who has been absent unexcusably from three
successive regular meetings of the Rent Stabilization Board may be
removed from office by Council after written notice and an opportunity to
explain the absences.
§ 325-9. Quorum.
A majority of the whole number of regular members shall constitute a
quorum. If a quorum is not present one hour after the appointed time for
the meeting, the presiding officer shall declare the meeting or hearing
adjourned.
§ 325-10. Special meetings.
A special meeting may be called at any time by the Chairman or upon
request to the Chairman of a majority of the Members of the Board. The
request and call for a special meeting shall specify the date, time, location
and purpose(s) of the meeting. The call for such special meeting shall
be served by the Chairman upon each Board Member and alternate at
least 72 hours prior to the time for which the meeting is called. Upon the
call for a special meeting, the Chairman, or other designated officer, shall
forthwith give notice thereof at such place previously designated by the
Board Members for that purpose. All such meetings shall be in conformity
with the "Open Public Meetings Act."
§ 325-11. Minutes.
§ 325-12. Procedure.
In absence of provisions of law or ordinances to the contrary, "Robert's
Rules of Order" shall govern conduct of the Board's proceedings.
§ 325-13. Forms, rules and regulations.
The Board may prescribe forms and procedures and adopt such
administrative rules and regulations as it deems necessary to implement
this chapter consistent herewith and with "Robert's Rules of Order." Such
forms, procedures and rules and regulations shall be filed with the Township
Clerk.
A. Accurate summary minutes of all meetings, hearings, complaints and
decisions shall be prepared and filed by the clerical assistant to the
Board within one month of each meeting. Minutes shall be in conformity
with the "Open Public Meetings Act" and all members, alternates and
the Township Clerk shall receive a filed copy.
B. All hearings of the Board shall be tape recorded and available for
transcription.
§ 325-8 LAWRENCE CODE § 325-14
1:422
§ 325-14. Subpoena power.
The Board shall have the power to subpoena witnesses, books and records
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.
§ 325-15. Confidentiality.
Insofar as the "Open Public Meetings Act" permits, whenever any material
is to be discussed, the disclosure of which would constitute an invasion of
individual privacy or is otherwise eligible for discussion in a closed session,
a request for confidentiality may be made and shall be observed to the
extent practicable.
§ 325-16. Appeals.
§ 325-17. Rent increases for existing tenancies.
A. Any party or affected tenant desiring to appeal any decision of the Rent
Stabilization Board shall appeal to Council. Such appeal shall be made
within 30 days of the date of final decision of the Rent Stabilization
Board. The appeal shall be made by serving the Township Clerk in
person or by certified mail with a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof and the name and address of the appellant and name
and address of his attorney, if represented. Such appeal shall be
decided by the Council only upon the record established before the
Rent Stabilization Board, and such argument as pertains to the
established record.
B. The appellant shall, within five days of service of the notice of appeal,
arrange for a transcript of proceedings before the Rent Stabilization
Board to be prepared for use by the Council, and shall pay a deposit of
$50, or the estimated cost of such transcription, whichever is less;
otherwise, the appeal may be dismissed for failure to prosecute. The
Township Council may waive the transcription fee provided for in this
section in the event of economic hardship and upon application by an
appellant.
C. The Township Council may reverse, remand or affirm, wholly or in part,
or may modify the decision of the Rent Stabilization Board.
D. Any landlord intending to appeal a decision of the Board shall notify the
tenant or tenants who may be affected, personally or by certified mail,
at least 10 days in advance of filing the appeal. A tenant intending to
appeal shall similarly notify the landlord and shall follow the same
procedures set forth in this section. Service shall be deemed effective if
made upon the person or address at which rental payments are made,
unless a landlord designates otherwise in advance in writing.
A. Establishment of rents between landlords and tenants in all residential
multiple-family dwellings covered by this chapter shall hereafter be
subject to the provisions of this chapter. With respect to extensions and
§ 325-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-17
1:423
renewals of tenancies which are in existence as of the effective date of
this chapter, no landlord may request, impose, or receive a percentage
increase in rent greater than as follows:
(1) For extensions and renewals taking effect on or before December
31, 1985, the percentage increase for an apartment may not exceed
4% of the average rent levels for that apartment for the preceding
12 months. In calculating average rent for an apartment for the
preceding 12 months for any month in which no rent or less than
full rent was charged because of a vacancy, the rent to be employed
for calculation purposes is the last full month's rent charged for
that apartment.
(2) For extensions and renewals taking effect on or after January 1,
1986, the percentage increase for an apartment may not exceed
the percentage increase in the index provided for in Subsection B
hereof, calculated by comparing the index for the immediately
preceding calendar year at year's end with the year and index for
the calendar year immediately preceding that year. Thus, for
increases in 1986 governed by this section, the percentage
increase is to be determined by comparing the 1985 year's end
index with the 1984 year's end index. If, for example, the 1984
year's end index were 200, and the 1985 year's index were 210,
then the percentage increase allowable in 1986 would be
calculated as follows:
(210 - 200)
200
= 0.05
The aforesaid percentage increase would be applied to the
average rent for a particular apartment for the preceding 12
months as calculated in accordance with Subsection A(1) above
for the purposes of determining the maximum increase allowable.
Thus, if the index calculations were to produce a maximum
allowable percentage increase of 5% and if the average rent for
a particular apartment for the preceding 12 months were to be
$500, then the maximum allowable increase for that apartment on
an extension or renewal would be $25 ($500 x 0.05).
(3) For extensions and renewals taking effect on or after January 1,
1993, the percentage increase for an apartment may not exceed
the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban
Wage Earners and Clerical Workers, Selected areas, All Items Index
(CPI-W, Table 3.), U.S. City Average, as published by the U.S.
Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, hereinafter
referred to as the "index," calculated by comparing the index for
the month of September in the immediately preceding calendar
year with the index for the month of September in the calendar
§ 325-17 LAWRENCE CODE § 325-17
1:424
§ 325-18. Powers of the Rent Stabilization Board.
year immediately preceding that year. Thus, for increases in 1993
governed by this section, the percentage increase is to be
determined by comparing the index for the month of September
1992 with the index for the month of September 1991. For
example, the index for the month of September 1991, was 135.2. If
the index for the month of September 1992 were to be 141.90, then
the percentage increase allowable in 1993 would be calculated as
follows:
141.90 - 135.2
135.2
= 0.05 (after rounding to the nearest 0.01) or 5%
The aforesaid percentage increase would be applied to the
average rent for a particular apartment for the preceding 12
months as calculated in accordance with Subsection A(1) above
for the purposes of determining the maximum increase allowable.
Thus, if the index calculations were to produce a maximum
allowable percentage increase of 5% and if the average rent for
a particular apartment for the preceding 12 months were to be
$500, then the maximum allowable increase for that apartment on
an extension or renewal would be $25 ($500 x 0.05).
B. Beginning January 1, 1986, the index to be utilized for making the
calculations called for by Subsection A(2) above shall be the December -
December Average Percent Change of the Consumer Price Index - CPI -
W - Table 3 U.S. City Average, All Items, as published by the U.S.
Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Pending publication of
the index during any applicable year, the corresponding index of the
preceding year shall be utilized in calculating rent level changes.
A. Powers of Board.
(1) The Rent Stabilization Board shall have the power and duty to hold
hearings, engage in fact finding, reform leases to accord with the
provisions of this chapter and adjudicate hardship increases and
decreases in rents from the increases permitted herein, provided
no such hardship increase or decrease shall result in a total
increase or decrease which provides more or less, respectively,
than a just and reasonable rate of return to the landlord on the
landlord's investment.
(2) The Rent Stabilization Board shall and does have the power to
promulgate such regulations as are necessary and proper to
administer the provisions of this chapter and to fairly adjudicate all
applications properly advanced before it. All such regulations shall
be fully consistent with the provisions of this chapter and with
State law.
§ 325-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-18
1:425
B. Hardship increases and decreases.
(1) Hardship increases may be granted upon landlord application as
follows:
(a) To provide amortized reimbursement to the landlord for major
capital improvements to the residential multiple-family
dwelling pro-rata as applicable to units thereof.
(b) To provide reimbursement to the landlord for additional or
enlarged landlord furnished services to tenants of the
residential multiple-family dwelling pro-rata as applicable to
units thereof.
(c) To insure, that, considering all applicable landlord operating
and financing costs, landlord may legally receive sufficient
rental income to provide a just and reasonable return.
(d) The foregoing factors permitting a hardship increase may also
be utilized to adjudicate hardship decreases where there is a
reduction in facilities, maintenance, repairs or services
rendered to any tenant by landlord or reduction in any
applicable landlord operating or financing costs, all upon
application by a tenant.
(2) The burden of proof shall be on the applicant, who shall comply
with all applicable rules, regulations and procedures and submit on
forms prescribed by the Board.
(3) All parties may be heard, call witnesses, be represented by counsel
and offer any relevant evidence or material.
(4) Applications for the foregoing hardship increase(s) or decrease(s)
in rent must be filed not later than 90 days prior to the proposed
effective date of the application. Proof of service upon the affected
tenant(s) or landlord, as the case may be, must accompany each
application. Any applications not complying with the provisions of
this chapter shall not be considered.
(5) All evidence of a financial nature submitted by any party to the
Rent Stabilization Board for hardship increases or decreases must
be supported by a sworn statement by that party as to the accuracy
thereof.
(6) The Board may grant, deny or modify any such application and its
decision shall be binding on all parties.
(7) There shall be a fee payable, per rental unit under application, to
the Township of Lawrence as established in Chapter 156, Fees.
C. Rent adjustment proceedings. In the event that a tenant contends that a
lease agreement outstanding or proposed between the tenant and
landlord provides for a rent which exceeds the allowable rental
§ 325-18 LAWRENCE CODE § 325-18
1:426
§ 325-19. New tenancies. [Amended by Ord. No. 1313-92]
§ 325-20. Reserve clause.
Permissible rent increases which are not charged by a landlord in whole or
in part will be waived unless the right to charge the difference is reserved
in the lease. The amount so reserved may be made a part of the base rent
upon the expiration of the lease period.
§ 325-21. Notification.
Any landlord seeking an increase in rents shall notify the tenant by certified
mail or by personal service, on a form approved by the Board of the
calculations involved in computing the increase, including all information
required in order to compute the formulas as set forth in this chapter, as
well as the rental charged for the unit under the terms of the most recent
prior lease, oral or written. A copy shall be filed with the Board at the time
of notice to tenants. A tenant seeking a rental decrease shall reciprocally
both notify the landlord and follow the same procedure set forth in this
section, with service upon landlord to be effected if made to the person or
address at which rental payments are then made unless landlord designates
otherwise in advance in writing.
increases provided for herein, the tenant may make complaint to the
Board upon forms and pursuant to procedures which may be
promulgated by the Board. Upon filing of such a complaint by a tenant,
and upon notice to the landlord pursuant to procedures set forth in
paragraph b. hereof, the Board shall hear and decide whether an
outstanding or proposed lease conforms to the provisions of this
chapter. If the Board finds that the lease does not conform, the Board
may direct reformation of the lease to conform. Refusal of the landlord
to so reform the terms of the lease shall constitute a willful violation of
this chapter.
A. Should an apartment become vacant, the initial rental to be charged for
that apartment to a new tenant shall be determined by the landlord.
Thereafter, any future rent increases for that apartment unit shall be
governed by the provisions of § 325-17 of this chapter.
B. A landlord who engages in any course of conduct which unreasonably
disturbs any tenants in the lawful use and occupancy of the tenant's
apartment unit, including, but not limited to, willful interruption or
discontinuance of services or failure to correct violations of applicable
housing, health and safety codes, with the intent to create a vacancy
shall be guilty of a violation of this section and shall be liable for the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, Article III.
§ 325-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-22
1:427
§ 325-22. Reprisal. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any reprisal or attempted reprisal by a landlord against a tenant or by a
tenant against a landlord, of any nature whatsoever because of the party's
use or attempted use of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, Article III, for each such reprisal or attempted
reprisal.
§ 325-23. Further procedures.
§ 325-24. Standards of maintenance, repairs, facilities and services.
Any significant decrease in maintenance, repairs, facilities or services shall
be deemed an added rent and may result in a decrease in rents as provided
in § 325-18. In addition, such may be deemed a reprisal and subject the
landlord to penalties provided in § 325-22 above. Significant increase or
decrease in maintenance, repairs, facilities or services is a factor to be
considered in all applications hereunder. If the Board shall determine there
has been a significant decrease in maintenance, repairs, facilities or
services, it may also order a pro-rata share of all rentals collected from
the residential multiple-family dwelling be placed in escrow, shall appoint a
trustee to take custody of such account, shall direct the trustee to provide
the maintenance, repairs, facilities or services in accord with public bidding
laws, and to pay therefor out of the escrow and shall order the landlord to
pay the trustee a reasonable fee for his services. The order shall continue
so long as the landlord fails to provide the required maintenance, repairs,
facilities and services.
A. Every hearing shall be conducted by a quorum of the Board. Two or
more petitions involving the same landlord may, in the discretion of the
Board, be consolidated for a single hearing.
B. The failure of any party to a rent adjustment proceeding or any other
hearing before the Board to appear in defense of or in response to a
petition shall not be cause for the granting of the relief petitioned for;
provided, however, that the Board shall not be obligated to await the
appearance of any party failing to respond to a notice of a hearing and
may proceed to a hearing and determination upon whatever evidence is
produced before it.
C. If the Board shall determine that a tenant has been caused to pay
excessive rents in excess of the limitations provided herein, it shall
incorporate in its final determination an order compelling
reimbursement of the difference between the total amount paid in
excess and the amount determined by the Board as allowable under the
chapter, plus interest at current bank money market rates.
§ 325-22 LAWRENCE CODE § 325-25
1:428
§ 325-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A violation of any provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the
filing with the Board of any material misstatement of fact, or any violation of
an order duly issued by the Board, the violator shall be liable for the penalty
stated in Chapter 1, Article III. A violation affecting more than one leasehold
shall be considered a separate violation as to each leasehold.
§ 325-26. Non-waiver of rights.
Any written or oral provision in any agreement whereby the rights
conferred under this chapter are waived, altered or amended shall be
deemed against public policy, void and unenforceable.
§ 325-27. Temporary ceiling.
Notwithstanding any provision hereof to the contrary, any rental increase
lawfully imposed pursuant to the Township's Temporary Rent Ceiling
Ordinance No. 947-83 adopted June 15, 1983, as amended and
supplemented, shall not be affected by the provisions of this chapter.
§ 325-28. Security deposits.
Whenever money or other form of security shall be deposited or advanced
on a lease agreement for the use of rental property and security for the
performance of that agreement, the person receiving the monies deposited
or advanced shall deposit such money in a banking institution or savings
and loan association in the State of New Jersey insured by an agency of
the federal government in an account bearing interest at the highest rate
currently paid by such institution and association for such accounts.
§ 325-29. Deceased tenants.
A lease between a tenant and a landlord shall cease to exist upon the death
of the tenant provided the tenant's estate pays for any rent due for the
apartment if it is still being used by the heirs of the deceased tenant. Once
all personalty and belongings of the deceased have been removed, the lease
shall expire.
§ 325-30. Annual reviews.
The Board shall annually review each of the provisions of this chapter and
recommend to Council all changes it deems appropriate to reflect change of
conditions affecting the local rental housing market.
§ 325-31. Tax appeals and reductions.
A. In the event a tax appeal is taken by the landlord and the landlord is
successful in the appeal, and the taxes are reduced, or if taxes are
decreased by virtue of other circumstances, 75% of the net benefit of
§ 325-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-31
1:429
§ 325-32. Unit registration. [Amended by Ord. No. 1315-92]
§ 325-33. Exemption. [Amended by Ord. No. 1001-85]
Any new construction rental development providing for 20% set aside to
comply with Mount Laurel II low- and moderate-income housing provisions
is exempt from Ord. No. 87-84.
§ 325-34. Repealer.
All ordinances and resolutions and all provisions thereof inconsistent or
conflicting with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed to the
extent of such conflict or inconsistency; provided, however, that the
provisions of Ord. No. 954-83 (Ord. Nos. 954-83, 997-84 and 1001-85 are
contained in this chapter.) adopted September 7, 1983 as amended and
supplemented, shall remain fully enforceable for the period during which
they were in effect.
Chapter 333
RETAIL BUSINESSES
the decrease shall be credited to each rental unit in proportion to its pro
rata unit tax burden. No landlord may request or receive any increase
in rent unless and until it has paid all outstanding rebates due pursuant
to this subsection.
B. No landlord may request or receive any increase in rent unless and until
it has been certified to the Township of Lawrence that the landlord has
remitted the most recent rebate to the tenant under the provisions of
this section. The landlords shall post and maintain in a prominent place
within its premises, a notice containing a listing of current specific
rebates. A failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall also
be punishable under § 325-25 above.
A. All landlords of properties covered by this chapter shall register all
rental units located therein with the Board. The registration shall
include pertinent information related to the rental history and status of
the units as required by the Township.
B. The registration provided for in this section shall be performed annually
using forms provided by the Board, with each annual registration due
on or before February 15 of the current year. Each registration shall be
filed with the Township Clerk, who shall forward such registration to
the Rent Stabilization Board for its review. No landlord may request or
receive any increase in rent after February 15 of the current year unless
and until the landlord has filed the registration required by this section
with the Township Clerk. In addition, a failure to comply with the
provisions of this section shall also be punishable under § 325-25 above.
§ 325-31 LAWRENCE CODE § 325-34
1:430
ARTICLE I
Hours of Operation
[Adopted 5-20-2014 by Ord. No. 2185-14]
§ 333-1. Hours of operation.
No business or commercial establishment to which the public is invited,
defined either as a "permitted use," "accessory use," or "special exception
use" within the "neighborhood business," "limited business," general
commercial," or "highway development" districts set forth in the Township
of Lawrence Zoning Ordinance, as amended, or as may hereafter be
amended or supplemented, or any nonconforming such use or variance
permitting such use, located within such districts, or in any other zoning
district, shall be opened to the public or conduct any such business,
operations or activities in any manner before 5:00 a.m. on any day and
after midnight on the same day on Mondays through Thursdays, or after
1:00 a.m. on Fridays through Sundays and legal holidays. Except with
respect to security lighting, all exterior and window electrical lighting or
illumination, whether temporary or permanent, for each such business or
commercial establishment shall be extinguished at the closing time thereof,
as established herein.
§ 333-2. Exclusions.
Subject to § 333-3 below, the following businesses and commercial
establishments, if not otherwise excluded pursuant to § 333-1 above, shall
be excluded from the application of § 333-1 , all being either otherwise
regulated by law, deemed to involve minimal nuisance characteristics,
necessary to the public health, safety, welfare or convenience, or some
combination of the foregoing, as follows:
A. Establishments licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages pursuant to
Chapter 83 of the Code of the Township of Lawrence, New Jersey,
whose hours and mode of operation are governed separately by
Township ordinances and by N.J.S.A. 33:1-1 et seq. of the laws of New
Jersey pertaining to alcoholic beverages.
B. Barbershops, barber schools or barber colleges whose hours and mode
of operation are governed separately by Chapter 101 of the Code of the
Township of Lawrence, New Jersey.
C. Bowling alleys operating within the interior of an enclosed building or
structure.
D. In-house cafeterias and similar retail food operations customarily
servicing employees or residents of institutions but not the general
public, and operating within the interior of an enclosed building or
structure.
§ 333-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-2
1:431
§ 333-3. Exceptions to exclusions.
Anything contained in § 333-2 above notwithstanding, other than businesses
and commercial establishments set forth in § 333-2A and B above, and
any business or commercial establishment which, as of the effective date
hereof, operates on a twenty-four-hour-a-day basis or during any other
hours that are different from those permitted under § 333-1 above and has
continuously done so, legally, since April 8, 1992, no business or commercial
establishment shall be excluded from § 333-1 which is situated within 500
feet of a residential zone or any residential property, measured in a straight
line between the closest points of the respective lot lines.
§ 333-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, corporation, limited liability company, partnership or
other business entity or commercial establishment of any type whatsoever
violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, pay a fine not
to exceed $1,000 or be imprisoned not to exceed 90 days, or both, in the
discretion of the court. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day or part thereof during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
E. Gasoline service stations, provided such operations do not include
automobile, truck or other motor vehicle repair or body and fender
repair work during the hours of operation prohibited by § 333-1 above.
F. Hotels and motels.
G. Medical and dental offices, hospitals, nursing homes and rehabilitation
centers.
H. Movies and other theatrical performances, provided that the final
performance or featured film on any given date commences at or before
11:00 p.m. on that date.
I. Supermarkets, groceries, and convenience stores selling food products
within the interior of an enclosed building or structure primarily for offpremises
preparation or consumption.
J. Restaurants offering full service meals on a twenty-four-hour basis,
seven days a week, which are located on U.S. Alternate Highway No. 1
(Business Highway 1, a.k.a. Brunswick Pike).
K. Incidental activities, not involving business operations or sales or
services, within or about any business or commercial establishment
which may be required in advance of or after the hours of operation
permitted by § 333-1, including, but not limited to, cleaning and
sweeping, off-street loading and unloading of inventory and supplies,
and disposal of waste and garbage, provided such activities are carried
on in such reasonable manner as to emit the least possible noise.
§ 333-2 LAWRENCE CODE § 333-5
1:432
§ 333-5. Relief from hours of operation.
Any waiver of or relief from the provisions contained in this section, in
whole or in part, must be sought by way of an application made to the
Township Council of the Township of Lawrence pursuant to this § 333-5, and
only the Township Council shall have the authority to provide relief from
and/or waive the provisions contained in this section, in whole or in part.
§ 333-6. Severability.
If any paragraph or provision of this article shall be adjudicated invalid
or unenforceable, such determination shall not, to the extent severable,
affect any other paragraph or provision of this article, which shall otherwise
remain in full force and effect.
§ 333-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 333-6
1:433
Chapter 339
SAFE EXCHANGE ZONE
§ 339-1. Establishment; location; purpose.
There is hereby established a "Safe Exchange Zone" located in the area
of the Municipal and Police Parking Lot of the Municipal Complex located
at 2207 Lawrence Road, Lawrence Township, New Jersey, for conducting
in-person, private transactions involving a Township resident that have
been facilitated through either online (or other) market places, and to be
designated the "Safe Exchange Zone."
§ 339-2. Exchange of certain items prohibited.
The private exchange of the following items will not be permitted:
§ 339-3. Responsibility and liability of Township.
A. Motor vehicles.
B. Weapons.
C. Illegal contraband.
D. Alcohol.
E. Items that do not fit in a ten-foot-by-ten-foot parking space.
A. Township officials will not provide police personnel or Township staff to
witness any transactions in person; however, the video surveillance by
and in proximity to police personnel is meant to provide a safer place to
complete the transaction and to increase the public's peace of mind
when engaging in such transactions with unfamiliar individuals within
the Safe Exchange Zone.
B. The Township of Lawrence makes no guarantees, assurances, or
promises with respect to the condition or authenticity of any items
exchanged between private parties.
C. The Township of Lawrence makes no guarantees, assurances, or
promises as to the safety or security of any in-person transactions that
may take place on Township property.
D. The Township of Lawrence makes no guarantees, assurances, or
promises as to availability of the Safe Exchange Zone at any particular
date or time.
E. The Township of Lawrence is establishing this Safe Exchange Zone to
advance the public good; however, nothing in this chapter is intended
to, nor should this chapter be interpreted in any way, to waive or
release the Township's defenses or immunity from suit under the New
Jersey Tort Claims Act, N.J.S.A. 59:1-1 et. seq.
§ 333-6 LAWRENCE CODE § 339-4
1:434
§ 339-4. Safe practices encouraged.
The Township encourages all persons to engage in such transactions in
daylight hours only; to bring a cell phone along in case of an emergency;
to notify friends and/or family of the intention to meet to conduct such
a transaction; to never invite strangers to the home or agree to meet at
a stranger's home; and to reconsider any transaction with someone who
refuses to meet at the Municipal Complex.
§ 339-5. Purpose; violations and penalties.
§ 339-6. Severability.
If any paragraph or provision of this chapter shall be adjudicated to be
invalid or unenforceable, such determination shall not, to the extent
severable, affect any other paragraph or provision of this chapter, which
shall otherwise remain in full force and effect.
Chapter 345
SCHOOL ENROLLMENT
§ 345-1. Findings.
The Township Council and the Township Board of Education recognize that
enrollment by non-paying nonresidents places a financial burden on the
taxpayers of this community and increases class sizes.
§ 345-2. Falsifying residence prohibited.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a safe space for the conduct
of private transactions involving Township residents facilitated by
online (or other) marketplaces.
B. Any violation of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalties
established in Chapter 1, Article III.
A. It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to assist, allow or
encourage a minor to enroll in the Township School System where the
minor is ineligible to attend as a result of nonresidency.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit, with the
intention of avoiding the nonresidential tuition payment, the use of his
or her name, address or residence as documentation to register a
student in the Lawrence Township School System who is not a bona fide
resident of the Township.
§ 339-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 345-3
1:435
§ 345-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Where no other penalty is prescribed by law, any person convicted of a
violation of any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty
stated in Chapter 1, Article III.
Chapter 351
SECONDHAND GOODS, DEALERS IN
§ 351-1. Purpose and intent.
§ 351-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCEPTABLE IDENTIFICATION — A current valid New Jersey driver's
license or identification card, a current valid photo driver's license issued
by another United States state, a valid United States passport, or other
verifiable United States government-issued identification, which will be
recorded on the receipt retained by the dealer and subsequently forwarded
to the local police department on request.
DEALER — Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation,
or other entity who, either wholly or in part, engages in or operates any
of the following trades or businesses: the buying for purposes of resale
of precious metals, jewelry, or other secondhand goods as defined herein;
pawnbrokers as defined herein; itinerant businesses as defined herein. For
the purposes of this chapter, transient buyers, as defined herein, are subject
to the same licensing and reporting requirements as any other dealers.
ITINERANT BUSINESS — A dealer who conducts business intermittently
within the municipality or at varying locations.
MUNICIPAL CLERK — The statutory officer whose duties are defined in
N.J.S.A. 40A:9-133 and may refer to the duly appointed Clerk of the
Township of Lawrence.
PAWNBROKER — Any person, partnership, association or corporation:
lending money on deposit or pledge of personal property, other than choses
A. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to assist law enforcement
officials and victims of crime in recovering stolen precious metals and
other secondhand goods by requiring minimum identification,
reporting, maintenance and distribution criteria for licensed dealers of
these goods.
B. No person shall use, exercise, or carry on the business, trade, or
occupation of the buying, selling, or pawning of precious metals or
other secondhand goods without complying with the requirements of
this chapter in the exact manner described herein.
§ 345-3 LAWRENCE CODE § 351-2
1:436
in action, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness; purchasing
personal property on condition of selling it back at a stipulated price; or
doing business as furniture storage warehousemen and lending money on
goods, wares or merchandise pledged or deposited as collateral security.
PRECIOUS METALS — Gold, silver, platinum, palladium, and their alloys as
defined in N.J.S.A. 51:5-1 et seq. and N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.
PUBLIC — Individuals and retail sellers, not to include wholesale
transactions or transactions between other merchants.
REPORTABLE TRANSACTION — Every transaction conducted between a
dealer and a member of the public in which precious metals, jewelry, or any
other secondhand goods as defined herein are purchased or pawned.
SECONDHAND GOODS —
SELLER — A member of the public who sells or pawns used goods such as
precious metal, jewelry, or other secondhand goods to a dealer.
TRANSIENT BUYER — A dealer, as defined herein, who has not been in
a registered retail business continuously for at least six months at any
address in the municipality where the dealer is required to register or who
intends to close out or discontinue all retail business within six months.
Used goods such as antiques, gold, silver, platinum, or other precious
metals, jewelry, coins, gemstones, gift cards, any tools, telephones,
typewriters, word processors, GPS devices, computers, computer
hardware and software, television sets, radios, record or stereo sets,
electronic devices, musical instruments, sporting goods, automotive
equipment, collectibles, game cartridges, DVDs, CDs, and other
electronically recorded material, firearms, cameras and camera
equipment, video equipment, furniture, clothing, and other valuable
articles.
A.
For the purposes of this chapter, secondhand goods shall not include
goods transacted in the following manner:
(1) Judicial sales or sales by executors or administrators;
Occasional or auction sales of household goods sold from private
homes;
(2)
(3) Auctions of real estate;
The occasional sale, purchase, or exchange of coins or stamps by
a person at his permanent residence or in any municipally owned
building who is engaged in the hobby of collecting coins or stamps
and who does not solicit the sale, purchase, or exchange of such
coins or stamps to or from the general public by billboard, sign,
handbill, newspaper, magazine, radio, television, or other form of
printed or electronic advertising.
(4)
B.
§ 351-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 351-3
1:437
§ 351-3. License requirement for dealers.
No person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity shall engage in the business of buying, selling, or pawning of precious
metals or other secondhand goods, as defined above, within the jurisdiction
of the municipality, without having first obtained a license therefore from
the Municipal Clerk, which license shall bear a number issued by the
Municipal Clerk. The application for a license to the Municipal Clerk shall
set forth the name, date of birth, and address of the dealer, whether or
not he or she is a citizen of the United States, and whether or not he or
she has ever been convicted of any business-related crime(s), disorderly
persons offense(s), or municipal ordinance violation(s), and the date(s)
thereof. Advertising in any print or electronic media or by sign that any of
those articles or secondhand goods referred to in § 351-2 above are being
bought in any location within the municipality shall constitute engaging in
business as a dealer of secondhand goods for purposes of this chapter. No
person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation or other entity
shall place or cause to be placed any advertisement for purchase of such
articles or goods without stating in the advertising the license number
issued to a person or entity by the municipality. In any print advertisement,
the license number shall appear in type no smaller than eight point in
the lower-right-hand corner of the advertisement. In any advertisement in
electronic media, the license number shall be visually or audibly stated.
Failure to state or indicate the license number shall be a violation of this
chapter and shall be subject to the penalties established in § 351-9.
§ 351-4. Application process for dealers; approval or denial.
A. Upon receipt of an application completed pursuant to this chapter, the
Municipal Clerk shall refer such application to the Chief of Police, who
shall make an investigation of the prospective licensee, pursuant to this
chapter for the purpose of determining the suitability of the applicant
for licensing. The investigation shall include, but shall not be limited to,
the following:
(1) The experience of the applicant in the business of purchase and
sale of those articles or goods referred to in § 351-2 above,
although nothing in this section shall be construed to warrant
denial of a license solely on the basis of lack of experience;
(2) The reputation of the applicant for fair dealing in the community,
which shall be made among credible sources, which sources shall
be disclosed to the applicant in the event of a denial of any license;
(3) Any criminal record of the applicant, including any past convictions
for any business-related crime(s), disorderly persons offense(s), or
municipal ordinance violation(s) within this or any other
jurisdiction. The Chief of Police shall, as part of the application
process, require a fingerprint criminal background check through
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Criminal Justice Information
§ 351-3 LAWRENCE CODE § 351-4
1:438
Services Division, which shall require an additional fee from the
applicant.
(4) The type of operation contemplated to be conducted by the
applicant, particularly whether the business is to be operated from
a fixed location, whether it is to be conducted from a location
primarily devoted to the purchase and sale of precious metal or
other secondhand goods, and other factors bearing on whether the
licensed business will be of a fixed and permanent nature. This
section shall not be construed to require denial of any license solely
on the grounds that the business is not from a fixed location or that
the applicant is a transient buyer or itinerant business; however,
applicants who fall under the category of a transient buyer or
itinerant business must state with specificity on the license
application the business address where transaction records
required by § 351-5D of this chapter will be stored as well as the
location where purchased goods will be retained during the
mandatory inspection period required under § 351-6A.
B. The Chief of Police shall complete any investigation pursuant to this
chapter within 30 days of the submission of the application to the
Municipal Clerk, fully completed by the applicant. If a criminal record
check has been requested within the thirty-day period and has not been
received by the Chief of Police within that period, the Chief of Police
may, if all other factors are satisfactory, recommend a conditional
issuance of the license subject to the finding regarding criminal record.
C. The Chief of Police shall, upon completion of the investigation,
recommend "grant" or "denial" of the license to the Municipal Clerk,
who shall grant or deny the license. Any recommendation of the Chief of
Police shall be in writing and, in the case of a recommendation of
denial, shall state fully and specifically the reasons for said
recommendation. If the Chief of Police recommends to deny any license,
the applicant shall be notified in writing within 10 days of such denial
by the Municipal Clerk, and the Clerk shall forward to the applicant a
statement of the reason or reasons for such denial.
D. Grounds for recommending denial of license may include reliable
information indicating that the applicant has in the past engaged in
fraudulent or deceptive business practices in a business identical to or
similar to a dealer in secondhand goods. A license may be denied if the
investigation reveals a conviction of the applicant or any of its principal
officers or employees of any business-related crime(s), disorderly
persons offense(s) in which deceit or misrepresentation is an element;
or any conviction of any crime(s), disorderly persons offense involving
theft or the receiving of stolen goods, regardless of whether the
applicant was a principal, accessory before the fact, after the fact, or a
co-conspirator; or any prior municipal ordinance violation(s) by the
applicant or any of its principal officers or employees in this or any
other jurisdiction. A license may be denied if the applicant fails to
demonstrate an ability to satisfactorily comply with the electronic
§ 351-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 351-4
1:439
§ 351-5. Identification of seller; recordkeeping requirements for
dealers.
For every reportable transaction between a dealer and the public, the
dealer shall be required to do as follows:
reporting requirements specified in § 351-5, the retention and
inspection requirements of § 351-6, or any other portion of this chapter.
Upon receipt of the recommendation of the Chief of Police, the
Municipal Clerk shall issue or deny the license accordingly, contingent
upon the receipt of a bond as required by § 351-7 of this chapter.
E. Whenever any application for a permit is denied, the applicant shall be
entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel appointed by the Chief
of Police, at which time the applicant shall be permitted to introduce
such evidence as may be deemed relevant to such denial. Any applicant
exercising the right to appeal must file a written notice of appeal within
10 days of receiving written notice of denial of a license to act as a
dealer of secondhand goods.
F. No license shall be assignable by the dealer.
A. Require of each person selling or pawning precious metals or other
secondhand goods acceptable identification as defined above in § 351-2.
B. Require each seller to execute a "Declaration of Ownership," which
shall contain the following certification: "My signature confirms that I
am the sole legal owner of and am legally authorized to sell the goods
being sold. By signing below I certify that I did not obtain and do not
possess the identified goods through unlawful means. I am the full age
of 18 years and the identification presented is valid and correct."
C. Record and issue to each person selling or pawning such goods on a
sequentially numbered receipt:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the purchaser,
including the name of the Clerk or employee of the licensee making
the purchase;
(2) The name, address, date of birth, and telephone number of the
seller or sellers;
(3) A photographed recording of the seller in a format acceptable to
the Chief of Police, along with a physical description of the seller,
including height and weight (approximate), hair color, eye color,
facial hair, if any, etc.;
(4) A photographed recording of the seller's presented acceptable
identification, as set forth in § 351-2, in a format acceptable by the
Chief of Police;
(5) A photographed recording of all items sold in a format acceptable
by the Chief of Police. When photographing, all items must be
§ 351-4 LAWRENCE CODE § 351-5
1:440
positioned in a manner that makes them readily and easily
identifiable. Items should not be grouped together when
photographing or imaging. Each item should have its own
photograph;
(6) The receipt number;
(7) A detailed, legible description of the item(s) and the manufacturer
and model of the item(s) if known; in the case of jewelry, the
descriptions must include style, length, color, design, and stones, if
any; any identifying marks, including numbers, dates, sizes,
shapes, initials, names, monograms, social security numbers
engraved thereon, serial numbers, series numbers, or any other
information, which sets apart the particular object from others of
like kind;
(8) The price paid for the purchase or pawn of the item(s);
(9) If precious metals, the net weight in terms of pounds Troy,
pennyweight (Troy) or kilograms/grams; fineness in terms of karats
for gold, and sterling or coin for silver, in accordance with N.J.S.A.
51:5-1, N.J.S.A. 51:6-1 et seq.;
(10) The time and date of the transaction.
D. The information outlined in Subsection C above must also be
electronically documented through the use of an electronic database
system authorized by the Chief of Police. Installation and training in this
software will be made mandatory as of the effective date of this chapter
and licensing will be conditional upon compliance with proper use of
the system as described herein. These records shall be subject to the
inspection of any authorized police officer or any sworn law
enforcement officer acting in the performance of their duty as set forth
in Subsection F below. Through the use of the required computer
equipment, and using the electronic format approved by the Chief of
Police, every dealer shall enter all reportable transactions into the
electronic database by the end of the close of business on the same date
as the purchase or receipt of property for pawn or consignment. The
information entered must contain all pertinent information outlined in
Subsection C above.
E. In the event of a database failure, or dealer's computer equipment
malfunction, all transaction information is required to be submitted on
paper forms approved by the Chief of Police within 24 hours from the
date of purchase. In the event that paper forms are used, the dealer is
responsible to enter all transaction information set forth in Subsection
C above into the database as soon as possible upon the dealer's
equipment being repaired or replaced, or the database coming back
into service. Failure by the dealer to properly maintain computer
equipment in a reasonable fashion, or failure by the dealer to replace
faulty computer equipment, may result in the dealer being cited for a
violation of this chapter and subsequently being subject to the penalties
§ 351-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 351-5
1:441
§ 351-6. Retention; revocation; other restrictions.
for doing so including revocation of the dealer's license as described in
§ 351-6.
F. It shall be the requisite duty of every dealer, and of every person in the
dealer's employ, to admit to the premises during business hours any
member of the police department to examine any database, book,
ledger, or any other record on the premises relating to the reportable
transactions of precious metals or other secondhand goods, as well as
the articles purchased or received and, where necessary, relinquish
custody of those articles as provided in § 351-6. Itinerant businesses
and transient buyers will be responsible for notifying the Chief of Police
of the address where these records and articles will be stored.
A. All precious metals and other secondhand goods purchased, received
for pawn, or received for consignment as described above, are to be
made available for inspection by the Chief of Police or designee thereof
at the designated business address for a period of at least seven
calendar days from the date the transaction information is actually
reported to the Chief of Police in the approved manner described above
in § 351-5 except for jewelry, which must be maintained for at least 10
business days or for the statutory period provided in N.J.S.A. 2C:21-36d.
All precious metal or other secondhand goods subject to inspection
must remain in the same condition as when purchased or received for
pawn and shall not be sold, disposed of, changed, modified, or melted
by the dealer until the seven-day retention period has expired. Itinerant
businesses and transient buyers will be responsible for notifying the
Chief of Police of the location where the purchased item(s) are being
held.
B. Upon probable cause that goods held by a dealer are stolen, and
providing that the seller signed the mandatory statement required by
§ 351-5B upon the sale of those goods, a law enforcement officer with
jurisdiction should charge the seller with theft by deception under
N.J.S.A. 2C:20-4 on behalf of the dealer, who shall be considered the
"victim" of the offense for the purposes of N.J.S.A. 2C:43-3. The officer
shall seize the goods, provide the dealer with a receipt, and issue a
criminal complaint against the seller for theft by deception and any
other criminal charges for which the officer has probable cause that the
seller has committed. If convicted of theft by deception and if so found
by an order of a court of valid jurisdiction, the seller will be responsible
for providing restitution to the dealer under N.J.S.A. 2C:44-2 for the
amount paid by the dealer to the seller for the stolen goods.
C. In addition to all other reporting requirements, every dealer shall
maintain for at least five years, a written record of all purchases of
precious metals and other secondhand goods in the form prescribed in
§ 351-5C.
§ 351-5 LAWRENCE CODE § 351-6
1:442
D. No dealer shall purchase any item covered by this chapter from any
person under the age of 18 or in the absence of providing prior
notification of such purchase to the Chief of Police or business designee
identifying the individual from whom such purchase is to be made and
the item to be purchased.
E. Suspension. The Chief of Police or a designee thereof is hereby
empowered to temporarily suspend for cause any dealer's license and
rights to operate there under. This penalty shall be in addition to any
fines and penalties the dealer may incur pursuant to § 351-9 of this
chapter.
(1) Grounds for suspension. The following shall constitute grounds for
suspension: violation of any provisions of this chapter, including
failure to comply with any training or fees associated with the
electronic database software system in use by the municipality;
violation of any other statute, regulation, or local ordinance; or any
other illegal, improper, or fraudulent activity.
(2) Procedure for suspension. Upon determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a suspension is warranted, the Chief of
Police or a designee thereof shall issue a written notice of
suspension of license to the offending dealer and to the Municipal
Clerk, which shall set forth the grounds for the suspension and
notify the dealer of his or her right to appeal pursuant to
Subsection G. A temporary suspension shall issue immediately,
pending the outcome of any appeal taken. Suspended dealers must
immediately cease engaging in the business of purchasing for
resale, receiving for pawn, and/or selling of precious metals and/or
other secondhand goods in the municipality until reinstatement.
(3) Reinstatement. Suspended dealers may be reinstated only when
the grounds leading to the suspension have, in the determination of
the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee, been cured, corrected,
or appropriately rectified; or if reinstatement is deemed
appropriate by the three-person panel appointed by the Chief of
Police, upon the timely filing of an appeal as provided in Subsection
G.
F. Revocation. A license issued under this chapter shall be revoked by the
Municipal Clerk upon written recommendation from the Chief of Police
or the Chief's designee that the dealer is no longer qualified, capable or
competent to comply with the requirements of this chapter. This penalty
shall be in addition to any fines and penalties the dealer may incur
under § 351-9.
(1) Grounds for revocation. The following shall constitute grounds for
revocation: a third violation under this chapter; a second violation
under this chapter less than one year after an earlier violation
under this chapter; conviction for a criminal offense within this or
§ 351-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 351-6
1:443
§ 351-7. Bond.
Each dealer covered under this chapter shall deliver a bond to the
Municipal Clerk executed by the applicant as principal and executed by a
surety company authorized to do business under the laws of the State of
New Jersey as surety. The bond shall be subject to review and approval by
the Municipal Attorney, as defined in N.J.S.A. 40A: 9-139, and shall be in
the penal sum of $10,000, conditioned for the due and proper observance
of and compliance with the provisions and requirements of all ordinances of
the municipality in force or which may be adopted respecting the conduct of
this business and conditioned also that the bond shall be and remain for the
benefit of any person or persons who shall have received judgment against
the dealer licensed under this chapter, which damage shall be established
by a judgment of a court of proper jurisdiction. Said bond shall contain the
following language: "The obligation of this bond shall, in addition to the
Township of Lawrence, be and remain for the benefit of any person who
any jurisdiction; or multiple violations of any other regulations or
local ordinances within this or any jurisdiction.
(2) Procedure for revocation. Upon a determination that appropriate
grounds exist and that a revocation is warranted, the Chief of
Police of the Chief's designee shall so report to the Municipal Clerk
in writing. A temporary suspension will immediately and
automatically issue, if one is not already in effect, pending the
outcome of the charge. A three-person panel, appointed by the
Chief of Police, shall review the stated grounds for revocation and
the hear from the dealer as provided in Subsection G, issue an
appropriate disposition of either suspension, revocation, or
reinstatement. If the panel determines that revocation is the
appropriate disposition, it shall set forth the grounds for the same
in writing in the form of a notice of revocation, which shall be
provided to the dealer. If the panel determines that suspension is
the appropriate disposition, it shall provide the dealer with a notice
of suspension in writing. Following revocation, the dealer must
relinquish his or her license and must immediately and indefinitely
cease operating as a dealer of precious metals or other secondhand
goods within the municipality.
G. Appeal. Any applicant wishing to appeal an issuance of a suspension or
revocation shall be entitled to a hearing before a three-person panel,
appointed by the Chief of Police, at which time the applicant shall be
permitted to introduce such evidence as may be deemed relevant to
such suspension or revocation. Any applicant exercising the right to
appeal must file a written notice of appeal within 10 days of receiving
written notice of revocation or suspension of license. The decision of
the panel shall be final and binding.
H. A dealer shall have the right to change the location of the licensed
business, provided that he or she notifies the Municipal Clerk, in
writing, of the street address of said new location.
§ 351-6 LAWRENCE CODE § 351-7
1:444
shall obtain a judgment against obligor as a result of damage sustained in
operation pursuant to any license granted under this chapter." Said bond
shall be kept for a minimum of one year from the date of issuance of license
and must be renewed annually along with the license.
§ 351-8. Fees; period of license validity.
A nonrefundable fee for initial application and license for a pawnbroker or
a dealer in precious metals or other secondhand goods, as covered under
this chapter, is $250. The annual renewal fee for a license is $150. If on
the effective date of this chapter a person has been in business pursuant to
§ 351-3 for a period not less than five years, the fee for initial application
shall be $150, and investigation pursuant to § 351-4 may be waived by the
Municipal Clerk. These fees are separate from and in addition to any fees
the dealer must pay in relation to the mandatory electronic database system
designated by the Chief of Police, as provided by § 351-5D of this chapter.
The said yearly electronic database system fee shall be no greater than the
annual dealer license fee. Payments are to be made in the manner directed
by the Municipal Clerk. A license is valid for a one-year period from the date
of its issuance.
§ 351-9. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any provision of this chapter by any dealer shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not in excess of the limitations
of N.J.S.A. 40:49-5 or by a term of imprisonment or a period of community
service not exceeding 90 days in addition to a suspension or revocation of
operating license as provided in §§ 351-6F and G above. Each and every
violation shall be considered a separate violation. Each violation shall result
in an additional suspension period. Any person who is found guilty of
violating the provisions of this chapter within one year of the date of a
previous violation and who was fined for the previous violation may be
sentenced by the court to an additional fine as a repeat offender and, in
addition, may be subject to revocation proceedings as provided in § 351-6G.
The additional fine imposed as a repeat offender shall not be less than the
minimum or exceed the maximum fine provided herein, and same shall be
calculated separately from the fine imposed for the violation of this chapter.
§ 351-10. Disposition of penalties recovered.
A. The civil penalty shall be collected pursuant to the "Penalty
Enforcement Law of 1999" P.L. 1999, c. 274 (N.J.S.A. 2A:58-10 et seq.),
in a summary proceeding before the Lawrence Township Municipal
Court.
B. A penalty recovered under the provisions of this chapter shall be
recovered by and in the name of the Township. The penalty shall be paid
into the treasury of the Township of Lawrence for general uses of the
municipality.
§ 351-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 351-10
1:445
§ 351-11. Effect on statutory provisions.
Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to replace any preexisting
statutory requirements governing pawnbrokers, as in N.J.S.A. 45:22-1 et
seq., the sale of precious metals as in N.J.S.A. 51:6A-1 et seq., the sale of
secondhand jewelry as in N.J.S.A. 2C:21-36 et seq., or any other statutory
provision regarding any subject matter discussed herein.
§ 351-12. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court
of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct,
and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.
Chapter 360
SEWER AND WATER REGULATIONS
C. Any person, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity engaging in the business of a pawnbroker, or a dealer in precious
metals or other secondhand goods shall conform to the provisions of
this chapter within 90 days following the effective date of this chapter.
§ 351-10 LAWRENCE CODE § 351-12
1:446
ARTICLE I
Sewer Connections
[Derived from Ch. 20, Art. I, of the 1971 Code]
§ 360-1. Sewer connections required.
§ 360-2. Schedule of rates for sewer service. [Amended by Ord. No.
1660-01E; Ord. No. 1735-03; Ord. No. 1829-05]
A. All owners of land situate along the lines of any sewers now or hereafter
constructed in any of the streets or highways of the Township shall
cause the houses or buildings located thereon to be connected with the
sewer in the street or highway adjoining the property upon order from
the Division of Health requiring such connection to be made.
B. Upon receipt by the Division of Health of notification from the Ewing-
Lawrence Sewerage Authority that the sewer in any street in the
Township is ready to receive sewage or industrial waste, the Division of
Health shall order all property owners along the lines of such sewer to
connect his house or other building therewith in accordance with the
term of this article. The Department of Health shall designate one of its
proper officers to give notice of the order to the owner of such property.
C. The notice shall be addressed to the owner of the property as the name
of the owner appears in the last tax duplicate of the Township, shall
describe the property by lot and block designation as the same appears
on the Tax Map of the Township and by the street address thereof, if a
street address exists, and shall state that by order of the Division of
Health of the Township the owner is required to connect the house or
other building on the property with the sewer and shall state briefly the
location of the sewer and the notice shall inform the owner of the
penalty to be imposed for failure to comply with the notice and order in
accordance with the terms of this article.
D. The notice may be served on the owner personally or by leaving it at his
usual place of abode with a member of his family above the age of 18
years if the owner has a place of abode within the Township. The notice
may also be served within or without the limits of the Township by
mailing the same by registered mail to the last known post office
address of the owner as the same person appears on the last tax
duplicate of the Township.
A. See Chapter 156, Fees.
B. The Township shall review annually the sewer service charges and
revise the rates as necessary to comply with federal regulations.
C. Payment dates.
§ 360-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-2
1:447
§ 360-3. Construction of sewers by Township upon property when
owner refuses to do so.
(1) Except for sewer accounts with effluent meters, all charges for
sewer service shall be due and payable on April 1 and October 1 of
each year.
(2) All charges for sewer service for sewer accounts with effluent
meters shall be due and payable quarterly on the same dates as
real estate taxes.
(3) Delinquent sewer payments are subject to interest, costs and
penalties in a manner and at the same rate as delinquent real
estate taxes.
A. Upon certification of the Division of Health, after a finding by the
Health Officer and Plumbing Subcode Official that a health hazard
exists, the Township Council shall, by resolution, upon failure of the
property owner to complete the work after 30 days' notice to do so as
provided by law, authorize the construction of sewer connections on any
private property affected by such health hazard within the Township as
shall be described more particularly in the resolution, all in strict
accordance with the standards, requirements and specifications for
such connections set forth by the Ewing-Lawrence Sewerage Authority,
as required by law.
B. The Plumbing Subcode Official shall keep an accurate account of the
cost of such construction and, under oath, certify same to the Township
Council at the completion thereof.
C. Upon such certification of the costs of construction of a sewer
connection, the Township Council shall, by further resolution confirm
the costs, assess the same upon the property concerned, give notice to
the owner of the property as provided by law and authorize the payment
of the construction costs from the appropriation herein made.
D. Each property owner against whom any such assessment shall be made
may thereupon either pay the assessment in full within 30 days after
the filing of the notice with the Tax Collector, without interest, or may
pay the same at his option in five succeeding equal annual installments,
each such installment to bear interest at the rate of 7% per annum.
Each such installment shall fall due annually on the same date as that
fixed by law for the assessment of real property taxes, and shall be
collected, unless sooner paid, by the Tax Collector in the same manner
as and upon notice sent concurrently with real property tax bills.
Unpaid assessments shall remain a lien upon the property concerned,
until paid and discharged in full, with accrued interest, costs and
penalties, in the same manner as real property tax arrearages are
enforced and collected according to law.
§ 360-2 LAWRENCE CODE § 360-3
1:448
E. The sum of $2,000 is hereby appropriated from the capital
improvement fund of the Township to finance the cost of construction.
§ 360-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-3
1:449

ARTICLE II
Individual Sewage Disposal Systems
[Derived from Ch. 20, Art. III, Div. 1, of the 1971 Code]
§ 360-4. Adoption of Code.
§ 360-5. Permit required.
No person shall locate, construct or alter any individual sewage disposal
system until a permit for the location, construction or alteration of such
sewage disposal system shall have been issued by the Health Officer.
A. A code regulating the location, construction, use, maintenance and
method of emptying or cleaning individual sewage disposal systems,
the issuance of permits to locate, construct, empty or clean such
systems, and fixing penalties for the violation thereof is hereby adopted
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 26:3-69.1 to 26:3-69.6. A copy of such code is
annexed hereto and made a part hereof without inclusion of the text
thereof herein.
B. The code established and adopted by this section is described and
commonly known as the "Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of
New Jersey (1963)."
C. Three copies of the Individual Sewage Disposal System Code of New
Jersey (1963) have been placed on file in the office of the Secretary,
Clerk or other similar office of the Health Officer and will remain on file
in such office for the use and examination of the public.
D. In addition to the foregoing, there is hereby adopted the code
promulgated by the State Department of Environmental Protection
entitled "Standards for the Construction of Individual Subsurface
Sewage Disposal Systems" incorporated in the New Jersey
Administrative Code as N.J.A.C. 7.9-2.1 et seq. (hereafter "State Code")
which became effective in July, 1978, and which shall supersede and
govern in the event of any conflict or inconsistency with the foregoing
provisions of this Sec. 20-7 et seq. of the Lawrence Township Code
(Ord. No. 658, adopted 9-20-1972) or any other applicable ordinance of
the Township of Lawrence. Three copies of the State Code have been
placed on file in the offices each of the Township Health Officer and the
Municipal Clerk, are incorporated herein by reference, and will remain
on file in such offices for the use and inspection of the public.
E. In the event the State Code is hereby further amended or supplemented
by the State Department of Environmental Protection, further action
necessary to adopt such amendments or supplements shall be by
resolution of the Lawrence Township Council, copies of which
resolution, and the amendments and supplements thereto adopted,
shall likewise be placed on file as set forth above.
§ 360-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-6
1:451
§ 360-6. Certificate required for new systems.
New individual disposal systems shall not be placed in operation, nor shall
new dwellings or buildings or additions thereto be sold or occupied, which
must rely on such a system for sewage disposal, until the Health Officer
shall have issued a certificate indicating that such disposal system has been
located and constructed in compliance with the terms of the permit issued
and the requirements of the Standards for the Construction of Individual
Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:9-2.1, which
shall govern in the event of any conflict or inconsistency with the Individual
Sewage Disposal System Code. Issuance of such certificate shall not be
required for alterations to an existing individual sewage disposal system.
§ 360-7. Emptying or cleaning septic tanks and cesspools; license
required.
§ 360-8. Hearing upon denial of permit or certification.
In case any permit or certification required by this article is denied by the
Health Officer, a hearing shall be held thereon before the Township Council
within 15 days after request therefor is made by the applicant and upon
such hearing the Township Council shall affirm, alter or rescind his previous
determination and take action accordingly within 15 days after the date of
such hearing.
§ 360-9. Order to stop work in violation of individual sewage
disposal system code.
The Health Officer may order all further work in and about any individual
sewage disposal system, which is being erected or installed in violation
of the Standards for the Construction of Individual Subsurface Sewage
Disposal Systems set forth in N.J.A.C. 7:9-2.1, which shall govern in the
event of any conflict or inconsistency with the Individual Sewage Disposal
System Code, to be stopped forthwith, except such work as shall be
necessary to remedy such violation, and, thereafter, the work continued
A. Persons shall not engage in the business of emptying or cleaning septic
tanks, cesspools, privies or any place used for the reception or storage
of human excrement who do not hold a license to engage in such
business issued by the health officer. Such licenses shall be valid for a
period of one year from the date of issuance but may be renewed by the
Health Officer. Such license may be revoked for failure of the licensee
to comply with the provisions of the Standards for the Construction of
Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal Systems set forth in N.J.A.C.
7:9-2.1, which shall govern in the event of any conflict or inconsistency
with the Individual Sewage Disposal System Code or any rule or
ordinance of the Health Officer.
B. The contents of any septic tank, cesspool, privy or other receptacle
containing human excrement shall not be removed until a permit for
such removal has been obtained from the Health Officer.
§ 360-6 LAWRENCE CODE § 360-9
1:452
without any violation of any of the provisions of the Standards for the
Construction of Individual Subsurface Sewage Disposal System set forth
in N.J.A.C. 7:9-2.1, which shall govern in the event of any conflict or
inconsistency with the Individual Sewage Disposal System Code, and after
issuance of any such order and the service of a copy thereof upon any
person connected with or working in and about the erection or installation
of any such disposal system, or any part thereof, no further work shall be
done thereon except as aforesaid.
§ 360-10. Fees and charges.
See Chapter 156, Fees, for fees and charges.
§ 360-11. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of or any promulgated under this division or the State
Standards for the Construction of Individual Subsurface Sewage
Disposal Systems, the State "Individual Sewage Disposal System Code"
or any ordinance, rule or regulation pursuant thereto which are made a
part hereof shall be liable, upon conviction, for the penalties stated in
the State Sanitary Code, or, if no other penalty is provided, they shall be
liable to the penalty stated in Chapter I, Article III.
B. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 360-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-11
1:453

ARTICLE III
Abandonment of Cesspools and Septic Tanks
[Derived from Ch. 20, Art. III, Div. 2, of the 1971 Code]
§ 360-12. Permit required.
No person, firm or corporation shall directly discontinue use of, disconnect
or abandon, or, alternatively, knowingly allow or permit any such
discontinuance, disconnection or abandonment by others for more than
three years, on premises under its ownership or control, of any cesspool,
septic tank or other similar or appurtenant subsurface private sanitary
facilities within the Township without first applying for and obtaining a
permit therefor from the Township Plumbing Subcode Official.
§ 360-13. Application for permit; issuance; enforcement.
§ 360-14. Fee.
There shall be a fee paid upon the filing of any such application prescribed
for in this article which may be found in Chapter 156 of this Code.
§ 360-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. The Township Plumbing Subcode Official shall prescribe the form of
such application and permit, and shall issue and enforce same in
accordance with rules and regulations to be prescribed by him in
accordance with law, and in conformity with such applicable
regulations and standards as may be prescribed or recommended by
the Division of Water Policy and Supply of the State Department of
Conservation and Economic Development, by the State Department of
Health and Senior Services and by other agencies having jurisdiction.
B. In the absence of applicable State standards and recommendations, the
Township Health Officer may prescribe such rules and regulations in
accordance with the following criteria:
(1) The safety of persons on the surface in or about the facilities
abandoned or to be abandoned.
(2) Prevention of contamination or pollution of the subsurface or
percolating waters of the Township.
(3) Prevention of disease and otherwise insuring the public health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Township.
A. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of or any
order promulgated under this article shall, upon conviction, be liable
for the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Article III.
B. Each day a particular violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 360-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-15
1:455

ARTICLE IV
Protection of Water Supplies
[Derived from Ch. 20, Art. II, Div. 3, of the 1971 Code]
§ 360-16. Endangering water quality.
No person, firm, municipality or corporation, whether private, public or
quasi-public, or other governmental agency or instrumentality thereof shall
deposit, dump, store, treat or allow to accumulate or provide storage or
treatment facilities for human excrement, decomposable animal or
vegetable matter, domestic, factory, workshop, mill or slaughterhouse
refuse, sink, laundry, milk, creamery or cheese house waste or any other
garbage, refuse, waste or polluting matter, domestic or commercial, above
or adjacent to any aquifer, well, spring, stream, hole or other body of water
which is used or may be used for domestic purposes, all hereafter called
"aquifer," in such manner as to cause or threaten injury to any of the
inhabitants of the Township, either in health, comfort or property or to
cause or threaten degradation of water quality resulting in damage to the
aquatic community or wildlife in and adjacent to the affected body of water.
§ 360-17. Proof of safety from pollution generally.
Any person as defined in § 360-16 intending to conduct or engage in any
of the activities regulated in this section shall first make application to the
Planning Board and shall have the burden of proof by clear and convincing
evidence that such proposed activity would, if undertaken, not cause or
threaten injury to any of the inhabitants of the Township either in health,
comfort or property or cause or threaten degradation of water quality.
§ 360-18. Site plan required.
Regardless of whether a proposed activity as provided in § 360-16 otherwise
requires a building permit or may be otherwise subject thereto, all
applicants proposing to conduct or engage in any such activities shall first
comply with all of the requirements of section 5.100 of Appendix A to this
Code.
§ 360-19. Review and recommendation generally.
A. In reviewing a site plan required by § 360-18, the Planning Board shall
consider its conformity to the master plan and other applicable Codes
and ordinances of the Township and shall, at the applicant's expense,
conduct its own independent environment impact study in accordance
with the prevailing accepted technological criteria and standards for
such studies in such manner as to insure protection of the public health.
B. In addition to impact on underground and surface water quality and
environmental consequences thereof, the impact on drainage shall also
be considered to ensure against flooding and, in particular, possible
flooding by polluted waters. Other conservation features, including
§ 360-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-19
1:457
§ 360-20. Effect; changes; stages of construction.
aesthetics, landscaping and impact on surrounding development as well
as on the entire Township shall be part of the Planning Board review, as
well as traffic flow and circulation.
C. In its review, the Planning Board shall also secure written
recommendations from such independent environmental experts as it
deems necessary, the Township Division of Health, the Township Traffic
Safety Advisory Committee, Shade Tree Advisory Committee,
Recreation Advisory Committee, Environmental Resources Committee
or any other local, County, State or Federal Agency which may have an
interest in the particular development for which site plan approval is
being sought, which recommendations shall be received by the
Planning Board within 90 days after the request therefor.
D. The written recommendations of the Planning Board regarding the site
plan shall be forwarded to the Township Council, with copies to the
Township Division of Health and, where otherwise applicable, the
Construction Official and the applicant, not more than 60 days from the
time the environmental impact study and other Board and expert
recommendations referred to above are submitted for Planning Board
review, unless extended by mutual agreement between the Planning
Board and the applicant. If the Planning Board takes no action within 60
days, the site plan shall be deemed to have been recommended to the
Township Council as submitted.
E. The Planning Board may recommend reasonable conditions to become
binding on the applicant upon approval of any such site plan by the
Township Council.
F. Final approval or disapproval shall be by the Township Council within
60 days after receipt of the Planning Board's recommendations and any
comments thereon by the Division of Health. If the Township Council
takes no action within such sixty-day period, unless extended by mutual
agreement between the Township Council and the applicant, the
Planning Board's recommendations shall be deemed approved in full.
Any amendment to the recommendations of the Planning Board shall be
by a 2/3 affirmative vote of all members of the Township Council which
may, if deemed necessary, retain additional independent environmental
experts.
A. The site plan as finally approved shall be binding upon the applicant.
Any change from the approved plan shall require resubmission and
reapproval as if it were an initial application under this section. The site
plan shall remain effective for a period of two years from the date of
approval.
B. In the event a particular facility is to be constructed in stages, a site
plan for each particular stage shall be required.
§ 360-19 LAWRENCE CODE § 360-21
1:458
§ 360-21. Issuance of construction permit prior to final approval.
Neither the Health Officer nor the Construction Official shall issue any
applicable health or Construction Permit under this section until final
approval by the Township Council or until 60 days or agreed upon extension
thereof have elapsed without action by the Township Council.
§ 360-22. Submission to County Planning Board.
Site plans shall also be submitted by the applicant to the County Planning
Board for review, comment and approval when affecting an existing or
proposed County road or drainage facility. Whenever such plan shall be
submitted to the County Planning Board, the Township Planning Board shall
take no action until 30 days have elapsed from the date of such submission
to the County Planning Board.
§ 360-23. Fee.
Applications for site plan review shall be accompanied by an initial fee
equal to that required for a Construction Permit, which shall be paid with
the filing of such application; except, that in no event shall such initial fee
exceed a maximum as established in Chapter 156. The Township Manager
shall thereafter maintain an accurate record of all costs and disbursements
paid or incurred by the Township in processing and reviewing such
application, including, but not limited to, administrative overhead related
thereto and shall certify the total of such costs to such applicant which costs
shall then become due and payable to the extent of any excess over the
initial fee previously paid, up to the maximum provided for in this section,
payable prior to the issuance of a construction permit.
§ 360-24. Landscaping and improvements.
The Planning Board may recommend that improvements and landscaping
be secured by a performance guarantee in the same manner prescribed for
such improvements in Land Development Appendix.
§ 360-25. Conflict with state law.
This article shall not in any event be construed so as to conflict with any
provision of the Solid Waste Management Act (1970), N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et
seq., or any other statute applicable to the subject matter herein regulated,
which shall govern in the event of any conflict or inconsistency with the
subject matter of any provision of this section, but shall be construed to give
plenary supplementary and coordinate effect to the paramount municipal
public health interest in protection of local water resources from pollution
set forth in N.J.S.A. 26:3-31, Subdivisions (a), (f) and (h) and N.J.S.A. 26:3B-1
§ 360-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-25
1:459
et seq.10, the Township Council having succeeded to all legislative powers
of its former Board of Health.
§ 360-26. Exemption.
This article shall be prospective in operation and shall not apply to the
Ewing-Lawrence Sewerage Authority, a public body corporate and politic
created and operating heretofore under the "Sewerage Authorities Law."
§ 360-27. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons or corporation violation any provision of this section
shall, upon conviction, be liable for the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Article
III.
10.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 26:3B-1 and 26:3B-4 were repealed by L.1977, c. 224, § 14, eff. Sept.
17, 1977; N.J.S.A. 26:3B-13 to 26:3B-15 were repealed by L.1953, c. 26, §§ 32 to 34, eff.
March 19, 1953.
§ 360-25 LAWRENCE CODE § 360-27
1:460
ARTICLE V
Discharge of Water by Pumping
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1461-96]
§ 360-28. Regulation of discharge of water by pumping.
A. The discharge of water by pumping shall not be directed in a manner
which results in a flow to any abutting property. In the absence of a
practical outlet for such discharge, a disposal system approved by the
Municipal Engineer may be used.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating this section shall be subject,
upon conviction, to the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Article III. Each day
this section is violated shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 360-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-28
1:461

ARTICLE VI
Illicit Connections
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1841-05]
§ 360-29. Illicit connections.
An illicit connection is defined by NJDEP as any physical or nonphysical
connection to a storm sewer system that discharges domestic sewage,
noncontact water, process wastewater or industrial waste or pollutants.
Exemptions to this discharge are permitted under a NJPDES (New Jersey
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System) permit. It shall be unlawful for
any person or property owner to have an illicit connection to either the
municipal storm sewer system or a stormwater outfall pipe. If an illicit
connection is detected through investigation during dry weather flows, the
municipality must identify the violator and provide written notice to said
violator to eliminate the illicit connection within six months. All procedures
regarding illicit connections is found in the Stormwater Pollution Prevention
Program on file with the municipality.
§ 360-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-29
1:463

ARTICLE VII
Private Storm Drain Retrofitting
[Adopted by Ord. No. 2010-09]
§ 360-30. Private storm drain retrofitting.
Existing storm drain inlets which are in direct contact with repaving,
repairing, reconstruction or resurfacing or alterations of facilities on private
property must be retrofitted to prevent the discharge of solids and
floatables to the municipal separate storm sewer system operated by the
Township.
A. No person in control of private property (except a residential lot with
one single-family house) shall authorize the repaving, repairing
(excluding the repair of individual potholes) resurfacing (including top
coating or chip sealing with asphalt emulsion or a thin base of hot
bitumen), reconstructing or altering any surface that is in direct contact
with an existing storm drain inlet on that property unless the storm
drain inlet either:
(1) Already meets the design standard below to control passage of
solid and floatable materials; or
(2) Is retrofitted or replaced to meet the standard in the municipal
stormwater permit prior to the completion of the project.
B. This article shall be enforced by the Police Department, and/or
Engineering Department of Lawrence Township.
C. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500 for each storm drain
inlet that is not retrofitted to meet the design standard.
D. This article shall be enforced by the Police Department, Health
Department and/or Engineering Department of Lawrence Township.
E. Any person(s) who is found to be in violation of the provisions of this
article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $500.
§ 360-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-30
1:465

ARTICLE VIII
Emergency Conservation of Water
[Adopted 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 2354-19]
§ 360-31. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Lawrence Township Water
Conservation Ordinance."
§ 360-32. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to reduce the consumption of water in
Lawrence Township during a declared water emergency and to assure that
water resources will remain available for the public benefit with particular
regard for public health, fire protection and domestic use.
§ 360-33. Provisions operative.
The provisions of this article shall become operative when a water
emergency is declared by the Governor of the State of New Jersey or
the Mayor of Lawrence Township, and shall remain operative during the
pendency of the water emergency until the declared water emergency is
rescinded.
§ 360-34. Prohibited water uses.
Water supplied to users shall not be used for any purpose declared to be
nonessential, and the following uses are strictly prohibited while this article
is in effect:
A. Watering of lawns, shrubs, landscaped areas, trees, gardens or
vegetation of any type.
B. Water or washing of sidewalks, driveways, streets, parking areas,
tennis courts or other exterior paved areas. The Department of Public
Works shall utilize water from a nonportable source for street cleaning.
C. Noncommercial washing of privately owned motor vehicles, trailers or
boats.
D. Use of water for public or private pools.
E. Serving water in restaurants, clubs or public eating places, unless
specifically requested by the customer.
F. Use of water by any person for the purpose of dust control or
compaction.
G. Use of water utilized in any garbage grinder.
§ 360-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-35
1:467
§ 360-35. Variances.
Application for a variance from the provisions of this article shall be made,
in writing, to the Municipal Engineer. The Engineer will coordinate with the
applicable water authority and may, in his/her discretion, grant a variance
to permit a use of water, otherwise prohibited by this article, only if the
Engineer determines that the variance is reasonably necessary to protect
the public health and safety.
§ 360-36. Severability.
If any portion of this article shall be deemed invalid, such part(s) shall be
severed and the invalidity thereby shall not affect the remaining parts of
this article.
§ 360-35 LAWRENCE CODE § 360-36
1:468
Chapter 369
SMOKING AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
§ 360-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-36
1:469

ARTICLE I
Self-Service Displays of Tobacco Products
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1485-97]
§ 369-1. Displays prohibited; exceptions.
Except in establishments where patronage is limited to adults 19 years of
age or older, self-service tobacco displays including but not limited to any
racks, stands or other display devices from which a customer may take
tobacco products directly with only payment to be made to the tobacco
retailer are prohibited.
§ 369-2. Free distribution prohibited.
No person shall knowingly distribute or furnish without charge, or shall
cause to be furnished or distributed without charge, cigarettes or other
tobacco products in any public place.
§ 369-3. Removal of display racks; exception.
Except in establishments where patronage is limited to adults 19 years of
age or older, any person owning, operating, renting or permitting the use
of self-service display for cigarettes or tobacco in any form on premises
under his or her control shall immediately terminate the use of such selfservice
display, and shall remove or cause to be removed any such selfservice
display from the premises.
§ 369-4. Violations and penalties.
Penalties for the violation of this article shall be as prescribed in Chapter 1,
Article III, of the Code of the Township of Lawrence.
§ 369-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 369-4
1:471

ARTICLE II
Purchase of Tobacco by Minors
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1510-97]
§ 369-5. Additional statutory regulations.
See also N.J.S.A. 2C:33-13.1 for regulations prohibited persons from selling
or giving persons under 19 years of age tobacco products, and N.J.S.A.
2A:170-51 et seq.11 for regulations prohibiting persons 19 years of age or
older from purchasing products for persons under 19 years of age.
§ 369-6. Prohibited purchase or use.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2C:33-13.1, no person under the age of 19 shall within
or upon any public place or area, use cigarettes or other tobacco products
within the Township of Lawrence.
§ 369-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PUBLIC PLACE OR AREA — Any place or area to which the public is
invited or upon which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to,
any sidewalk, street, or any other right-of-way, playground, and any other
property owned by the Township, any mall or shopping center, and any
school property.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product made from the tobacco plant for
the purpose of smoking, chewing, inhaling or other person use, including
cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff and cigarettes in any form.
§ 369-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person under the age of 19 who purchases, or within or upon any public
place or area, uses cigarettes or other tobacco products, shall be subject to
the following noncriminal penalties:
A. For a first offense issuance of a written warning to be determined by the
Health Officer which explains the risk of tobacco use and the purposes
for which Lawrence Township has adopted this section.
B. Parental notification by the Health Officer.
C. Repeat offenders of the ages of 16, 17 or 18 at the time of the violation
shall be required to participate in community service projects as
determined by the Health Officer of Lawrence Township in the amount
11.Editor's Note: N.J.S.A. 2A:170-51 was repealed by L.1999, C. 90, § 19, eff. May 3, 1999;
N.J.S.A. 2A:170-51.3 was repealed by L.2000, C. 87, § 5, eff. Aug. 14, 2000; N.J.S.A.
2A:170-52 and N.J.S.A. 2A:170-54 were repealed by L.1971, C. 98, § 1 eff. April 16, 1971;
N.J.S.A. 2A:170-53, N.J.S.A. 2A:170-54.1 and N.J.S.A. 2A:170-54.2 were repealed by L.1978,
C. 95, § 2c:98–2, eff. Sept. 1, 1979.
§ 369-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 369-8
1:473
of up to 25 hours for the second offense and up to 50 hours for
any subsequent offenses, and be required to participate at their own
expense in an educational program determined by the Health Officer
of Lawrence Township concerning the dangers of smoking and tobacco
use.
D. Repeat offenders under the age of 16 shall be required to participate in
community service projects as determined by the Health Officer of
Lawrence Township in the amount of up to 15 hours for the second
offense and up to 30 hours for any subsequent offenses, and be required
to participate at their own expense in an educational program
determined by the Health Officer of Lawrence Township concerning the
dangers of smoke and tobacco use.
§ 369-8 LAWRENCE CODE § 369-8
1:474
ARTICLE III
Smoke-Free School Zones
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1881-06]
§ 369-9. Creation of zones; prohibited activities; signage and maps.
§ 369-10. Enforcement.
§ 369-11. Violations and penalties.
A. It shall be unlawful for persons 18 years or age or under to use or
possess in public a cigarette or any other tobacco products within the
right-of-way area and on any public properties or public places of
business within a radius of 1,000 feet of any elementary or secondary
educational institution when classes or other student activities are in
session. It shall also be unlawful for persons 18 years or age or under to
use or possess in public a cigarette or any other tobacco products one
hour before and one hour after any such classes or other student
activities within a radius of 1,000 feet of any elementary or secondary
educational institution.
B. Appropriate signage shall be posted within or at the perimeter of the
1,000-foot radius indicated the existence of a Smoke-Free School Zone
in accordance with the local ordinance. The 1,000-foot radius shall be
the same as the Drug-Free School Zone established by State
regulations. Maps indicating these zones shall be on file in the office of
the Lawrence Township Municipal Clerk.
C. A map produced or reproduced by the Municipal Engineer for the
purpose of depicting the location and boundaries of the area on or
within 1,000 feet of any property used for school purposes which is
owned or leased to any elementary or secondary school or school board,
or a true copy of such map, shall, upon property authentication, be
admissible, and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the location and
boundaries of those areas, provided that the Lawrence Township
Council has adopted a resolution or ordinance approving the map as an
official finding and record of the location and boundaries of the area or
areas on or within 1,000 feet of the school property.
A. The Chief of Police or his designee is authorized to enforce this article.
B. Citizens may bring complaints against violators of this article.
A. Unless otherwise provided by law, statute or ordinance, any person that
is 18 years of age who is found violating any of the provisions of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, pay a penalty of not less than $25
or more than $500.
B. Any offender that is below the age of 18 who is found violating any of
the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided
by law in the handling of juveniles.
§ 369-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 369-11
1:475
Chapter 375
SOLID WASTE
§ 369-11 LAWRENCE CODE § 369-11
1:476
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 375-1. Deposit on highways prohibited.
The deposit or placing of garbage, ashes, tin cans, bottles, refuse of any
kind whatsoever, and any and all parts of any glass, metal, plastic containers
or cartons upon any of the highways of the Township is prohibited.
§ 375-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
COMMERCIAL LANDSCAPER/LANDSCAPING — Any person who satisfies
the definition of a home improvement contractor or otherwise meets the
registration requirements of the Contractors' Registration Act, N.J.S.A.
56:8-136 et seq., that is in the business, occupation or trade of adorning or
improving any property or portion of property by trimming or cutting grass
or shrubs; by planting, installing or removing leaves, branches, logs, grass,
flowers, mulch, hedges or shrubs; or by planting or installing trees. As used
in this chapter, commercial landscaper and landscaping shall also refer to
solicitation of the above-referenced services.
GARBAGE — Animal and vegetable matter originating in dwellings,
kitchens, restaurants, hotels, produce markets, etc.
PERSON — Any individual or entity whose existence is recognized by
law, including, but not limited to, any partnership, corporation (for-profit,
nonprofit, or municipal and its agencies), firm, association, or any
combination of the foregoing.
REFUSE — Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive,
including, but not limited to, rags, old clothes, rubber, carpets, wood,
excelsior, papers, ashes, furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery, masonry, etc.
TRADE WASTE — All solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from
construction, building operations, or the prosecution of any business, trade,
or industry, including, but not limited to, plastic products, cartons, paint,
grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and other
forms of solid or liquid waste material.
VEGETATIVE MATERIALS — All leaves, plants, bushes, twigs, branches and
other plant materials not otherwise excluded or exempted in this chapter.
Grass, soil, dirt and mud are expressly excluded from the definition of
vegetative materials.
WAGE THEFT — When any person has been found guilty, liable or
responsible in any judicial or administrative proceeding of committing a
violation of the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, 29 U.S.C.A. § 201
et seq., the New Jersey Wage and Hour Law, N.J.S.A. 34:11-56a et seq., the
New Jersey State Wage Payment Law, N.J.S.A. 34:11-4.1 et seq., or N.J.S.A.
2C:40A-2 (Violation of contract to pay employees).
§ 375-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-2
1:477

ARTICLE II
Collection
§ 375-3. Incorporation of statutory provisions.
The New Jersey Solid Waste Management Act, N.J.S.A. 13:1E-1 et seq., and
Solid Waste Management Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:26-1.1 et. seq., as from time to
time amended, are hereby incorporated by reference as if fully set forth
herein.
§ 375-4. Placement of garbage and refuse.
Garbage and refuse shall be disposed of pursuant to the following
regulations:
§ 375-5. Upsetting or scavenging in refuse prohibited.
No person shall maliciously upset or loosen, or scavenge, or in any manner
disarrange any refuse properly placed and secured for collection.
A. All garbage shall be placed at the road or street edge clear of any gutter
or drain in a manner convenient to collection.
B. Garbage shall be placed for collection no earlier than 5:00 p.m. of the
day prior to scheduled collection.
C. Trash receptacles shall be removed from the street or road within 48
hours of garbage collection.
D. With the exception of bulk waste, all garbage, including grass, shall be
placed in trash receptacles owned and issued by the Township of
Lawrence. Bulk waste consists of items to be discarded which are too
large to fit into your new cart. The exceptions are "white goods" such as
washers, dryers and refrigerators and bulky materials too large to fit in
the "hopper" of any vehicle used for collection.
E. Each household or business may utilize up to 200 gallons of receptacle
capacity per collection.
F. Condominium associations, under terms mutually agreed to by the
association and the Township, may be serviced by means other than
Township owned and issued trash receptacles.
§ 375-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-5
1:479

ARTICLE III
Brush, Weeds and Other Deleterious Debris and Trash
§ 375-6. Placement collection.
§ 375-7. Dimension and size restrictions.
A. Vegetative materials shall be placed at the front yard curb, or edge of
the street or road in the front yard, in a manner convenient for the
Township collector and that does not impede pedestrians and motorists
from safely traversing the streets and sidewalks.
(1) Leaves shall be separated from all other plant materials and shall
be placed loose (not in bags or other containers).
(2) Grass shall be disposed of as regular trash on normal collection
days. Grass shall be bagged and placed in a garbage cart or
receptacle.
(3) Tree trunks and stumps are prohibited.
B. The owner, lessee, tenant, mortgagee, its agent and/or assigns or
occupant of lands lying within the Township are responsible for the
vegetative material that has been placed at the front yard curb, or edge
of the street or road in the front yard by commercial landscapers they
have hired. Commercial landscapers and/or tree contractors are
prohibited from placing trees, segments thereof, and branches on the
front yard curb, or edge of the street or road in the front yard for
municipal curbside collection, and an owner, lessee, tenant, mortgagee,
its agent and/or assigns or occupant shall be responsible for any such
violation of this subsection by his, her or their commercial landscaper
and/or tree contractor.
C. For the purposes of collecting vegetative materials, the Township is
divided into four zones. (See zone map.12) Vegetative materials shall be
collected in Zone 1 during the week containing the first Monday in the
month, Zone 2 during the week containing the second Monday, Zone 3
during the week containing the third Monday, and Zone 4 during the
week containing the fourth Monday. Vegetative materials shall be put
out the Saturday or Sunday immediately preceding the week in which a
zone is to have collection.
A. Vegetative materials shall be placed in an area of the street or road
edge not greater than four feet from the edge of the pavement.
B. Vegetative materials shall be piled not greater than three feet in height
and 12 feet in length.
C. Trees, or segments thereof, and branches greater than six inches in
diameter may not be disposed of through municipal curbside collection.
12.Editor's Note: The zone map is on file in the Township office.
§ 375-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-7
1:481
§ 375-8. Accumulation prohibited; collection only in front yard.
§ 375-9. Inspections; notice to remove.
The Department of Health, Department of Public Works, or Police
Department shall from time to time make inspections, and if any such
department finds any violation of this article, or if any such violation is
reported to it by a Township officer or employee, shall give written notice to
the owner, tenant, lessee, mortgagee, its agent and/or assigns or occupant
to remove or correct the violations.
§ 375-10. Action upon failure to remove.
In the event the owner, lessee, tenant, mortgagee, its agent and/or assigns
or occupant, within 10 days after such notice to such owner, tenant, lessee
or occupant, shall refuse or neglect to remove the same, the Township
manager may provide for the removal from such lands of brush, weeds,
dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth, garbage,
trash and debris or under the direction of any officer of the Township the
Township manager may designate.
§ 375-11. Costs of removal constitute lien upon property.
In all cases where brush, weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots,
obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris are removed from any
lands by or under the direction of the manager, or such other officer as
D. Trees, or segments thereof, branches and twigs shall not exceed three
feet in length.
A. No owner, lessee, tenant, mortgagee, its agent and/or assigns, or
occupant of lands lying within the Township shall accumulate or allow
to accumulate on such lands, including sidewalks, gutters and catch
basins thereon, lands, brush, weeds, dead or dying trees, stumps, roots,
obnoxious growths, filth, garbage, trash and debris, if such
accumulation is adverse to the public health, safety, general welfare or
creates a fire hazard.
B. Vegetative materials shall only be piled in and collected from front yard
curbs in conformance with the collection schedule for such materials
established in § 375-6C above.
C. Owners, lessees, tenants, mortgagees, their agents and/or assigns or
occupants are prohibited from adding, or allowing the addition of, their
vegetative materials to other piles or collections located in the front
yard of neighboring or adjacent properties, or from piling for collection
by the Township such vegetative materials in the rear or the side yards
of their property(ies). Nothing herein shall prohibit an owner, lessee,
tenants, mortgagees, their agents and/or assigns from temporarily
piling vegetative materials in other areas of their property(ies) until it is
the proper time to place such materials in the front yard for collection.
§ 375-7 LAWRENCE CODE § 375-11
1:482
provided above, such officer shall certify the cost thereof to the Township
council, which shall examine the certificate, and if found correct, shall cause
the cost as shown thereon to be charged against such lands, which amount
so charged shall forthwith become a lien upon such lands, the same to bear
interest at the same rate as taxes, and shall be collected and enforced in the
same manner as taxes.
§ 375-12. Certain portions of land or certain items may be included
in notice to remove.
The Department of Health, Department of Public Works, or Police
Department, in preparing the notice described in this article, shall have
discretion to include all or only certain portions of the lands of the owner,
tenant, lessee, mortgagee, its agents or assigns or occupant to be served
with such notice, or all or only specified types, quantities or sizes of brush,
weeds, dead and dying trees, stumps, roots, obnoxious growths, filth,
garbage, trash and debris, as may be described and designated in such
notice.
§ 375-13. Applicability to commercial landscapers.
The provisions of this article, including, but not limited to, accumulation
of and size and dimensions of vegetative materials, are also applicable to
commercial landscapers as defined in this chapter. Commercial landscapers
must register with the Township as set forth in Article IV herein.
§ 375-14. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the terms of this article shall, upon conviction in the
municipal court, be punished as follows:
A. For the first offense, a fine of $500;
B. For the second offense, a fine of $750; and
C. For the third offense and any subsequent offenses thereafter, a fine of
$1,000 or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both.
§ 375-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-14
1:483

ARTICLE IV
Commercial Landscaper Registration
§ 375-15. Purpose.
§ 375-16. Registration requirement for commercial landscapers for
hire.
No person shall engage in any commercial landscaping on any public or
private property within the Township for hire without first registering with
the Department of Public Works, on forms to be supplied by said
department.
§ 375-17. Applications for registration; registration fee; suspension
or revocation of registration; disclaimer.
A. The purpose of this chapter requiring registration is to ensure that
commercial landscapers as defined in this chapter are cognizant of the
Township's regulations concerning the vegetative materials collection
program, federal and New Jersey State wage and hour laws, and the
New Jersey State workers' compensation laws.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall relieve any owner, lessee, tenant,
mortgagee, its agent and/or assigns or occupant of his, her or their
responsibility to comply with the requirements of the Township's
vegetative materials collection program set forth elsewhere in this
chapter.
A. An application for registration shall be made upon forms provided by
the Township and shall be filed with the director of public works, or his
designee. Approved applications for registration shall be public
records.
B. At the time of registration, applicants shall acknowledge in writing that
they have received (or have been offered, at no cost) a copy of the
provisions of the Township's ordinance regulating its vegetative
materials collection program. In addition, applicants shall
acknowledge, in writing, that they have received (or have been offered,
at no cost) a copy of the federal and New Jersey State wage and hour
laws, and New Jersey State workers' compensation insurance laws.
C. Every registration shall be issued and renewed on an annual basis,
effective March 31 of each year, upon payment of an annual fee to the
municipality in the amount of $50.
D. No registration shall be required of any owner, lessee, tenant,
mortgagee, its agents or assigns, or occupant of lands lying within the
Township who shall personally perform activities otherwise requiring a
registration; except that all such work must otherwise comply with the
Township's ordinance.
§ 375-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-17
1:485
§ 375-18. Violations and penalties.
For each violation of this article, the violator shall be subject to such fines
and other penalties as provided in § 375-14 of this Code.
E. The Mayor and council may, upon recommendation of the director of
public works, or his designee, after notice and an opportunity for a
hearing, suspend or revoke any registration for violation of law,
including, but not limited to, wage theft laws, or related Township
ordinances, or for good cause, which is shown to be prejudicial to the
public health, safety or welfare. In addition, the director of public
works, or his designee, may temporarily suspend any registration for a
period not to exceed one week or until the Mayor and council can be
convened to consider said suspension, when:
(1) The Director of Public Works, or his designee, has reasonable cause
or belief that an emergency affecting the public health, safety or
welfare so requires; or
(2) The Director of Public Works, or his designee, receives sufficient
information to establish that the registrant has committed wage
theft which has not been cured by the registrant by compliance
with the order or decision of the governmental entity determining
the same.
F. The Township makes no guarantee or representation regarding the
fitness, knowledge or qualification of any person that is registered by
the Township to engage in commercial landscaping for hire.
§ 375-17 LAWRENCE CODE § 375-18
1:486
ARTICLE V
Abandonment and Storage of Inoperable Motor Vehicles
§ 375-19. Findings of Council; declaration of policy.
It is hereby determined and declared that the abandonment or storage
outdoors of any inoperable motor vehicle or any motor vehicle not currently
licensed or registered, on any public street or on any public or private
lands within the Township is contrary and inimical to the public welfare in
that such vehicles so abandoned or stored attract or may attract vermin
and persons of tender years, who being so attracted may play in or about
them and be injured doing so, and in that such vehicles so abandoned
or stored outdoors deteriorate and are unsightly and are detrimental to
and depreciate the value of properties in the neighborhood where they are
located and in the Township as a whole.
§ 375-20. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
INOPERABLE — Any motor vehicle, omnibus, road tractor, trailer, truck,
truck-trailer and vehicle that is not currently registered or licensed, or
which is not capable of being used or operated upon any public street
or highway, whether by reason of improper or inadequate equipment or
otherwise.
JUNK AUTOMOBILE or JUNK AUTOMOBILE BODY — Any automobile
which is no longer in actual use as a motor vehicle or which is wholly unfit,
without rebuilding or reconditioning, for use in highway transportation,
or which has been discarded for use as a motor vehicle or otherwise
abandoned.
MOTOR VEHICLE, OMNIBUS, ROAD TRACTOR, TRAILER, TRUCK,
TRUCK-TRAILER and VEHICLE — Such terms shall have the meanings
stated and defined in N.J.S.A. 39:1-1 et seq.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership or corporation being the owner
or having any legal right in, of or to the motor vehicle or other vehicle as
herein defined.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Township.
§ 375-21. Parking of inoperable motor vehicles prohibited;
exclusions; exempt certificates.
A. Parking of inoperable motor vehicles prohibited.
(1) No person shall park, leave or store any inoperable motor vehicle
on any public lands or premises, except in case of emergency and
then for a period of not more than 72 hours.
§ 375-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-21
1:487
(2) No person shall park, leave, store or maintain any inoperable motor
vehicle for a period of more than 30 days upon any private lands or
premises.
(3) No owner or occupier of any private lands or premises shall permit
or suffer any inoperable motor vehicle to be parked, left, stored or
maintained on his lands or premises for more than 30 days.
B. Exclusions. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit the placing,
keeping or storage of an inoperable vehicle in a garage, barn, building
or other enclosure that adequately protects against injury and vermin
and that substantially hides said vehicles from public view. Additionally,
nothing heretofore mentioned shall be deemed to prevent any of the
following activities from being conducted on private lands under the
conditions or by the persons referred to:
(1) Keeping one motor vehicle within the definition set forth above
which does not possess the current year's registration. Such a
vehicle may be maintained by a single-dwelling unit on its
associated premises as long as the motor vehicle is in complete
condition.
(2) Maintaining motor vehicles altered for drag or stock car racing as
long as such motor vehicles are maintained on registered trailers.
(3) Motor vehicles being held for sale or resale or for repair or
maintenance or an otherwise permitted business at a regular place
of business where such commercial activity is permitted.
(4) Keeping a motor vehicle which would otherwise come under the
provisions of this article but whose owner is in the military
stationed outside the state.
(5) Keeping an antique motor vehicle which is classified as such under
the state statutes.
(6) Use of vehicles for agricultural, business or property maintenance
purposes which vehicles are not required to be registered because
they remain and are used solely on private property.
C. Exempt certificates. Any person who possesses, owns or maintains a
motor vehicle covered under any of the exclusions referred to above
shall obtain from the Chief of Police, or his designee, an exempt
certificate, which shall indicate that the motor vehicle or business in
question comes under one of the exclusions referred to in Subsection B
above. Such exempt certificate shall be valid for one year from the date
of issuance; except, that a certificate issued pursuant to Subsection
B(3) above shall expire 10 days after the termination of the business
referred to. All owners of exempt certificates shall display the
certificate on the windshield or other prominent place on the motor
vehicle in question so that it is readily observable by the enforcement
officials under this article; except, that a certificate holder pursuant to
§ 375-21 LAWRENCE CODE § 375-21
1:488
§ 375-22. Storage of junk automobiles.
No person shall place, keep or store any junk automobile or junk automobile
body on any public or private property within the Township, nor shall
any person who owns any real property within the Township allow any
such automobile or body to remain on his land, and failure to remove
such automobile or body, after seven days' notice to do so by the Police
Department, shall constitute a violation of this article.
§ 375-23. Impoundment of vehicles; notice.
§ 375-24. Sale of impounded vehicles.
Subsection B(3) shall display his certificate at some prominent place on
the business premises. No fees shall be charged for the issuance of an
exempt certificate.
A. Whenever any officer of the Police Department finds any motor vehicle,
omnibus, road tractor, trailer, truck, truck-trailer or inoperable vehicle
which has been abandoned, kept or stored contrary to the provisions of
this article, such officer shall remove or secure the removal of such
vehicle to such premises designated by the Chief of Police, and such
vehicle shall be retained in impoundment until the persons owning the
same shall first pay the reasonable cost of removal and storage which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle and any fine or penalty and court costs assessed.
B. The Police Department shall report the taking of possession
immediately to the Director of the State Motor Vehicle Commission, on
a form prescribed by him for verification of ownership. Notice shall also
be given to the registered owner, when and if ascertained, by certified
mail, addressed to such owner at his last known address, and to the
holder of any security interest filed with the Director of the possession
of the vehicle, the reason for its removal, its present location and the
date of the proposed sale of the same, as hereinafter provided for.
A. Whenever any vehicle impounded by the Police Department shall
remain unclaimed for a period of 60 days, the vehicle shall be sold
under the direction of the Chief of Police at public auction to the highest
bidder. Such auction shall take place after notice of such has been given
to the owner and holder of any security interest as provided above, and
at least seven days prior thereto by one publication in a newspaper
circulated in the Township. The address of the owner as shown on the
records of the State Motor Vehicle Commission shall be deemed
sufficient for the purposes of this article.
B. In the alternative, the sale may be conducted in conformance with the
provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 through N.J.S.A. 39:10A-7, as from time
to time amended.
§ 375-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-25
1:489
§ 375-25. Provisions supplementary to statute.
The remedies and obligations set forth herein are in addition to those
established by N.J.S.A. 39:10A-1 et seq., N.J.S.A. 39:3-4, N.J.S.A. 39:4-56.5
and any other applicable state statutes.
§ 375-26. Violations and penalties.
Unless otherwise provided, any person who violates any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $250, or
by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both, at the discretion of the
municipal judge, and each day that such violation shall continue shall be
deemed a separate offense.
§ 375-27. Continuance of violation; injunctive relief.
A continuance of a violation of a noncompliance with the provisions of this
article shall be deemed a nuisance, and the Township Council shall have the
right to apply to the courts of this state for injunctive relief or other relief in
addition to the penalties provided for herein.
§ 375-25 LAWRENCE CODE § 375-27
1:490
ARTICLE VI
Deposit of Litter on Private Property and Public Roadways
§ 375-28. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
LITTER — Any unused or unconsumed substance or waste material which
has been discarded whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber,
paper or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof,
including, but not limited to, any bottler, jar or can, any top, cap, or
detachable tab of any bottle, jar, or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar,
match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, refuse,
debris, rubbish, grass clippings or other law or garden waste, newspaper,
magazines, glass, metal, plastic or paper containers or other packaging
or construction material, but does not include the waste of the primary
process of mining or other extraction process, logging, sawmilling, farming
or manufacturing.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any dwelling or structure, whether or not occupied,
as well as any yard, grounds, sidewalk, wall, fence, driveway, porch, steps,
vestibule or mailbox belonging to or appurtenant to such dwelling or
structure.
PUBLIC WAYS ADJACENT TO PRIVATE PROPERTY — The areas from the
side edge of a highway, street or road, whether or not curbed, to and
including the sidewalk, if any, to the front property line of the adjacent
private property, and all areas used for any public park, playground,
municipal building or other installation, including driveways, parking areas,
walks, paths and other public ways thereupon.
§ 375-29. Prohibited acts.
A. Littering prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to throw, drop,
discard, or otherwise place litter of any nature upon any public or
private property, other than in a litter receptacle.
B. Illegal dumping. It is unlawful for any person to discard or dump along
any street or road, on or off any right-of-way, any household or
commercial solid waste, rubbish, refuse, junk, vehicle or vehicle parts,
rubber tires, appliances, furniture, or private property, except by
written consent of the owner of said property, in any place not
specifically designated for the purpose of solid waste storage or
disposal.
C. Uncovered vehicles. It is unlawful for any vehicle to be driven, moved,
stopped or parked, on any public roadway unless such vehicle is
constructed, covered or loaded to prevent any of its load from dropping,
sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom. Any person operating
such vehicle from which any materials which constitute litter have
fallen or escaped, which could cause an obstruction, damage a vehicle,
§ 375-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-29
1:491
§ 375-30. Exceptions.
The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to the delivery of:
or otherwise endanger travelers or public property, must immediately
cause the public property to be cleaned of all such materials and must
pay the costs thereof.
D. Construction site. It is unlawful for any owner, agent, or contractor in
charge of a construction or demolition site to permit the accumulation
of litter before, during, or immediately following completion of any
construction or demolition project. It is the duty of the owner, agent, or
contractor in charge of a construction site to furnish containers
adequate to accommodate flyable or non-flyable debris or trash at areas
convenient to construction areas, and to maintain and empty the
receptacles in such a manner and with such a frequency as to prevent
spillage of refuse.
A. Mail, parcels or packages by and in accordance with the rules of the
United States Postal Service.
B. Parcels, packages and materials by and in accordance with the rules of
the Railway Express Agency or other utility licensed or regulated for
such purposes, and those delivered by vendors where ordered by the
owner or occupant of the recipient premises.
C. Newspapers and other publications and periodicals only if subscribed
to by the owner or occupant of the recipient premises; provided, that
they are either placed firmly in a receptacle designed for such purpose
or, if none, then tightly wrapped to prevent blowing or scattering upon
the recipient premises or adjacent areas.
D. Laundry, dry cleaning, dairy, bakery and similar food products and
commercial product sampling by agreement with or invitation of the
owner or occupancy of the recipient premises.
E. Solicitation cards, brochures and flyers by duly authorized bona fide
nonprofit charitable organizations, including, but not limited to, the
United Fund, American Red Cross, religious, educational, medical and
volunteer police, fire, and ambulance organizations; provided, that such
are packaged and placed in such a manner as not to blow or scatter
upon the recipient premises or adjacent areas.
F. Noncommercial handbills of a political or other nature whose
distribution is or may be protected by constitutional rights of free
speech; provided, that such are packaged and placed in such a manner
as not to blow or scatter upon the recipient premises or adjacent areas.
G. Unsolicited and unsubscribed newspapers, publications and other
periodicals of a commercial nature, in whole or in part; provided, that
the distribution of such is in compliance with this article; and further
§ 375-29 LAWRENCE CODE § 375-30
1:492
§ 375-31. Unsolicited and unsubscribed commercial publications;
licenses.
The delivery of unsolicited and unsubscribed newspapers, publications and
other periodicals of a commercial nature, in whole or in part, shall qualify
for the exception provided for in § 375-30G above, subject to and contingent
upon initial and continuing compliance with the following requirements:
§ 375-32. Suspension and revocation of license.
The Township Manager may, in addition to the penalties provided for herein
for violations, either suspend, revoke or refuse to renew any such license
where three or more violations of this article by the licensee shall have
occurred within any annual license period; provided, that the licensee is
first given 10 days advance written notice of any such action and a hearing.
provided, that such are packaged and placed in such a manner as not
to blow or scatter upon the recipient premises or adjacent areas.
A. Licenses. The publisher or distributor shall, prior to any such delivery,
apply to the Township Clerk for an annual license to be effective from
July 1 to the following June 30 (or any portion thereof), on forms to be
prescribed by the Township manager requiring, in part, complete
information about the publisher, distributor, the publication concerned,
frequency of distribution, and designating specific persons, with
addresses and telephone numbers, responsible for compliance with this
article. The fee for such licenses shall be $150 per year, or any portion
thereof, to cover the costs of processing the applications and
administering the requirements provided herein.
B. Objection to delivery. The owner or occupant of any property within the
Township shall have the right, in writing, at any time, to transmit to the
Township Clerk notice of objection to the continued delivery of any such
unsolicited and unsubscribed publication by any licensee, and the
Township shall prepare and maintain, at all times on a current basis, a
list of the names and addresses of such objectors which shall be sent to
the Police Department and made available to licensees hereunder at all
times during the business hours prescribed by law for the Township
Clerk's office. Such notice of objection shall continue in effect until
revoked, and it shall be deemed a violation of this article for any
licensee to deliver, or continue to deliver, any such unsolicited and
unsubscribed publication to any such objecting owner or occupant
whose name appears on the list of objectors.
§ 375-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-32
1:493
Chapter 384
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 375-32 LAWRENCE CODE § 375-32
1:494
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Derived from Ch. 21, Art. I, of the 1971 Code]
§ 384-1. Removal of brush and hedges near roadways and
intersections; notice.
§ 384-2. Action on failure to comply.
If the owner or tenant of lands designated in any notice under § 384-1 shall
refuse or neglect to comply with the requirements of such notice within
the time limit provided therein and compliance is effected by or under the
direction of the Superintendent of Roads, the Superintendent shall certify
the cost thereof to the Township Council, which, if the certificate shall be
A. All brush, hedges or other plant life growing upon any lands lying in the
Township within 10 feet of any roadway and within 25 feet of any
intersection of two roadways shall be cut to a height of not more than
2 1/2 feet. The Council shall direct the Municipal Clerk to give written
notice to the owner or tenant, or both requiring such cutting, and
thereupon it shall become the duty of the owner or tenant to comply
within 10 days after receipt of such notice, or within 10 days after
publication and posting of such notice as hereinafter provided.
B. The foregoing notice may be served upon any owner or tenant either
personally or by registered mail, and, in the latter case, the period of 10
days within which compliance with the directions of such notice is
required shall be deemed to have commenced from the date of the
return receipt for the delivery of such registered notice obtained by
postal authorities.
C. In the event that proper service cannot be effected by the Municipal
Clerk, as provided herein, the notice may, in lieu of such service, be
published at least once in a daily newspaper published in the County
and also be posted in a conspicuous place upon the lands designated
therein. In the event that such notice shall be served by publication and
posting, the period of 10 days within which compliance with the
directions of such notice is required shall be deemed to have
commenced from the date of the publication or the date of posting of
such notice, whichever is later.
D. Every notice shall, in addition to the requirements specified in this
article, set forth a warning to such owner or tenant of the lands
designated therein that, in the event of refusal or neglect by the tenant
or owner to comply within the time limits hereinbefore provided after
service of the notice, the acts required to be performed by the notice
will be performed by or under the direction of the Superintendent of
Roads of the Township, the costs of such performance to be charged
against and thereupon become a lien upon the lands, bearing interest at
the same rate as unpaid taxes of the Township.
§ 384-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-2
1:495
found to be correct, shall cause the cost as shown thereon to be charged
against the lands, and, in the event that such cost shall be found by the
Council to be excessive, shall cause the reasonable cost thereof to be
charged against the lands; and thereupon a statement of the cost so found
by the Council to be charged against the lands shall be furnished by the
Municipal Clerk to the Assessor of Taxes, and the cost thereof shall become
a lien upon the lands and shall be added to and become and form a part of
the taxes next to be assessed and levied upon the lands, the same to bear
interest at the same rate as taxes, and to be collected and enforced by the
same officers and in the same manner as taxes.
§ 384-3. Use of streets by public utilities.
A. All persons and corporations including the Township and the Ewing-
Lawrence Sewerage Authority, placing pipes, lines, conduits or making
any other construction under the surface of any of the streets or roads
of the Township shall comply with the following rules, regulations and
specifications:
(1) All sewer lines shall be located in the center of streets and roads.
(2) Water mains shall be located on the south or east side of all streets
and roads no more than six feet from the curblines thereof.
(3) Gas mains shall be located on the north or west side of all streets
and roads no more than six feet from the curblines thereof.
(4) Telephone and electric utility conduits shall be installed in the
sidewalk areas.
(5) Subsurface drains shall be located as close to the street side of the
curblines as possible.
(6) In all cases where it is necessary for one utility to cross another
utility or utilities, the crossing shall be made at right angles.
B. The Township Engineer shall have the authority and power to enforce
these rules and regulations. Before any subsurface construction in the
streets or roads is commenced, plans therefor shall be submitted to the
Township Engineer who shall have power to grant necessary variances
from the above regulations where the existence of bridges, tunnels,
streams or other obstructions or conditions make it necessary or proper
to deviate from the above regulations. The Township Engineer shall also
have power to permit changes in the above regulations in those
instances where the present location of subsurface structures and
utilities will prevent a strict compliance with the terms of this article.
C. Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any person or
corporation disturbing the surface of the streets or the roads of the
Township for subsurface construction, from the obligation to replace
and repair the surface of such street or road to the condition in which it
§ 384-2 LAWRENCE CODE § 384-3
1:496
§ 384-4. Acceptance of streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
See also N.J.R.S.I.S. for additional specifications.
was found, nor from the payment of any fee for a road opening permit
which is now or may hereafter be required by the Township.
D. The Township Engineer shall have power to stop construction and
revoke the permit given to any person or corporation violating the
terms of this article.
A. No street, road or highway shall be accepted by the Township and taken
over as a municipal road and maintained as such unless it complies with
the specifications designated Amended Street Specifications for the
Township of Lawrence in the County of Mercer and State of New Jersey,
dated April 17, 1968, copies of which specifications are on file in the
office of the Municipal Clerk.
B. Sidewalks, curbs and gutters. Concrete sidewalks, curbs and gutters
shall be constructed in accordance with the specifications as outlined in
the Amended Street Specifications for the Township of Lawrence in the
County of Mercer and State of New Jersey which are on file in the office
of the Municipal Clerk.
C. Refusal to accept variances from specifications. The Township Council
may refuse to approve or accept any road, street, highway, concrete
sidewalk, curbs and gutters notwithstanding compliance with all of the
respective specifications named hereinabove when in its judgment it is
not advisable for good reason to grant such acceptance. It may permit
variations of the specifications named hereinabove when for good
reason and without injury to the public interest, it deems a variance
thereof to be advisable.
§ 384-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-4
1:497

ARTICLE II
Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters
[Derived from Ch. 21, Art. II, of the 1971 Code]
§ 384-5. Responsibility for maintenance; notice. [Amended by Ord.
No. 1311-92 § 1]
A. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of all property traversed by a
public sidewalk and curb to maintain the sidewalk and curb in a safe
and structurally sound condition in accordance with Township
specifications. Whenever it shall be determined by the Township
Engineer that it has become necessary for the preservation of public
safety to require the construction, repair, alteration, relaying or
maintenance of any sidewalk, curb, driveway apron or gutter, a notice
in writing to be served upon the owner or occupant of the lands
abutting the area requiring the necessary specified work to said area to
be done by the owner or occupant within a period of not less than 60
days from the date of service of such notice;
B. Whenever any lands are unoccupied and the owner cannot be found
within the Township, the notice may be mailed, postage prepaid, to his
or her post office address, if the same can be ascertained. In case such
owner is a nonresident of the Township or his or her post office address
cannot be ascertained, then the notice may be inserted for four weeks,
once a week in some newspaper of the Township or if none be published
therein, then in some newspaper published in the State and circulating
in the Township.
C. In case the owner or occupant of such lands does not comply with the
requirements of this notice, it shall be lawful for the Street Department
or the Township, upon filing due proof of service or publication of the
aforesaid notice in the appropriate Department of the Township, to
cause the required work to be done, and paid for out of the municipal
funds available for that purpose. The cost of such work shall be certified
by the Department or person having charge thereof to the Department
or the person having charge of the collection of assessments in the
Township. Upon filing of the certificate the amount of the costs of such
work shall be and become a lien upon the abutting lands in front of
which such work was done to the same extent assessments for local
improvements are liens in the Township under its charter or general
law, and shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the
collection of such other assessments, and shall bear interest at the
same rate.
D. In addition thereto, the Township may have an action to recover the
amount against the owner of the lands and any court having competent
jurisdiction thereof. A certified copy of the aforesaid certificate shall
and such action be prima facia evidence of the existence of a debt due
from the owner to the Township.
§ 384-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-6
1:499
§ 384-6. Specifications.
§ 384-7. Curb and sidewalk permit required; fees.
No curb, sidewalk or gutter installation or repair shall be undertaken unless
a curb and sidewalk permit has been issued by the Township Engineer and
the required fee has been paid as stated in Chapter 156, Fees.
§ 384-8. Person to whom permit is issued.
A curb and sidewalk permit shall issue only to:
§ 384-9. Restrictions on placing new concrete.
§ 384-10. Curb and sidewalk contractor's license.
A. See also N.J.R.S.I.S. for additional regulations.
B. All curbs and sidewalks and gutters, in or upon an accepted or public
street in the Township shall be constructed, installed and repaired in
accordance with the specifications adopted by resolution of the
Township Council, which specifications are incorporated herein by
reference.
A. The owner of property upon or in front of which the work is to be done;
provided, that such owner is personally to perform such work.
B. A contractor who is licensed to perform curb and sidewalk by the
Township, as hereinafter set forth.
A. No new concrete shall be placed until:
(1) The Township Engineer has set the curbline and grade at the site
where necessary.
(2) The Township Engineer or his representative is present at the time
of placing.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to notify the Engineer
of his intention to place new concrete.
A. Requirements for contractor's license. [Amended by Ord. No.
1311-92]
(1) A person is eligible for a curb and sidewalk contractor's license to
be issued by the Township Engineer, such license to expire on
December 31 of the year of its issuance, upon satisfying the
following requirements:
(a) The license fee is established in Chapter 156, Fees, shall be
paid to the Construction Official and shall not be prorated.
§ 384-6 LAWRENCE CODE § 384-10
1:500
§ 384-11. Protection of work from vandalism and damage.
All work shall be protected from vandalism and damage by traffic or other
causes by the permit holder. All work damaged from whatever cause during
the course of construction shall be repaired or removed and replaced by the
permit holder, within 14 days of notification by the Construction Official.
§ 384-12. Driveways near intersections.
Where the permit holder plans to construct a new driveway the entrance to
which is to be within 40 feet of a street corner, no permit shall issue until the
Traffic Safety Advisory Committee has reviewed the plans and determined
that such driveway entrance will not create a traffic hazard.
§ 384-13. Barricades and warning lights required during
construction.
During construction of sidewalks, curbs and gutters, adequate barricades
and warning lights shall be placed at the site.
§ 384-14. Rejection of noncomplying work.
All work which is not completed in accordance with the provisions of
this article or the specifications incorporated by reference herein may be
rejected by the Construction Official or the Township Engineer, in which
(b) Furnishing satisfactory evidence to be verified by the Township
Engineer, that such person or firm has had training or
experience in the construction of curbs, sidewalks or gutters.
(c) Furnishing written statements by two responsible persons, to
be verified by the Township Engineer that such persons are
familiar with the training or experience of the applicant and
believe the applicant to be qualified to construct and repair
sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
(d) The requirements of Subsection A(1)(a) and (b) shall not apply
to the issuance of a license to a party to whom a license has
previously been issued.
(2) The Township Engineer may, in his discretion, refer the application
for the issuance of the curb and sidewalk contractor's license to the
Township Council for final action. The applicant may appeal the
denial of the application for such license by the Municipal Clerk to
the Township Council.
B. Revocation of license. Violations of any of the provisions of this article
or the specifications incorporated herein by reference shall be just
cause for revocation by the Township Council of the curb and sidewalk
contractor's license. A person whose license has been revoked shall be
ineligible for issuance of a new license for a period of one year from the
date of revocation.
§ 384-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-14
1:501
event such work is to be repaired or replaced by the permit holder, within
14 days of notification by the Construction Official.
§ 384-15. Exemptions for persons under contract with the
Township.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any work to be performed by
a person under contract with the Township.
§ 384-16. Removal of snow and ice from sidewalks. [Amended by
Ord. No. 1351-93 § 1; Ord. No. 1736-03 § 1]
A. Removal of snow and ice by property owner, occupant or tenant. The
owner, occupant or tenant of premises abutting or bordering upon the
sidewalk or corner of any street in the Township shall remove all snow
and ice from sidewalks and through the corner to the width of not less
than 24 inches, or in the case of ice, which may be so frozen as to make
removal impracticable, shall cause the same to be thoroughly covered
with sand or ashes, within 24 hours after the same shall cease to fall or
be formed thereon.
B. Depositing snow from private property into street or sidewalks
prohibited. No owner, tenant or occupant of any premises abutting any
street or sidewalk shall throw, place or deposit any snow or ice
accumulated on private property into or upon any street or sidewalk in
the Township.
C. Removal of snow and ice by Township. In case snow or ice shall not be
removed from sidewalks or through to the corner, of shall be cast,
deposited or placed upon such sidewalks or such street by the owner,
tenant or occupant of any premises as provided in § 384-16A and B, the
same shall be removed forthwith and under the direction of the
Construction Official and the cost of such removal, as nearly as can be
ascertained, shall be certified by the Construction Official to the
Township Council. The Township Council shall examine such
certification and, if found to be correct, shall cause such cost to be
charged against such real estate abutting or bordering upon such
sidewalks, and the amount so charged shall forthwith become a lien and
a tax upon such real estate or land, and be added to, recorded and
collected in the same way and manner as the taxes next to be levied and
assessed upon such premises, and shall bear interest and be enforced
and collected by the same officers and in the same manner as other
taxes. The imposition and collection of a fine imposed by this Code shall
not constitute any bar to the right of the Township to collect the cost as
certified for the removal of the snow or ice in the manner herein
authorized.
(1) Removal by site developer prior to dedication of public road.
(a) In the case of a site developer, it shall be the responsibility of
the site developer to remove all snow, ice and debris impeding
§ 384-14 LAWRENCE CODE § 384-16
1:502
the safe ingress and egress of vehicles to and from the
development until the dedication of said streets to the
Township for public use. Said developer shall cause all ice,
snow and debris to be removed as soon as practicable, or
immediately if so directed by the Chief of Police for reasons of
public safety, but in no event shall snow and ice be removed
later than 12 hours after the cessation of snowfall.
(b) Failure to comply with this section shall result in the imposition
of fines and penalties pursuant to Chapter 1, Article III.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the owner of a private road to
remove all snow, ice and debris from the roadway to ensure the safe
ingress and egress of vehicles. Debris must be removed as soon as
is practical. Snow and ice must be removed no later than 12 hours
after the cessation of snowfall.
(3) Failure to comply with this section shall result in fines and penalties
pursuant to Chapter 1, Article III.
§ 384-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-16
1:503

ARTICLE III
Excavations
[Derived from Ch. 21, Art. III, of the 1971 Code]
§ 384-17. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONNECTION — The installation of a pipe line or pipe lines to bring
utilities of any kind into a property from a public street or public right-ofway.
IMPROVED ROAD, CLASS A — Any road surfaced with a pavement such as
asphalt, concrete, bituminous concrete, brick or similar pavement and any
road having a concrete base, and the public right-of-way within which such
road is located.
IMPROVED ROAD, CLASS B — Any road surfaced with stone or slag
uniformly deposited in layers, with a total thickness of not less than four
inches where stone or slag has been compacted by the use of a power roller
and bound together by the application of bituminous binder tar or asphaltic
binder, and the public right-of-way within which such road is located.
IMPROVED ROAD, CLASS C — Any macadam or other road surfaced with
a light coat of stone or oil in any water-bound macadam road without oil
treatment and any gravel or cinder road with oil treatment, and the public
right-of-way within which such road is located.
UNIMPROVED ROAD — Any cinder, dirt or gravel road without oil
treatment and all other roads under the jurisdiction of the Township, and
the public right-of-way within which such road is located.
§ 384-18. Permit required for excavation.
No person shall cut, dig, drill or make any hole, trench or other excavation
in any road, street, alley, highway or other public way under the jurisdiction
of the Township without first having obtained a permit therefor in the
manner set forth in this article; nor shall any person mar, deface, damage,
injure or destroy the surface of any such road, street, alley or public way.
§ 384-19. Application for permit; issuance; contents.
Application for a permit under this article shall be made to the Municipal
Clerk who shall prepare forms for such purpose. Such application forms
shall state the name and address of the applicant, the name of the street
where the opening is to be made, the house number, if any, and the
Township Tax Map lot and section number of the property for the service of
which the opening is to be made, the purpose for which the opening is to
be used, the nature of the surface in which the opening is to be made, the
dimensions of the opening and the time when the work is to be commenced
and completed. Each application shall be filed by the applicant and the fees
§ 384-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-19
1:505
hereinafter fixed shall be paid with the application. The Municipal Clerk
shall issue permits for which applications are made in accordance with rules
and regulations to be established by the Township Manager. With respect to
any application, the Township Manager may determine the time limit during
which the permit shall be valid. Each permit shall be filed by the Municipal
Clerk and state the identity and address of the applicant, the name of the
street and location where the opening is to be made, the dimensions of the
opening and the period during which the permit shall be valid.
§ 384-20. Fees.
The fees to be paid upon filing application for a permit under this article are
hereby established and may be found in Chapter 156 of this Code.
§ 384-21. Extension of term; completion of work by Township.
Upon application being made therefor, the Township Council may extend
the time during which any permit shall be valid for such period as the
Township Council shall deem it advisable. In the event that the work
required to be done by a permittee shall not be completed within the time
stated on any permit, or any extension thereof, then the Township Manager
may complete the work required to be done by the Permittee and restore
the surface of the street affected. The permittee shall, upon demand, pay to
the Township the cost of completing such work as the permittee is required
to do under this article and such amount may be recovered by the Township
in a court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 384-22. Revocation; special conditions; variances.
The Township Committee may revoke any permit for noncompliance with
any provision of this article. In any special case, the Township Council
may by resolution impose special conditions to which the issuance of the
permit will be subject or the Township Council may in any such case deem
by resolution that any provision of this article shall not apply or shall be
altered.
§ 384-23. Guarding and lighting of opening; interference with
street travel.
Every permittee all keep each opening properly guarded and shall place
sufficient lights around such opening to give adequate warning during the
hours of darkness. All work done under any permit shall be done in such
manner as to cause a minimum of interference with travel along the street
affected. No street shall be closed to traffic unless specific permission
therefor has been granted by the Township Manager.
§ 384-24. Indemnification of Township.
Each permittee shall, as a condition of accepting any permit issued under
this article, save, hold and keep harmless and indemnify the Township,
its officers, agents, servants and employees, from and against any loss,
§ 384-19 LAWRENCE CODE § 384-24
1:506
damage, claim, demand or expense arising out of any suit or claim for
damage or injury alleged to have been sustained as a result of any work
done under such permit.
§ 384-25. Damage to mains, Township property, etc.
No work for which a permit is issued under this article shall be conducted
in such manner as to interfere with any water main or sewer line, or
any connection from either of the same to any building or any municipal
drain pipe, unless specific permission to interfere with such main or line
is obtained in advance from the Township Manager. Any rock or other
substance within five feet of any water main, sewer line or other pipe
line which may become damaged by blastings shall be removed without
blasting. No excavation which may result in damage to or destruction of any
trees or shrubbery or any Township property shall be made unless specific
permission therefor is granted by the Township Manager prior to the work
being done.
§ 384-26. Backfilling.
§ 384-27. Restoration of street surface.
In all cases where permits are issued under this article wherein the
permittee is to restore the surface of the street, the following rules,
regulations and requirements shall apply:
A. Every permittee shall completely back fill any excavation made and
replace as much as possible of the material excavated. Such material
shall be compacted by flushing, tamping or other suitable means as
directed by the Township manager, and any additional back-fill material
required shall be furnished by the permittee. In any case where the
Township Manager determines that the excavated material is
unsatisfactory for back fill, the permittee shall back fill the excavation
with sand, soft coal, cinders or other proper material which shall be
placed in layers not exceeding three inches in depth, moistened and
thoroughly compacted as directed by the Township Manager. Upon
completion of the work, the permittee shall remove any excess material
and leave the premises in a clean condition. Upon determination of the
Township Manager that any back filled excavation has settled or caved
in, the permittee shall promptly upon receiving notice of such
determination continue back filling as above described until the
Township Manager determines that the settlement is complete.
B. In the event that tunneling operations shall be required to reach the
point of connection with any main line, the back fill in any such tunnel
shall consist of rammed cement concrete composed of a mixture of one
part of cement to 10 parts of coarse aggregate material not inferior to
cinders.
§ 384-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-27
1:507
A. No permittee shall commence the restoration of any street foundation
or surface until the town manager has deemed that settlement of the
subsurface is complete and the area properly prepared for restoration.
B. All foundations shall be restored to a width of 12 inches wider than the
width of the excavation and to a length of six inches longer than the
length of the excavation.
C. The street surface shall be restored to a width of 12 inches wider than
the width of the restored foundation and to a length of six inches longer
than the length of the restored foundation.
D. When any foundation is restored by the use of cement concrete, the
same shall consist of a mixture by volume, of one part of Portland
cement, three parts of sand and five parts of gravel or stone.
E. All foundations and surfaces of Class A improved roads shall be
restored with the same type of material and to the same depths as
existing prior to the making of the excavation.
F. The foundations and surfaces of Class B or Class C improved roads or
unimproved roads shall be made with such materials and in such
manner as shall be directed in each particular case by the Township
Manager.
§ 384-27 LAWRENCE CODE § 384-27
1:508
ARTICLE IV
Dumpsters on Public Streets
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1406-97]
§ 384-28. Permit required.
A. A person or contractor must obtain a permit from the Engineering
Department to place a dumpster in a public street. A permit will only be
issued if the applicant can demonstrate that no off street placement
area exists. The dumpster shall be placed adjacent to the edge of the
roadway and must be removed within 72 hours. No dumpster may be
placed in a location where parking is prohibited or where it is deemed a
hazard to traffic by the Police Department.
B. Dumpsters must display markers consisting of amber or red reflective
diamond shaped markers (N.J.S.A. 27:51-1), having a minimum size of
18 inches by 18 inches. The panels shall be mounted on each end of the
dumpster, facing the direction of oncoming traffic and have a minimum
mounting height of three feet.
§ 384-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-28
1:509

ARTICLE V
Closing of Municipal Roadways
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1759-03]
§ 384-29. Findings.
In the Interest of public safety it may be necessary to close a public street
to motor vehicle traffic an extended period of time in order to undertake
repair or reconstruction of the roadway or the repair or installation of public
utilities within the public right-of-way. Such closing on a non-emergency
basis shall only occur with the approval of the Municipal Manager after
conformance with the following regulations.
§ 384-30. Regulations for road closing.
§ 384-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be liable to such
penalty as is prescribed by Chapter 1, Article III of the Lawrence Township
Code.
A. The Municipal Engineer must determine that the road closing is
necessary to provide an adequate level of public safety.
B. Not less than seven days prior to the propose date of closing, signs shall
be erected notifying the public of the date of closing. The location of the
signage shall be determined by the Municipal Engineer.
C. A detour plan establishing an alternate route shall be approved by the
Municipal Engineer. If the detour plan includes roadways under the
jurisdiction of Mercer County, the State of New Jersey or another
municipality, then written approval of the plan must be provided by the
appropriate governmental entity.
D. Prior to the road closing a detour signage plan must be approved by the
Municipal Engineer and signs must be erected prior to road closing.
E. A written notice or proposed road closing with a copy to the Municipal
Engineer must be provided to the following:
(1) Chief - Lawrence Police Division.
(2) Director - Office of Emergency Management.
(3) Chief - Lawrence Township Volunteer First Aid Squad.
(4) Chiefs - Lawrence Township Volunteer Fire Companies.
(5) Superintendent - Lawrence Township Public Schools.
(6) New Jersey Transit - when the closed roadway accommodates
public transportation.
§ 384-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 384-31
1:511
Chapter 392
SWIMMING POOLS
§ 384-31 LAWRENCE CODE § 384-31
1:512
ARTICLE I
Swimming Pool Code
§ 392-1. Adoption of Code.
§ 392-2. License required.
No person shall locate and construct, alter or operate a swimming pool until
licenses therefor shall have been issued by the Division of Health.
§ 392-3. License fees.
The fees for a license to locate and construct, or to alter a swimming pool
are located in Chapter 156.
§ 392-4. Term of license; renewal.
Licenses issued for the operation of a swimming pool shall expire annually
on April 1 and application for renewal thereof shall be submitted together
with the required fee prior to March 31 of each year.
§ 392-5. Denial; suspension.
A. A code regulating and controlling the location and construction,
alteration and operation of swimming pools, the issuance of licenses to
locate and construct, alter or operate swimming pools, declaring and
defining certain swimming pools as nuisances and fixing penalties for
violations is hereby adopted. A copy of such Code is annexed hereto and
made a part hereof without inclusion of the text thereof herein.
B. The Code established and adopted by this section is described and
commonly known as the New Jersey State Sanitary Code Chapter 26,
Public Recreational Bathing, N.J.A.C. 8:26-1.1 et seq.
C. Three copies of the New Jersey State Sanitary Code Chapter 26, Public
Recreational Bathing, N.J.A.C. 8:26-1 et seq. are on file in the office of
the Health Officer for the use and examination of the public.
A. Licenses required by this section or the State Sanitary Code may be
denied or suspended by the Division of Health for failure to comply with
this section or Code.
B. The Division of Health shall afford the person whose license to locate
and construct, alter or operate has been denied or suspended an
opportunity to be heard in public hearing; and following this to be
informed of the Division's decision.
§ 392-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 392-5
1:513

ARTICLE II
Fencing of Swimming Pools
[Adopted by Ord. No. 356]
§ 392-6. When required; height.
When, in the opinion of the Construction Official, a swimming pool or
other artificial body of water, temporary or permanent, by virtue of size,
depth, accessibility, location or proximity of children, is determined by
the Construction Official to be a hazard, the owner shall be required to
surround it with a fence, wall or other enclosure. The enclosure required for
permanent installations shall be a minimum of four feet in height, but those
for temporary installations may be of less height or omitted entirely when,
because of shallow depth, small size and similar factors, the Construction
Official determines that none of the safety purposes intended by this section
would be served by its application to such temporary swimming pool.
§ 392-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 392-6
1:515
Chapter 399
TATTOOING AND BODY ART
§ 399-1. License required.
§ 399-2. License fee and delinquency charge. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 399-3. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
operating an establishment where body art procedures are performed
without first obtaining a license from the Lawrence Township Health
Department.
B. Body art establishment licenses shall be issued on an annual basis upon
payment of an annual license fee as specified in Chapter 5 of the Code
of Lawrence Township and upon satisfactory compliance with the New
Jersey State Sanitary Code. Upon issuance, the license shall not be
transferable. Any change in ownership shall require submission of a
new application with payment of fees. All applicants shall submit plans
for the establishment to the Lawrence Township Health Department
prior to approval for a building permit.
C. Facility locations with on-site sewage systems must provide annual
reports of septic system maintenance, satisfactory operation and
annual pumping history. Evidence of a failing or malfunctioning sewage
system would be cause of the closure of said facility until the violation is
abated to the satisfaction of the Health Department.
D. Facilities served by an on-site well water system shall be considered a
public water system. Acceptable bacterial water quality reports shall be
provided to the Health Department during each quarter. Evidence of a
falling of water quality would be cause for the closure of said facility
until the violation is abated to the satisfaction of the Health
Department.
E. Medical waste generated at the facility shall be stored and disposed of
properly according to state regulation, N.J.A.C. 7:26-3A.
A. The annual license fee shall be as stated in Chapter 156, and the license
shall be issued on February 1 of each year.
B. There shall be a delinquent charge as stated in Chapter 156, Fees,
including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, where the operator of a
body art establishment falls to apply for a license by February 1.
A. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for
enforcement action by the Lawrence Township Health Department.
§ 392-6 LAWRENCE CODE § 399-3
1:516
Chapter 405
TAXATION
Such penalty action may include a summons being issued in Municipal
Court, or suspension, revocation or nonrenewal of the body art
establishment license issued by the Lawrence Township Health
Department.
B. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
be liable for the penalty stated in Chapter 1, Article III. Each day that
this violation exists shall be considered a separate offence.
§ 399-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-3
1:517

ARTICLE I
Hotel Tax
[Adopted by Ord. No. 1760-03]
§ 405-1. Imposition of tax. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The Township does hereby impose a tax, at a uniform percentage rate of 3%
on charges of rent for every occupancy on or after July 1, 2004, an a room or
rooms in a hotel subject to taxation pursuant to the New Jersey State sales
tax, N.J.S.A. 54:32B-3. A tax imposed under this article shall be in addition
to any other tax or fee imposed pursuant to statute or local ordinance or
resolution by the Township.
§ 405-2. When effective. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
This article or any amendment thereto shall take effect on the first day of
the first full month occurring 90 days after the date of transmittal to the
State Treasurer for any amendments adopted in calendar year 2004 and
thereafter.
§ 405-3. Administration. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see
Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
The Hotel Occupancy Tax shall be administered in conformance with
N.J.S.A. 40:48F-1 et seq. as follows:
§ 405-4. Collection of tax.
A. All taxes imposed by this article shall be paid by the purchaser or guest
renting a hotel room;
B. A vendor or hotel establishment (hereinafter "vendor") shall not assume
or absorb any tax imposed by this article;
C. A vendor shall not in any manner advertise or hold out to any person or
to the public in general, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that the
tax will be assumed or absorbed by the vendor, that the tax will not be
separately charged and stated to the customer or hotel guest, or that
the tax will be refunded to the customer;
D. Each assumption or absorption by a vendor of the tax shall be deemed a
separate offense and each representation or advertisement by a vendor
for each day the representation or advertisement continues shall be
deemed a separate offense; and
E. Any violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of not greater than
$1,000 imposed by the Municipal Court.
A. A tax imposed pursuant to this article shall be collected on behalf of the
Township by the person collecting the rent from the hotel customer.
§ 405-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-4
1:519
§ 405-5. Procedure for payment to the state. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
§ 405-6. Powers of Director. [Amended at time of adoption of Code
(see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
B. Each vendor or person required to collect a tax imposed by the article
shall be personally liable for the tax imposed, collected or required to
be collected hereunder. Any such vendor or person shall have the same
right in respect to collecting the tax from a customer or hotel guest as if
the tax were a part of the rent and payable at the same time; provided,
however, that the Chief Fiscal Officer of the Township shall be joined as
a party in any action or proceeding brought to collect the tax.
A. A person required to collect a tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of
this article shall, on or before the dates required pursuant to N.J.S.A.
54:32B-17, forward to the Director of the Division of Taxation in the
New Jersey Department of the Treasurer (hereinafter the Director) the
tax collected in the preceding month and make and file a return for the
preceding month with the Director on any form and containing any
information as the Director shall prescribe as necessary to determine
liability for the tax in the preceding month during which the person was
required to collect the tax.
B. The Director may permit or require returns to be made covering other
periods and upon any dates as the Director may specify. In addition, the
Director may require payments of tax liability at any intervals and
based upon any classifications as the Director may designate. In
prescribing any other periods to be covered by the return or intervals or
classifications for payment of tax liability, the Director may take into
account the dollar volume of tax involved as well as the need for
ensuring the prompt and orderly collection of the tax imposed.
C. The Director may require amended returns to be filed within 20 days
after notice and to contain the information specified in the notice.
A. The Director shall collect and administer any tax imposed pursuant to
the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48F-1 et seq. In carrying out the provisions
of this section, the Director shall have all the powers granted in N.J.S.A.
54:32B-1 et seq.
B. The Director shall determine and certify to the State Treasurer on a
quarterly or more frequent basis, as prescribed by the State Treasurer,
the amount of revenues collected for the Township pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:48F-1 et seq.
C. The State Treasurer, upon the certification of the Director and upon the
warrant of the State Comptroller, shall pay and distribute to the
Township on a quarterly or more frequent basis, as prescribed by the
State Treasurer, the amount of revenues determined and certified
under Subsection B of this section.
§ 405-4 LAWRENCE CODE § 405-6
1:520
§ 405-7. Additional rules and regulations.
The provisions of this article shall be subject to any rules or regulations
that may be adopted by the Director of the Division of Taxation, New Jersey
Department of the Treasury.
D. A tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be
governed by the provisions of the "State Uniform Tax Procedure Law,"
N.J.S.A. 54:48-1 et seq.
§ 405-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-7
1:521
Chapter 410
TAXICABS
§ 410-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TAXICAB — Includes any motor vehicle commonly called taxi, engaged in
the business of carrying passengers for hire, which is held out, announced
or operated to run over any streets within the Township, or which accepts
or discharges paying passengers within the Township.
§ 410-2. Insurance.
Every applicant for a taxicab owner's license shall, together with his
application, submit an insurance policy of a company duly licensed to
transact business under the insurance laws of this State conditioned for
the payment of a sum of not less than $100,000 to satisfy all claims for
damages by reason of bodily injury to, or the death of, any one person,
resulting from an accident, and a sum of not less than $300,000 to satisfy
all claims for damages by reason of the bodily injury to, or the death of,
all persons, on account of any such accident by reason of the ownership,
operation, maintenance or use of such autocab upon any public street;
and conditioned for the payment of a sum not less than $50,000 to satisfy
any claim for damages to property of any one person resulting from an
accident, and a sum not less than $50,000 to satisfy all claims for damages
to property of all persons on account of any such accident by reason of the
ownership, operation, maintenance or use of such autocab upon any public
street, and such insurance as may otherwise be required by N.J.S.A. 48:16-1
to 48:16-22, as now or hereafter amended or supplemented.
§ 410-3. Display of fare and charges.
No taxicab shall be operated in this Township unless there is prominently
displayed in the interior thereof within the full view and access of any
passengers therein a complete list of fares, charges or tariff rates charged
for transportation of passengers, which fares, charges or tariffs so
displayed, and no other, shall be those to be charged any passengers so
transported.
§ 410-4. Marking of vehicles.
Every taxicab licensed under this chapter shall have painted on both sides
thereof the words "taxi" or "cab" in letters at least six inches high or the
name of the operating owner containing the words "taxi." "cab" or "taxicab"
or an electric sign affixed to the top of the motor vehicle in clear view from
all sides bearing the words "taxi." "cab" or "taxicab."
§ 405-7 LAWRENCE CODE § 410-5
1:522
§ 410-5. Records; accident reports.
The owner of each taxicab licensed under this chapter shall keep or cause
to be kept a written daily record of each trip made by the taxicab, showing
the date, time and place the cab was engaged, the place and time of
discharge of the passenger, the number of passengers carried, the fare
received, distance carried, a statement of receipts and expenditures and the
taxicab driver's license number of the person driving the cab on the trip.
Such records shall be subject to inspection by the Police Department of the
Township or the Township Council at their discretion. There shall also be
reported to the Township Clerk the happening of an accident involving such
taxicab or the loss of property left in the taxicab by a passenger within 24
hours after such event.
§ 410-6. Condition and inspection of taxicab.
The owner and operator of each taxicab operating in the Township shall
keep his taxicab in good running order so that it makes a presentable
appearance and affords comfortable, safe rides to passengers, free from
mechanical defects, loose fenders, dents, loose doors, broken or soiled
upholstery and broken or cracked glass. The owner and operator of each
taxicab operating in the Township shall present his taxicab to the Chief
of Police or other designated officer prior to the issuance of renewal of
his license, and thereafter upon request of the Chief of Police or other
designated officer, so that it may be inspected to determine whether it
complies with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 410-7. Receipts for fares.
The operator of each taxicab shall at all times have available a suitable cash
receipt book to write out, sign and give to any passenger requesting the
same, a written receipt in the amount of the fare paid.
§ 410-8. Fare zones.
The Township Council shall have the right to adopt resolutions establishing
zones or districts within the Township as it may from time to time deem
desirable or necessary, for the purpose of prescribing or fixing maximum
or minimum charges which may be made within the area or within said
districts for such taxicab service.
§ 410-9. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The Township Council may, by resolution, make such general rules and
regulations and such special findings and rulings as may be necessary
for the proper regulation and control of the operation of taxicabs in the
Township and enforcement of this chapter. In addition thereto, and not
inconsistent therewith, may alter, amend, repeal and publish the same from
time to time.
§ 410-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-10
1:523
§ 410-10. License required; exceptions.
No person shall operate any taxicab within the Township unless both the
taxicab and the driver thereof are licensed pursuant to this chapter and
conform to all the provisions of this chapter; provided, that such taxicab
licenses as are now issued and outstanding shall remain effective until
their respective expiration dates and the taxicabs thereby licensed shall
be deemed to be licensed pursuant to the terms of this chapter until such
licenses are surrendered, suspended or revoked, or have expired; provided,
that in all other particulars the taxicabs and their owners shall be subject
to all the provisions of this chapter; provided, that the provisions of this
section shall not apply to a taxicab duly licensed by another municipality
and, is operated in this Township solely in response to pick up a passenger
in the Township and to transport such passenger to a destination outside
the Township, or is operated in this Township solely for the purpose of
delivering to a destination within the Township a passenger picked up by
the taxicab at a point or points outside of the Township.
§ 410-11. Classes established.
There are hereby established two classes of taxicab licenses to be known as
taxicab driver's license and taxicab owner's license, respectively.
§ 410-12. Scope of driver's license.
A taxicab driver's license shall entitle the person named therein to operate
within this Township any taxicab duly licensed under this chapter until the
license either expires or is surrendered, suspended or revoked, and shall
not be transferable.
§ 410-13. Scope of owner's license.
A taxicab owner's license shall entitle the taxicab therein described to be
operated in this Township by a driver duly licensed under this chapter until
the license either expires or is surrendered, suspended or revoked, and
shall not be transferable.
§ 410-14. Application.
A. All applications for the issuance or renewal of any license of either class
shall be made to the Township Council in duplicate on forms adopted by
the Council and obtained from the Township Clerk and designed to
elicit information respecting the identification, responsibility and lawabiding
habits of the applicant.
B. Each applicant for a license of either class shall supply the information
requested on the application in full and verify the correctness thereof
by his oath or affirmation and thereafter file the completed applications
with the Township Clerk together with the full amount of the proper fee
hereafter fixed therefor; the Township Clerk shall thereupon notify each
Councilman, in writing, of the name and address of the applicant and
§ 410-10 LAWRENCE CODE § 410-14
1:524
§ 410-15. Expiration date.
Any license issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall expire at
12:00 Midnight of December 31 of the year in which it was issued unless
sooner surrendered, suspended or revoked.
§ 410-16. Number of licenses limited.
The number of any licenses of either class at any one time issued and
outstanding shall not exceed such number as the Township Council shall, in
its discretion from time to time, deem sufficient adequately to serve public
necessity and convenience.
§ 410-17. Photographs of applicant for driver's license.
Each applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall file with his application
two photographs each 3 1/2 inches by 3 1/2 inches in size, clearly depicting
the facial features of the applicant, both of which photographs shall
thereupon become the property of the Township and be retained with the
application form unless the application shall be issued, in which event one
of such photographs shall be permanently affixed to the license card in a
space provided thereon.
§ 410-18. Fingerprints of applicant for driver's license.
Every applicant for a taxicab driver's license shall, at the time of filing
his application, be fingerprinted by the Township Police Department; an
impression of such fingerprints shall be thereupon forwarded forthwith by
the Police Department to the Bureau of Identification of the State Police for
a report of applicant's criminal record, which report when received shall be
permanently affixed to the application before consideration thereof by the
Township Council.
§ 410-19. Fees. [Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I)]
the type of license sought and shall post notice after such application in
at least one public place in the Township.
A. The license fees for the taxicab driver's license and the taxicabs owner's
license are contained in Chapter 156, Fees.
B. Such fees shall not be prorated nor any part thereof refunded for any
reason; except, that upon the denial of an application for issuance or
renewal of a license by the Township Council, 90% of the fee deposited
shall be returned to the applicant, and 10% shall be retained by the
Township as compensation for investigation of the application.
C. The aforesaid fees for a driver's license or an owner's license shall be
waived upon presentation of proof that the applicant is a veteran of
§ 410-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 410-19
1:525
§ 410-20. Grounds for denial, suspension or revocation.
The Township Council may, in its discretion, refuse to issue or renew or may,
after notice and hearing, revoke or suspend:
§ 410-21. License card — issuance; display generally; surrendering.
Each applicant granted a taxicab driver's license shall be issued a license
card in evidence thereof in a form approved by Township Council and signed
by the Township Clerk in its behalf. Such license card shall at all times
be prominently displayed and adequately protected in the interior of any
taxicab operated by the licensee so that the face thereof shall be at all times
in the full view of and plainly legible to any passenger seated in the rear
seat of such taxicab. The license card shall at all times be and remain the
property of the Township and at the directions of the Township Council,
shall at any time be surrendered to the Township Clerk.
service with any branch of the United States armed forces and has so
served during a time of national conflict.
A. Any license of either class if the applicant for the license has been once
convicted of a crime in this or any other jurisdiction, or convicted of
being a disorderly person or of a violation of Title 39 "Motor Vehicles
and Traffic Regulation" of the New Jersey Statutes or who violates any
provision of this chapter or has any judgment unsatisfied of record
against him arising out of an automobile accident, or who has made
false answers in his application for such license, or any renewal thereof,
or who has failed or fails to render reasonably prompt, safe and
adequate taxicab service or who has not complied fully with all
requirements of this chapter for such class of license.
B. Any taxicab driver's license if the licensee or applicant has in any
degree contributed to any injury to person or damage to property
arising out of negligent operation of a motor vehicle; or has any
communicable or contagious disease.
C. Any taxicab owner's license if the motor vehicle licensed or to be
licensed, by reason of unsafe or unsanitary condition is dangerous to
the safety or health of the occupants or others, or if the policy of
insurance required herein has once lapsed, or such coverage not
maintained at all times.
D. The violation by the taxicab owner or the taxicab driver of any rules,
regulations, special findings and rulings which are hereafter
promulgated by the Township Council and included within a resolution
or adopted by the Council, shall be sufficient cause for revocation of any
license granted to such taxicab owner or taxicab driver pursuant to this
chapter, and shall be sufficient cause for the refusal by the Township
Council to renew such license in addition to any and all other grounds
heretofore specifically mentioned in this chapter.
§ 410-19 LAWRENCE CODE § 410-22
1:526
§ 410-22. Display of improper card.
No taxicab driver's license card other than that of the licensee actually
operating the cab at the time shall be displayed therein.
Chapter 416
THEATERS
§ 416-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
THEATER — Includes any place, whether indoors or outdoors, devoted
to public amusement wherein dramatic, operatic, vaudeville or burlesque
performances, motion picture exhibitions or other like forms of amusement
are provided for public entertainment for which an admission fee is
charged.
§ 416-2. License required.
No person having the management or control of any theater shall produce
any performance, show or exhibition therein, or suffer or permit any
performance, show or exhibition to be given therein without obtaining a
license, as provided in this chapter.
§ 416-3. Application license.
All applications for licenses under this chapter shall be made in writing
upon blanks to be supplied by the Township Council, and shall give such
information as it may deem requisite to determine the suitability of the
building and the fitness of the applicant to conduct the same.
§ 416-4. License fees; term.
§ 416-5. Issuance.
All licenses under this chapter shall be issued by the Township Clerk, under
his hand and the seal of the Township, upon the written recommendation of
the Township Council and upon payment of the fee fixed therefor, and not
otherwise; and shall respectively state the purpose for which the same shall
have been issued, the number of the license, the location of the premises
thereof and the name of the person licensed and shall be granted only upon
express condition of a forfeiture in case the licensee, his agent or servant
A. The annual license fee for theaters shall be found in Chapter 156 of this
Code.
B. Such licenses shall be issued for a period of one year from the date of
issuance.
§ 410-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 416-5
1:527
shall violate any law, ordinance or rule regulative of the business licensed,
and the further condition that the Township Council may, in its discretion,
suspend, revoke and annul such license whenever in its opinion the public
good required that such action shall be taken.
§ 416-6. Conditions of license.
Every license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be issued only upon the
condition that the licensee complies with all health, fire, traffic and other
safety laws, and cooperates with the issuing authority at their own expense
to prevent abnormal traffic hazards and other unsafe conditions.
Chapter 423
TOWING AND STORAGE OF MOTOR VEHICLES
§ 423-1. Purpose and scope.
§ 423-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASIC TOWING SERVICE — Private property towing and other
nonconsensual towing as defined in this section and other ancillary services
that include the following: arriving at the site from which a motor vehicle
will be towed; waiting 15 minutes; hooking a motor vehicle to or loading
a motor vehicle onto a tow truck; cleanup; transporting a motor vehicle
to a storage facility; unhooking or unloading a motor vehicle from the tow
truck; and situating the motor vehicle in the space in which it will be stored.
"Basic tow" also includes issuing documents for the release of a motor
vehicle to its owner or other person authorized to take the motor vehicle;
A. The purposes of this chapter are:
(1) To establish a requirement and procedure for the licensing of
individuals and entities providing municipal towing and storage
services to the Township of Lawrence;
(2) To establish, in the interest of public safety, a uniform policy for the
towing and storage of motor vehicles;
(3) To establish uniform fees for towing and storage services.
(4) It is the purpose of this chapter to establish a nondiscriminatory
method of rotating calls between all registered operators
requesting to provide municipal towing services at the request of,
on behalf of, or for the Township of Lawrence or its Police
Department.
B. This chapter shall apply to all motor vehicle towing and storage
operations performed at the request of the Township of Lawrence.
§ 416-5 LAWRENCE CODE § 423-2
1:528
issuing an itemized bill; three trips to the motor vehicle in storage, which, if
applicable, include making a vehicle available to an insurance appraiser or
adjuster; issuing documents for the release of a motor vehicle to its owner
or other person authorized to take the motor vehicle; and retrieving a motor
vehicle from storage during the hours in which the storage facility is open.
Basic tow does not include a recovery of a motor vehicle from a position
beyond the right-of-way or berm, or from being overturned or impaled upon
any other object within the right-of-way or berm.
BUSINESS OFFICE — The business office of the towing operator where
the towing operator shall conduct business associated with the towing and
storage of vehicles.
CHIEF OF POLICE — The Chief of the Lawrence Township Police
Department or his/her designee.
DECOUPLING — Releasing a motor vehicle to its owner or operator when
the motor vehicle has been, or is about to be hooked to or lifted by a tow
truck, but prior to the motor vehicle actually having been moved or removed
from the property.
IMPOUNDED VEHICLE — A vehicle that is towed by an officer from the
Lawrence Township Police Department for a reason that requires a vehicle
release form to be obtained prior to the vehicle being released from the
storage facility.
MATERIALS — Includes any product used to absorb oil, antifreeze and any
other fluids leaking from a vehicle (e.g., Speedy Dry and/or absorbent-type
material).
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes all vehicles propelled otherwise than by
muscular power, except such vehicles as run only upon rails or tracks
and motorized bicycles, motorized scooters, motorized wheelchairs and
motorized skateboards.
NONCONSENSUAL TOWING — The towing of a motor vehicle without the
consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle. "Nonconsensual towing"
includes towing a motor vehicle when law enforcement orders the vehicle
to be towed whether or not the owner or operator consents.
PERSON — An individual, a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
limited liability company or any other business entity.
RECOVERY — A tow operator using his skill and knowledge to preserve the
condition of a motor vehicle while uprighting an overturned motor vehicle
or recovering it from a position beyond the right-of-way or berm, or from
being impaled upon any other object within the right-of-way or berm to a
position where it can be towed.
SECURE STORAGE FACILITY — A storage facility that is either completely
indoors or is surrounded by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier that is
at least six feet high and is lighted from dusk to dawn.
STORAGE FACILITY — A space at which motor vehicles that have been
towed are stored by the towing operator.
§ 423-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-2
1:529
TOWING — The moving or removing from public or private property or from
a storage facility by a motor vehicle of a consumer's motor vehicle that
is damaged as a result of an accident or otherwise disabled, is recovered
after being stolen, or is parked illegally or otherwise without authorization,
parked during a time at which such parking is not permitted, or otherwise
parked without authorization, or the immobilization of or preparation for
moving or removing of such motor vehicle, for which a service charge
is made, either directly or indirectly. Dues or other charges of clubs or
associations which provide towing services to club or association members
shall not be considered a service charge for purposes of this definition.
TOWING LIST — The list maintained by the Township Police Department
containing the names of those actively registered towing operators whom
have contracted with the Township to provide municipal towing services for
the Township.
TOWING OPERATOR — Any person in the business of, or offering the
services of, a towing service whereby motor vehicles are or may be towed or
otherwise removed from one place to another by the use of a motor vehicle
adapted to and designated for that purpose.
TOWNSHIP — The Township of Lawrence, Mercer County, New Jersey.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which a person or property is or may
be transported upon a highway.
§ 423-3. Municipal towing services; contract.
A. Any towing operator desiring to provide municipal towing services for
the Township must file an application with the Township, meeting the
requirements of this section, and enter into a contract with the
Township.
B. The Township shall secure a contract with those towing operators who
filed applications with the Township and desire to provide municipal
towing services for the Township. The contract shall provide for an
annual review of the towing operator's services and compliance with
this section. The contract shall prohibit subcontracting by the towing
operator.
C. The contract with the Township shall be for a period of three years. At
the expiration of the three-year term, in order to continue to provide
municipal towing services for the Township, the towing operator shall
file a new application, with the required submissions, and enter into a
new contract with the Township.
D. Applications may be submitted to the Township at any time. New tow
operator contracts may be awarded by the Township and entered onto
the on-call towing list at the beginning of each calendar year. The Chief
of Police may include a new tow operator onto an existing on-call towing
list when such inclusion is in the best interest of public safety. The
contract shall not be exclusive, with the Township being able to award
contracts to multiple towing operators at any time.
§ 423-2 LAWRENCE CODE § 423-3
1:530
§ 423-4. Municipal towing services; application.
E. The Township shall have the sole discretion to deny a contract with any
towing operator failing to file the requisite application or to meet the
requirements of this section. All applications for a contract for the
provision of municipal towing services filed with the Township shall be
granted or denied by the Township Council, based upon the
recommendation of Chief of the Township Police Department, or his
designee, upon review of same.
A. No person shall be eligible to provide municipal towing services for the
Township until it submits an application with the Township.
B. An application for municipal towing shall be made, in writing, to the
Township Clerk, in the form prescribed by the Township Clerk, and shall
be accompanied by a fee of $400, which is nonrefundable and covers
the Township's costs in processing the applications.
C. The applicant shall state the complete street address of the location or
locations from which the business of towing shall be conducted,
indicating which its principal location is and which is its storage
facilities, which shall meet the requirements of § 423-11. The applicant
shall provide a copy of a valid certificate of occupancy for the storage
facility for automobile related uses.
D. The applicant shall identify and provide a description of its towing
vehicles, including vehicle registration number, weight, number of
wheels and purpose, with which the applicant intends to provide towing
services. All towing vehicles shall meet the requirements of Section
§ 423-6. The applicant shall provide copies of the equipment
manufacturer's specification for each piece of equipment.
E. The applicant shall provide the name, address and driver's license
number of the applicant and all employees of the applicant that are
expected to be involved in the operation of the applicant's vehicular
equipment for the towing of motor vehicles. All drivers for the applicant
shall be at least 18 years of age and possess a valid New Jersey driver's
license for the operation of the towing equipment.
F. The applicant shall authorize a criminal background check of the
applicant and all of its employees and agents, including the obtainment
of a New Jersey driver's abstract. The background check shall also
require a fingerprint background check by IdentoG by MorphoTrust
USA. All applicants, employees and agents shall set up an appointment
to be fingerprinted by going online to www.bioapplicant.com/nl. The
costs associated with obtaining the criminal background checks shall
be the responsibility of the applicant and payment is required during
scheduling. New Jersey Universal Fingerprint Forms are on file at the
Lawrence Township Police Department's Records window and can be
picked up during normal business hours. (NOTE: Fingerprinting of
applicants—this applies to new towing applicants who have never
§ 423-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-4
1:531
towed in Lawrence Township or have lapsed in towing service with
Lawrence Township.)
G. The application shall include a valid original certificate of insurance
from an insurer authorized to do business in the state, at the minimum
amounts set forth in § 423-8.
H. The applicant shall disclose whether the applicant, or any of its
employees or agents, is subject to any of the disqualifications specified
in § 423-6.
I. The applicant shall provide written proof of a minimum of five years
towing experience.
J. The applicant shall provide a minimum of three references of the
applicant's towing experience.
K. The applicant shall provide copies of all certifications for its employees
as follows:
(1) Each "light duty" driver must obtain a certification for such
operation from a nationally recognized organization.
(2) Each "heavy duty" driver must obtain a certification for such
operation from a nationally recognized organization.
(3) Each "recovery supervisor" must obtain a certification for such
operation from a nationally recognized organization.
(4) The nationally recognized organizations that are acceptable for the
Township are:
(a) Towing and Recovery Association of America (800-728-0136).
(b) Wreck Master (800-267-2266).
(c) Garden State Towman's Association (732-530-4782).
L. The applicant shall furnish any additional information concerning the
personnel, vehicles, equipment and storage facilities of the applicant as
may be required by the Township Clerk or Chief of the Township Police
Department during the review of the application.
M. If any of the information required in the application changes, or if
additional information should be added after the filing of the
application, the applicant shall provide that information to the
Township Clerk, in writing, within 30 calendar days of the change or
addition. Any application to add an additional driver during the contract
term shall be accompanied by a fee of $35 plus the costs incurred under
§ 423-4F.
N. The applicant shall provide a certified statement of the willingness of
the towing operator to be available on a twenty-four-hour, seven-dayper-
week basis, and to abide by the instructions and directions of the
§ 423-4 LAWRENCE CODE § 423-4
1:532
§ 423-5. Minimum requirements; equipment.
§ 423-6. Denial, suspension or revocation of contract.
Chief of Police, his subordinates, and the provisions of this section.
Such towing operators shall further provide the telephone number or
numbers available on a twenty-four-hour, seven-day-per-week basis,
and the names, addresses and New Jersey Motor Vehicle driver's
license numbers of all the towing operator's employees.
O. The applicant shall provide a certified statement of compliance with the
minimum requirements of § 423-6.
A. Any towing operator providing municipal towing services shall have a
minimum of two vehicles that meet the minimum standards set forth
below:
(1) At least one-light duty wrecker with a minimum chassis rating of
15,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, equipped with a hydraulic
boom rated for 8,000 pounds, a hydraulic wheel-lift with 3,000
pounds lift capacity, and with dual hydraulic winches each having
an 8,000 pound capacity, and equipped with 100 feet of 3/8 inch
wire rope.
(2) At least one flatbed-type wrecker with a minimum chassis rating of
25,500 pounds gross vehicle weight, equipped with a minimum
twenty-one foot bed and equipped with a hydraulic wheel lift with
3,000 pounds lift capacity.
(3) In addition to foregoing requirements, if the towing operator
applies for heavy-duty towing assignments, the towing operator
must own a heavy-duty wrecker with a minimum chassis rating of
33,000 pounds gross vehicle weight, with a hydraulic boom rated
for a minimum of 35 tons, hydraulic under-reach with a minimum
45,000 pounds lift capacity, and dual hydraulic winches, and must
have tandem rear axles.
(4) All vehicles must be equipped with a communication device
(cellular phone), cab-mounted amber emergency warning lights
(conforming to New Jersey Motor Vehicle law standards and all
light permits being obtained), tow sling type bars with rubber
straps and/or wheel lift capability with safety straps to prevent
damage to towed vehicles, and with steering locks for towing
vehicles from the rear.
A. The Township may deny, suspend or revoke any contract for municipal
towing services upon the recommendation of the Chief of the Township
Police Department, or upon other proof that the towing operator, or any
of its employees or agents:
(1) Has obtained a registration through fraud, deception or intentional
misrepresentation;
§ 423-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-6
1:533
§ 423-7. Rotating list.
(2) Has engaged in the use or employment of dishonesty, fraud,
deception, misrepresentation, false promise or false pretense;
(3) Has engaged in gross negligence or gross incompetence;
(4) Has engaged in repeated documented acts of negligence or
incompetence;
(5) Has had a towing operation registration or license revoked or
suspended by any other state agency or authority for reasons
consistent with this section;
(6) Has violated or failed to comply on more than three occasions with
the schedule of tariff or fee regulations herein; or
(7) Has been convicted of:
(a) A crime under Chapter 11, 12, 13, 14 or 15 of Title 2C of the
New Jersey Statutes;
(b) Motor vehicle theft or any crime involving a motor vehicle
under Chapter 20 of Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes; or
(c) Any other crime under Title 2C of the New Jersey Statutes
relating adversely to the performance of towing services or the
storage of motor vehicles as determined by the Chief of the
Township Police Department.
B. A final refusal to register, or the suspension or revocation of a
registration by the Township shall not be made except upon reasonable
notice to the applicant, and an opportunity for the applicant to be heard
by the Township Council. The hearing is at the option of the applicant.
C. In the event the application has been denied, the applicant will have 10
business days to provide written notice to the Office of the Chief of
Police stating if the applicant requests a re-inspection of a storage site,
equipment or request to amend any information contained in the
written application. No more than two re-inspections or application
amendments may be requested.
D. All re-inspections or review of application amendments must be
completed within 20 business days from the receipt of denial of the
initial application.
E. There shall be a fee of $75 for each re-inspection or review of
application amendments, in addition, to any application fees.
A. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to establish a system of rotation
for the assignment of contracted towing operators to provide municipal
towing services required pursuant to this section. The rotation system
shall be established on a nondiscriminatory and nonexclusionary basis.
§ 423-6 LAWRENCE CODE § 423-7
1:534
§ 423-8. Insurance requirements.
In addition to the insurance requirements set forth in N.J.A.C. 13:45A-31.3,
as may be amended from time to time, all towing operators providing
municipal towing services must maintain the following insurance policies,
naming the Township as an additional insured:
Only towing operators with executed contracts with the Township shall
be assigned to the rotation list. A towing operator shall be added to the
rotation list pursuant to § 423-3. All new contracted towing operators
shall be assigned to the rotation list at the bottom of such list.
B. The rotation list shall be composed so as to permit a reasonable rotation
of contracted towing operators. This will be done on a per-call basis.
The revolving list applies to basic towing and heavy duty towing
services. Once the on-call towing operator has been utilized, the next
tow call goes to the next contracted towing operator. If the towing
operator currently on call under the rotation list cannot respond and
provide the required municipal towing service, the Township shall move
to the next towing operator on the rotation list. If no towing operator on
the rotation list is able to respond and provide the required municipal
towing service, the Chief of Police may deviate from the rotation list and
arrange for another towing operator to provide such service.
C. Notwithstanding the above rotation list, in the interests of public safety,
the Chief of Police, in his/her discretion, taking into account the
emergency, safety and location of the situation, may part from the
rotation list and call for the closest available towing operator to
respond.
A. Motor vehicle liability for a tow truck capable of towing a motor vehicle
that is up to 26,000 pounds, for the death of, or injury to, persons and
damage to property for each accident or occurrence in the amount of
$750,000, single limit; and
B. Motor vehicle liability for a tow truck capable of towing a motor vehicle
that is more than 26,000 pounds, for the death of, or injury to, persons
and damage to property for each accident or occurrence in the amount
of $1,000,000, single limit.
C. Garage keeper's policy. A garage keeper's liability policy in the
minimum amount of $100,000, and "on-hook" coverage, for each vehicle
damaged on a separate claim.
D. Garage liability policy. A garage liability policy covering applicant's
business, equipment and vehicles in the minimum amount of $500,000
for any one person injured or killed, and a minimum of $1,000,000 for
more than one person killed or injured in any accident and an additional
$100,000 for any damage arising from injury or destruction to property,
and/or a combined single limit of $1,000,000. In addition to each policy
containing an endorsement showing the Township as an additional
§ 423-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-8
1:535
§ 423-9. Indemnification.
Any contract entered into by the Township with a registered towing
operator pursuant to this chapter shall include a provision whereupon the
registered towing operator assumes all liability and shall indemnify, defend
and save the Township, its committees, boards, departments, agents, and
employees, harmless from damages (including attorneys' fees and court
costs) or losses sustained by vehicles while being towed, stored or released
from towing operator's possession, and from all personal injuries and
property damage occurring to any persons, or property, as a result of the
performance of the towing operator's services, including, but not limited to,
towing, storage, or other such activities relating to the municipal towing
services. All responsibility for the release of a stored vehicle shall be on
towing operator only.
§ 423-10. Schedule of services eligible for charging a fee;
reasonable fees.
insured, such policy shall also provide an endorsement entitling the
Township to 30 days' prior written notice to the Chief of Police in the
event of any change in coverage under the policy, or in the event of the
cancellation of the policy.
E. Workers' compensation policy. A workers' compensation policy covering
all of applicant's employees and operators, containing statutory
coverage, including liability coverage of at least $500,000 for each
accident per person, $500,000 policy aggregate limit per disease, and
$500,000 for each disease per person.
F. Umbrella liability insurance policy in the amount of $5,000,000, which
shall be applicable to all liability coverage required above.
A. A towing operator may only charge a fee for those towing and storage
services set forth in the following schedule, plus the cost of any
additional equipment needed for recovery, plus the cost of any
materials, parts or fuel.
Basic Tow Fee Fees
Light-duty rate
(less than 9,999 G.V.W)
Tow: $160
Recovery: $200
(flat rate per tow)
Medium-duty rate
(10,000 to 19,999 G.V.W)
Tow: $220
Recovery: $350
(per hour, per truck)
§ 423-8 LAWRENCE CODE § 423-10
1:536
§ 423-11. Storage facilities.
Basic Tow Fee Fees
Heavy-duty rate
(greater than 20,000 G.V.W)
Tow: $450
Recovery: $600
(per hour, per truck)
Storage
Fees Outside
(not to exceed)
Fees Inside
(not to exceed)
Light duty $35 per day $50 per day
Medium duty $75 per day $100 per day
Heavy duty $100 per day $200 per day
Road service $75 per call
Decoupling fee $80 per call
Tarp/wrapping vehicle $40 per vehicle
B. A towing operator may not charge a service fee for towing and storage
services that are not included in the schedule approved by the
Township.
C. A towing operator must accept all forms of payment, such as cash,
check, debit card, charge card or credit card, for towing or storage
services if the operator ordinarily accepts as payment at his place of
business.
D. A towing operator that engages in private property towing or other
nonconsensual towing shall calculate storage fees based upon full
24-hour periods a motor vehicle is in the storage facility. For example, if
a motor vehicle is towed to a storage facility at 7:00 p.m. on one day and
the owner of the motor vehicle picks up the motor vehicle on or before
7:00 p.m. the next day, the towing operator shall only charge the owner
of the motor vehicle for one day of storage, or if a motor vehicle is
stored for more than 24 hours, but less than 48 hours, the towing
operator may only charge for two days of storage. [Amended at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
E. A towing operator's bill for services shall include the time at which a
towed motor vehicle was delivered to a towing company's storage
facility, if applicable.
F. Municipal storage rates. Storage fees to be charged to or on account of
the Township for the storage of Township owned or operated vehicles
shall not exceed those fees permitted by N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.50.
A. The towing operator providing municipal towing services must tow all
vehicles to a storage facility that:
§ 423-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-11
1:537
§ 423-12. Standards of towing operator performance.
All towing operators who have entered into contracts with the Township
to provide municipal towing services shall be obligated to comply with the
following duties and regulations:
(1) Has a business office open to the public between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00
p.m. at least five days a week, excluding holidays;
(2) Has the ability to provide inside secured vehicular storage;
(3) Has the ability to store a minimum of 10 vehicles;
(4) Is safe and secured by a fence, wall or other man-made barrier that
is at least six feet high and a passive alarm system or a similar onsite
security measure;
(5) If it is an outdoor storage facility, is lighted from dusk to dawn: and
(6) Is located within three driving miles of any Township border.
B. The towing operator shall provide reasonable accommodations for
after-hours release of stored motor vehicles and may charge a release
fee for releasing motor vehicles to their owners after normal business
hours or on weekends. The fee shall not be in excess of $100.
A. Remove and tow to the designated storage facility all vehicles directed
by the Chief of Police to be removed and towed because such vehicles
are in the Chief of Police's sole discretion designated as abandoned,
illegally parked, disabled, involved in an accident, or to be impounded
because of criminal or other investigation. At the sole discretion of the
Chief of Police, taking into consideration safety concerns, the owner or
operator of a disabled vehicle may be permitted to arrange for the
vehicle to be towed by a towing operator of his/her choice.
B. Store such vehicles and move such vehicles as directed by the Chief of
Police. When not otherwise directed or required by the Chief of Police,
the owner or operator of a disabled vehicle may request that the vehicle
be towed to a location other than the designated storage facility. Upon
direction of the Chief of Police, the towing operator shall not release a
vehicle towed which is subject to a criminal investigation, an
impoundment, including, without limitation, compliance with "John's
Law," without a vehicle release form or prior authorization by the Chief
of Police.
C. Provide 24-hour, seven-day-a-week service to the Township during the
term of the contract.
D. Not utilize answering machines or answering services when on call
under the rotation list.
E. Respond promptly to all requests for municipal towing services by the
Chief of Police. In any event, the towing operator shall respond and be
§ 423-11 LAWRENCE CODE § 423-12
1:538
present at the location (all locations within the Township) for municipal
towing services within 25 minutes of receipt of notice. If severe weather
conditions or excessive traffic congestion prevents the towing operator
from arriving within the aforementioned response times, the towing
operator shall contact police communications and advise them of the
reason for the delay. In the event a towing operator does not arrive
at the tow location within 25 minutes and fails to notify police
communications without a valid reason, the police officer on the scene
shall have the right to have a substitute towing operator called to
the location who will have the right to perform the municipal towing
services; and the originally called towing operator shall have no right
to payment from any party.
F. Not charge any fee for replacement of damaged or broken towing
equipment incurred at the scene of the tow.
G. Tow or perform road service to any and all disabled Township owned or
operated vehicle upon request by the Chief of Police to a location within
the Township. The towing operator will not charge the Township for the
towing and/or recovery of Township owned passenger vehicles or
pickup trucks within two miles of the Township border to a location
within the Township. All other towing of Township owned or operated
vehicles shall be charged pursuant to § 423-10 at a 20% discount.
Nothing herein shall limit the Township from utilizing the towing
services provided for in any public bid contract.
H. Clean up all broken glass and debris at the scene of accidents which
shall include any fluids leaked onto the roadway. (All towing operators
must be equipped with a broom, shovel and Speedy Dry).
I. Ensure that all drivers and operators of the towing operator must wear
ANSI Class 2 reflective safety vests or clothing at all times when
responding to a request by the Township.
J. Furnish additional towing equipment and services during storm
periods, periods of snow emergencies, traffic emergencies, natural or
other disasters, any acts of God, and for any other reason when so
designated by the Chief of Police. Such standby service shall begin and
end when the Chief of Police notifies the towing operator. The Township
reserves the right, during any such emergency, to designate temporary
areas owned or leased by the Township and/or the towing operator for
the storage of disabled vehicles, and to direct the towing operator to
remove such disabled vehicles to said areas.
K. Record all vehicles towed and/or stored and retain such records for a
period of seven years. The Township shall, upon request, be provided
with a copy of any and all records evidencing that a vehicle has been
towed and/or stored by the towing operator. Such records shall include
a report of all personal property found within a towed vehicle that can
be observed by the towing operator at the time the vehicle came into
the towing operator's possession, an accounting of all monies received
§ 423-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-12
1:539
§ 423-13. Solicitation.
No towing operator shall respond to the scene of an accident or emergency
for the purposes of towing a vehicle unless specifically notified by the Chief
of Police, or his/her designee, or the individual involved in the accident or
emergency. All persons, towing operators, and owners of towing equipment
are hereby prohibited from soliciting business at the scenes of accidents
and emergencies within the Township.
§ 423-14. Complaint and dispute resolution.
Any person having a dispute or complaint arising from a specific act of
towing or storage of motor vehicles which is regulated by this chapter shall
present that complaint or dispute to the Chief of Police for resolution. The
Chief of Police shall render his decision as to how the said complaint or
dispute is to be resolved within 10 days of his conducting a hearing as
to the same. Such hearing can be in person, by telephone or on written
presentation at the election of the Chief of Police. In the event of an adverse
decision against a registered towing operator, said registration may be
revoked. Any appeal of the Chief of Police's decision may be appealed to the
governing body of the Township.
§ 423-15. Response time; missed calls.
for fees for towing, and a separate accounting of all monies received for
fees for storage services pursuant to this section. The Chief of Police
shall have access upon demand, to any and all records required to be
kept by this section.
L. The towing operator must comply with the provisions of N.J.S.A.
39:10A-1 through 39:10A-7 regarding the storage and proper
disposition of stored vehicles.
M. In all of the towing operator's dealings with the public, the towing
operator shall act in a professional manner, courteous at all times, and
respectful to members of the public, as well as representatives of the
Township. Reports of discourteous behavior by the towing operator or
his drivers that may be substantiated and documented, shall be
considered by the Township as sufficient cause for revocation and
termination of the towing operator's registration, and be considered as
material default under any contract entered into with a towing operator
pursuant to this chapter. Any discrepancies with dispatching
procedures shall be addressed with the Lawrence Township towing
coordinators, the Investigation Division Commander or Administration
Division Commander, Monday through Friday 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
A. If the licensee fails to arrive at the scene of the towing request within
the allotted time (as outlined in § 423-12E) three times in a thirty-day
period his license will be suspended for seven days. Written notification
will be given by the Police Department for each violation. There will be
no refund of licensee fees for suspended licenses.
§ 423-12 LAWRENCE CODE § 423-15
1:540
§ 423-16. Violations; enforcement and penalties.
Chapter 435
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
B. If the licensee misses three calls within a thirty-day period, his license
will be suspended for 30 days. Written notification will be given by the
Police Department for each miss. There will be no refund of licensee
fees for suspended licenses.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Lawrence Township Police
Department or the Township Clerk.
B. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter, including the failure to
register with the Township as required herein, shall subject such
violator, upon issuance of a summons and conviction in municipal court,
and at the court's discretion, to the fines and penalties set forth for each
such violation.
C. Any violation of the provisions of this chapter may also subject the
violator to a revocation or nonissuance of the contract with the
Township. If a towing operator's contract is revoked pursuant to this
provision, such towing operator is barred from reapplying with the
Township for the remaining portion of the current towing contract with
the Township.
D. In addition to any penalties or other remedies provided herein, the
towing operator that has billed a person an amount in excess of the fee
established in § 423-10 shall reimburse such person for the excess cost.
§ 423-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 423-16
1:541

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 435-1. Interpretation.
Whenever any words and phrases are used in this chapter, the meaning
respectively ascribed to them in Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised
Statutes of New Jersey shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases
used herein.
§ 435-2. Official time standard.
Whenever certain hours are named in this chapter, they shall mean either
Eastern Standard Time or Eastern Daylight Savings Time as may be in
current use.
§ 435-3. Authorization for the closing of any street.
§ 435-4. Removal of vehicles in violation. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
Any vehicle parked in violation of this chapter shall be deemed a nuisance
and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and any peace
officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The owner shall bear
the reasonable costs of removal and storage may result from such removal
before regaining possession of the vehicle.
§ 435-5. Penalties.
Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey Statute, every
person convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter or any
A. The Municipal Manager is hereby authorized to provide by regulations
with respect to the closing of any street or portion thereof to motor
vehicle traffic on any day or days or during specified hours on any day
or days whenever such closing is necessary for the preservation of the
public safety, health or welfare.
B. The regulations shall provide for the posting of proper warning signs of
any such closing during the time same is closed.
C. Any person convicted of a violation of this provision or for the
regulations promulgated thereunder shall be liable to the penalty as is
prescribed by Chapter 1, Article III, of the Lawrence Township Code.
D. Any regulations adopted that mandate the closing of any street for a
period greater than 48 consecutive hours shall not become effective
unless and until it has been submitted to and approved by the
Commissioner of the Department of Transportation.
E. For regulations pertaining to a road closing for more than 24 hours, see
Chapter 384, Streets and Sidewalks.
§ 435-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-5
1:543
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than $50 or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
§ 435-6. Severability.
If any part or parts of this chapter are, for any reason, held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
§ 435-7. Repealer.
All former traffic ordinances of the Township of Lawrence are hereby
repealed, and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with or
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed, except
that this repeal shall not affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment
of any person for any act done or committed in violation of any ordinance
hereby repealed prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
§ 435-5 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-7
1:544
ARTICLE II
Traffic Control Standards; Requirements for Construction and
Maintenance
[Amended 3-6-2018 by Ord. No. 2291-18]
§ 435-8. Purpose and scope.
The purpose of this article is to establish controls and regulations for
the safe and expeditious movement of traffic through the Township of
Lawrence, in order to promote public health, safety and welfare, when
construction, maintenance, repairs or utility work require blocking the
streets and obstructing normal flow of traffic.
§ 435-9. Adoption of standards.
The Township of Lawrence hereby adopts the current Manual of Uniform
Traffic Control Devices, hereby known as "MUTCD"' as same may be
supplemented and amended. The MUTCD controls and regulates traffic
whenever construction, maintenance operations or utility work obstructs
the normal flow of traffic. Any person, entity, contractor or utility that fails
to comply with the provisions of the MUTCD while performing such work is
in violation of this section.
§ 435-10. Preconstruction meeting.
It shall be the responsibility of the person, contractor or public utility, as
required under the public utility agreement, N.J.A.C. 16:25-9.2, wishing to
conduct work on, under or above the roadway to contact the Lawrence
Township Chief of Police or designee in order to arrange a preconstruction
meeting in order to submit plans for the safe movement of traffic during
such period of construction or work. The preconstruction meeting shall
take place at least one week prior to the start date of the construction or
maintenance work. Any person, contractor or utility who fails to submit and
secure approval for its traffic plan prior to the start of work shall be deemed
to be in violation of this chapter. The requirement to obtain approval of the
plans shall be in addition to any other permit or other approval required by
any other federal, state or municipal law, ordinance or regulation, including
the Lawrence Township Ord. No. 21-21 entitled "Street Excavations."
§ 435-11. Emergency contact telephone numbers; correction of
hazardous conditions by the Township.
The person, contractor or utility shall provide the Lawrence Township Police
Traffic Safety Bureau with at least two emergency-contact phone numbers
to be called if emergency problems occur at the construction or
maintenance site, or arising from the construction or maintenance being
performed, prior to the start of any work. If, for any reason, emergency
contacts cannot be reached or if the emergency-contact person does not
respond to a call from the Lawrence Township Police Department to correct
a hazardous condition, the Township of Lawrence may respond to correct
§ 435-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-11
1:545
such hazardous condition. The reasonable fees for such emergency services
by the Township of Lawrence shall be charged to the person, contractor
or utility responsible for such condition. The reasonable fees will include
the labor (based on current collective bargaining agreements), material and
equipment costs.
§ 435-12. Roadway defined.
"Roadway" shall include any county, municipal, private road, or area within
the boundaries of the Township of Lawrence in which the Lawrence
Township Police Department has New Jersey Title 39 authority. Any
exception from included roadways shall be made by the Chief of Police and
shall be binding.
§ 435-13. Time limits.
§ 435-14. Road closings and detours.
Road closings and/or traffic detours shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Lawrence Township Chief of Police of designee. Advance notice of
detours must be given to motorists, except in emergent situations.
§ 435-15. Traffic directors.
A. There shall be no construction, maintenance operations or utility work
under, on or above any roadway, as defined above, in the Township
before the hour of 9:00 a.m. or after 3:00 p.m.
B. This time limit may be adjusted to permit work prior to 9:00 a.m. or
after 3:00 p.m. by the officer in charge of the Traffic Bureau of the
Lawrence Township Police Department. If it is determined by the officer
in charge of the Lawrence Township Police Traffic Bureau that the
construction or maintenance operations prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 3:00
p.m. on any roadway would substantially delay traffic or cause a safety
or health hazard or create a noise nuisance, the work shall then be
permitted only between 9:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.
A. For the purposes of this section, a traffic director is that individual who
is responsible for traffic control at a roadway work site and is either a
sworn law enforcement officer or a civilian flagger who meets the
qualifications as set forth in Section 6E of the MUTCD and is certified
as a flagger by the American Traffic Safety Services Association,
Rutgers University or comparable organization, approved by the Chief
of Police.
B. Traffic directors shall be posted at all construction or maintenance sites
when deemed necessary and approved by the Lawrence Township Chief
of Police or designee to provide for the safety and expeditious
movement of traffic.
§ 435-11 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-15
1:546
§ 435-16. Stoppage of work.
The Lawrence Township Police Department shall have authority to stop
work being performed within the Township, and to require the removal of
equipment, vehicles and/or stored material within the right-of-way, or the
backfilling of open excavations and/or other related work, in order to abate
any nuisance and/or safety hazard, or for any violations of this chapter.
§ 435-17. Site preparation and maintenance.
No materials, vehicles or equipment are to be placed in any roadway or
sidewalk areas until all construction signs, lights, devices and pavement
markings are installed and approved. All construction signs that will not
apply during construction, such as "Flagman Ahead" or "Utility Work
Ahead" signs, after all work has been completed for the day, must be bagged
or removed from the view of motorists.
§ 435-18. Emergency repair work.
C. Civilian flaggers shall not be used as traffic directors in any work zone
which contains an intersection with a traffic control device or any
portion of a roadway which contains a traffic control device. In those
situations, only a sworn law enforcement officer will be used as a traffic
director. "Traffic control signal" shall be defined by N.J.S.A. 39:1-1.
"Official traffic control devices" means all signs, signals, lane markings,
and devices not inconsistent with this subtitle placed or erected by
authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction for the purpose
of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic. [Amended at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
D. If civilian flaggers are utilized, they shall wear high-visibility safety
apparel that meets the Performance Class 2 or 3 requirements of the
ANSI/ISEA 107-2004 publication entitled "American National Standard
for High-Visibility Apparel and Headwear" and labeled as meeting the
ANSI 107-2004 standard performance for Class 2 or 3 risk exposure,
and shall be visible at a minimum distance of 1,000 feet. The
retroreflective safety apparel shall be designed to clearly identify the
wearer as a person.
E. The STOP/SLOW paddle shall be the primary and preferred handsignaling
device because the STOP/SLOW paddle gives road users more
positive guidance than flags. The use of flags is to be limited to
emergency situations.
F. If traffic directors cannot see each other, they must have two-way
(portable radio) communications between them to allow for the efficient
and safe flow of traffic.
G. If the work requires any road to be closed to traffic 24 hours a day,
traffic directors shall only be required when deemed necessary and
approved by the Lawrence Township Chief of Police or designee.
§ 435-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-18
1:547
§ 435-19. Violations and penalties.
Unless another penalty is provided by New Jersey Statute, every person,
entity, contractor or utility convicted of a violation of a provision of this
article shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250 or more than $500
for a first offense. Subsequent violations shall be punishable by a fine of not
less than $500 or more than $1,000. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
§ 435-20. Notification of traffic delays or detours.
The Lawrence Township Police Department shall have sole responsibility
to notify immediately all affected agencies, including, but not limited to,
police, fire, EMS and the school transportation offices, of any work or
construction upon or near a roadway within the Township of Lawrence
that would delay or interfere with the provision of service. The Lawrence
Township Police Department shall utilize Nixle messaging, or other public
alerting system in use at the time, to notify citizens of any road closure or
traffic delay created by any work or construction. Such notifications shall
be made in a manner pursuant to, and in compliance with, the Lawrence
Township Police Department's policy and procedures.
A. In the case of emergency repair work where construction maintenance
operations or emergency utility work must be performed that will
obstruct, interfere or detour traffic on any roadway in the Township, the
person, contractor or utility performing such operation shall notify the
Lawrence Township Police Department of such emergency operation.
The person, contractor or utility shall disclose the nature of the
emergency, location and proposed hours of operation.
B. All emergency construction and maintenance operations shall be
performed with full regard to safety and to keep traffic interference to
an absolute minimum. During such emergency repair work, the person,
contractor or utility shall comply with the provisions of the MUTCD
while performing such emergency repair work.
§ 435-18 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-20
1:548
ARTICLE III
Parking, Stopping and Standing
§ 435-21. Regulations not exclusive.
The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on parking shall not
relieve any person of the duty to observe other, more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping or standing or parking of vehicles as set
forth in N.J.S.A. 39:4-138, any other New Jersey Statute or as hereinafter
provided.
§ 435-22. Parking prohibited during state of emergency.
§ 435-23. Temporary parking prohibition for snow plowing and
removal. [Amended by Ord. No. 1836-05]
A. Upon the declaration of an emergency, there shall be no parking upon
the streets where temporary emergency "No Parking" signs are
displayed. The Chief of Police or, in his absence, the ranking police
officer, is authorized to declare an emergency and to direct the posting
of emergency "No Parking" signs when weather conditions, accidents,
road construction, fire or public celebrations dictate or require
avoidance of hazards or other conditions which interfere with the free
flow of traffic. Notification that emergency "No Parking" signs are being
or will be posted shall be given to the operator or owner of any vehicle
which has been parked prior to the posting of the signs.
B. The effectiveness of this subsection is contingent upon the signs being
erected as required by law.
A. Whenever snow has fallen and the accumulation is such that it covers
the roadway, an emergency shall exist and no vehicle shall be parked on
the streets or roads or portions thereof indicated.
Name of Street Sides Location
Berwyn Place Both Entire length
Carr Avenue Both Entire length
Cherry Tree Lane Both Entire length
Darrah Lane and East Darrah
Lane
Both Entire length
Eldridge Avenue Both Entire length
Fairfield Avenue Both Entire length
Gainsboro Road Both Entire length
Gordon Avenue Both Entire length
Jackle Drive Both Entire length
Lawn Park Avenue Both Entire length
§ 435-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-23
1:549
§ 435-24. Stopping or standing prohibited at all times. [Amended by
Ord. No. 1925-07; Ord. No. 1906-06; Ord. No. 1880-06; Ord. No.
1872-06; Ord. No. 1368-93; Ord. No. 1466-96; Ord. No. 1477-96;
Ord. No. 1547-98; Ord. No. 1631-00; Ord. No. 1859-05; Ord. No.
1936-07]
No person shall stop or stand any vehicle at any time upon the following
streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Allen Lane Both All From Brunswick
Turnpike to Glenn
Avenue
Altamaur Avenue Southerly All From its intersection
with U.S. Route 206
(Lawrenceville Road) to
its intersection with
Rolfe Avenue
Bakers Basin Road Both All Entire length
Name of Street Sides Location
Marilyn Court Both Entire length
Marvin Court Both Entire length
Morton Court Both Entire length
Mulberry Street Both Entire length
Phillips Avenue Both Entire length
Princeton Pike Both Entire length
Stack Avenue Both Entire length
Texas Avenue Both Entire length
Woodmont Drive Both Entire length
B. The above parking prohibitions shall remain in effect after the snow has
ceased until the streets have been plowed sufficiently and to the extent
that parking will not interfere with the normal flow of traffic.
C. Any unoccupied vehicle parked or standing in violation shall be deemed
a nuisance and a menace to the safe and proper regulation of traffic and
any police officer may provide for the removal of such vehicle. The
owner shall pay the reasonable costs of the removal and storage, which
may result from such removal before regaining possession of the
vehicle.
D. The effectiveness of this section is contingent on signs being erected as
required by law.
§ 435-23 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-24
1:550
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Barnette Road Southerly All From the westerly
curbline of the
Princeton Pike to the
northerly side of Darrah
Lane
Basin Road Both All Entire length
Bergen Street
[Amended
8-16-2016 by Ord.
No. 2243-16]
Both All Lawrenceville-
Pennington to Cold Soil
Road
Blackwell Road Both All Entire length
Bonnie Court
[Added 8-16-2016
by Ord. No.
2243-16]
North All Entire length
Brunswick Avenue Northerly All From Brunswick Circle
to Lanning Avenue
Bunker Hill Road Both All Entire length
Carnegie Road Southerly All From the easterly
curbline of U.S. #1 to
the Delaware-Raritan
Canal
Carr Avenue Westerly All Between Princeton
Avenue and Brunswick
Avenue (U.S. Highway
No. 1)
Carson Road Both All Entire length
Carter Road Both All Entire length
Cherry Tree Lane Both All From its intersection
with U.S. No. 1
Alternate for a distance
of 150 feet in an
easterly direction
Cheverly Road Both All From Eggerts Crossing
Road to Albermarle
Road
Cold Soil Road Both All Entire length
Cold Soil Road Both All From the westerly
curbline of Route 206 to
a point 100 feet west
thereof
§ 435-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-24
1:551
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Colonial Lake Drive Northerly All From the easterly
curbline of U.S.
Highway No. 1 to a
point 200 feet east of
such curbline
Conrad Court
[Added 8-16-2016
by Ord. No.
2243-16]
Cul-de-sac All Park parallel to curb
Conrad Court
[Added 8-16-2016
by Ord. No.
2243-16]
West All J. Russel Smith Road to
cul-de-sac
Cravel Lane Southerly All Between George Street
and Main Street
Craven Lane (see
§ 435-25 for stopping
or standing on school
days)
Northerly All From Route 206 to the
westerly side of the
trolley right-of-way
Cut-off Road Both All Extending from
Brunswick Circle to
Princeton Avenue
Darrah Lane Both All From the easterly
curbline of U.S. Route
206 to the westerly
curbline of Wenczel
Drive
Darrah Lane-Darrah
Lane East
Southerly All From a point 250 feet
west of the westerly
curbline of Princeton
Pike to a point 200 feet
east of the easterly
curbline of Princeton
Pike
Darrah Lane East Both All From its intersection
with Glenn Avenue
easterly to the westerly
curbline of U.S.
Alternate Route 1,
except on the northerly
curbline, in designated
parking spaces in front
of the Senior Center
§ 435-24 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-24
1:552
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Darrah Lane East-
Darrah Lane
Northerly All From a point 250 feet
east of the easterly
curbline of Princeton
Pike to a point 200 feet
west of the westerly
curbline of Princeton
Pike
Denow Road Both All Entire length
Eggerts Crossing
Road
Both All Entire length
Eldridge Avenue Northerly All Within 75 feet of each
side of Rossa Avenue
Eldridge Avenue Southerly All From Lawrence Road to
Johnson Avenue
Elmo Avenue Both All From the northerly line
of Lawn Park Avenue to
the southerly line of
Merline Avenue
Enterprise Avenue Both All Entire length
Fackler Road Both All Entire length
Federal City Road Both All Entire length
Franklin Corner
Road
Both All From its intersection
with U.S. Highway No. 1
to its intersection with
Denow Road and
Lawrenceville-
Pennington Road
Gainsboro Road Both All From the easterly
curbline of U.S. 206 to
(unnamed alley)
Gainsboro Road Both All From its intersection
with U.S. Route 206 for
a distance of 500 feet in
an easterly direction
Gainsboro Road Northerly All Beginning at the
easterly curbline of
Route 206 and
extending to a point 120
feet easterly therefrom
Garden Road Both All Entire length
§ 435-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-24
1:553
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Gedney Road Both All From the westerly
curbline of Princeton
Pike to a point 200 feet
west thereof
Gedney Road Northerly All In a westerly direction
from the prolongated
curbline of the
intersection of
Princeton Pike 75 feet
George Street Both All From Phillips Avenue to
its intersection with
Titus Avenue
Gordon Avenue
[Amended
7-17-2018 by Ord.
No. 2301-18]
North All From Route U.S. 206 to
Bergen Street
Gordon Avenue
[Amended
7-17-2018 by Ord.
No. 2301-18]
South From a point 35 feet
west of the
Lawrenceville Fire
House Parking lot
driveway to U.S. Route
206
J. Russel Smith Road
[Added 8-16-2016
by Ord. No.
2243-16]
Cul-de-sac All Park parallel to curb
J. Russel Smith Road
[Added 8-16-2016
by Ord. No.
2243-16]
West All Entire length
Greenfield Avenue Southerly All Entire length
Johnson Avenue Easterly All Lying to the west of the
Reading Railroad lines,
from its intersection
with Eggerts Crossing
Road to a point 3,100
feet south of the
intersection of Johnson
Avenue and the center
line of the Reading
Railroad track crossing
§ 435-24 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-24
1:554
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Johnson Avenue Westerly All Lying to the east of the
Reading Railroad lines,
from the northerly
curbline of Alcazar
Avenue to a point 450
feet north thereof
Keefe Road Both All Entire length
Keefe Road Both All Except in the following
location: along the
south curbline, 50 feet
northbound from the
prolongated curbline of
the entrance drive to
The Manors, proceeding
north for a distance of
200 feet
Kent Court [Added
8-16-2016 by Ord.
No. 2243-16]
North All Entire length
Lake Drive Northerly All For a distance of 218
feet east of the easterly
curbline of U.S.
Highway No. 1
(Brunswick Pike)
Lake Drive Northerly All From its intersection
with U.S. Alternate
Route, jughandle
easterly to and
including the cul-de-sac
at end of Lake Drive
Lakedale Drive Both All For a distance of 100
feet northeasterly from
its intersection with the
curbline of Whitehead
Road
Landover Road Easterly All Entire length
§ 435-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-24
1:555
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Lawn Park Avenue
[Amended
4-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2326-19]
Southerly All From the prolongation
of the southerly curbline
of Lawn Park Avenue
and Lawrence Road, for
a distance of 579 feet
and beginning at a
distance of 880 feet
from the prolongation of
the southerly curbline of
Lawn Park Avenue and
Lawrence Road to Zoar
Street
Lawrence Avenue Southerly All From westerly curbline
of Lawrence Road (U.S.
Route 206) to Rossa
Avenue
Lawrence Station
Road
Both All Entire length
Lawrenceville-
Pennington Road
[Repealed
9-25-2018 by Ord.
No. 2309-18]
Lawrenceville-
Pennington Road
[Added 11-8-2018
by Ord. No.
2316-18]
Both All From its intersection
with Route 206 to it
intersection with Willow
Road
Lenox Drive Northerly All From the easterly
curbline of Princeton
Pike to a point 166 feet
east of the curbline
Lenox Drive Southerly All From the easterly
curbline of Princeton
Pike to a point 145 feet
east of the curbline
Lewisville Road Both All Entire length
Litho Road Both All From the prolongated
curbline of U.S. Route 1,
proceeding east for a
distance of 430 feet
§ 435-24 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-24
1:556
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Manor's Boulevard
[Added 8-16-2016
by Ord. No.
2243-16]
Both All Entire length
Maplewood Avenue Both All Between Brunswick
Avenue (U.S. Route 1)
and Lawrence Road
(U.S. Route 206)
Meadowbrook
Avenue
North All From Route 206 for its
length including cul-desac,
except that there
shall be a school bus
loading zone starting at
a point 169 feet west of
Route 206 and
continuing on for 170
feet in front of the
school property
Merline Avenue Both All Beginning at the
westerly curbline of
Route US 206 and
extending to a point 90
feet westerly therefrom
Merline Avenue Southerly All From the easterly line of
Zoar Avenue to the
westerly line of
Lawrenceville Road
(Route 206)
Mulberry Street Both All From the northerly
curbline of U.S. Route
206 to a point 120 feet
northerly therefrom
Myrtle Avenue Both All For a distance of 60 feet
from the westerly
curbline of Brunswick
Avenue
New York Avenue Both All From the Lawrence
Township boundary line
with the City of Trenton
for a distance of 250
feet north
Northbrook Avenue Southerly All Entire length
§ 435-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-24
1:557
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Ohio Avenue Westerly All From the southerly
curbline of Putnum
Avenue and continuing
440 feet south
Orchard Lane Both All Entire length
Phillips Avenue Both All Between U.S. Route 206
and the westerly side of
the Lawrenceville Fire
Company driveway
Pilla Avenue Both All Entire length
Pine Street Southerly All For a distance of 190
feet westerly of
Brunswick Avenue
Princeton Pike Both All From a point 200 feet
southerly of the
southerly curbline of
Darrah Lane to a point
200 feet northerly of the
northerly curbline of
Darrah Lane
Princeton Pike East All From the northerly
extended curbline of
Fairfield Avenue to a
point 518 feet north
thereof
Princeton Pike Easterly All Between Harney's
Corner and Carr Avenue
Princeton Pike Easterly All From U.S. Route 206 to
Carr Avenue
Princeton Pike Westerly All From the eastern
curbline of U.S. Route
206 to a point 350 feet
north thereof
Princeton Pike Easterly All From the Shabakonk
Creek to Texas Avenue
Princeton Pike Westerly All From the Shabakonk
Creek to Fairfield
Avenue
§ 435-24 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-24
1:558
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Princeton Pike Easterly All From the northerly
curbline of Texas
Avenue north to a point
200 feet south of the
southerly curbline of
Whitemarsh Drive
Princeton Pike Westerly All From the northerly
curbline of Gedney Road
north to the southern
curbline of the
prolongation of the
Lawrence Middle
School driveway
Princeton Pike Both All From a point 250 feet
southerly of the
southerly curbline of
Darrah Lane to a point
250 feet northerly of the
northerly curbline of
Darrah Lane
Princeton Pike Easterly All From Franklin Corner
Road to Stonicker Drive
Princeton Pike Westerly All From Franklin Corner
Road to a point 50 feet
south of the southern
driveway exit from
Benjamin Franklin
School
Princeton Pike Both All From Franklin Corner
Road north to the
boundary line with
Princeton Township
Province Line Road Both All Lawrence Township
side, whichever applies
Puritan Avenue Both All From the intersection of
Ohio Avenue to the
intersection of New
York Avenue
Quaker Bridge Road Both All Lawrence Township
side, or whichever
applies
Rolfe Avenue West All Extending from
Eldridge Avenue to
Merline Avenue
§ 435-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-24
1:559
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Rosedale Road Both All Entire length
Rossa Avenue Both All From Lawrence Avenue
to Eldridge Avenue
Seth Court [Added
8-16-2016 by Ord.
No. 2243-16]
North All Entire length
Slack Avenue Northerly All Entire length
Slack Avenue South All From the prolongation
of the curbline of
Brunswick Pike and
Slack Avenue, for a
distance of 498 feet
west to the easterly
curbline of Hopewell
Avenue
Slack Avenue All For a distance of 498
feet west to the easterly
curbline of Hopewell
Avenue
Spruce Street Northerly All From Princeton Avenue
to Ewing Township line
Spruce Street All Beginning at the
intersection of the
northerly line of Spruce
Street with the easterly
line of Princeton Avenue
and extending easterly
along the northerly
curbline of Spruce
Street to a point where
the easterly line of Ellis
Avenue would intersect
the curbline if
prolonged thereto
Texas Avenue Southerly and
Northerly
All From the easterly
curbline of Princeton
Pike to a point 100 feet
east thereof and from
the westerly curbline of
U.S. Route 1 Alternate
to the easterly curbline
of Glenn Avenue
§ 435-24 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-24
1:560
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Tiffany Woods Road
[Added 8-16-2016
by Ord. No.
2243-16]
Both All Spruce Street to Kent
Court
Tiffany Woods Road
[Added 8-16-2016
by Ord. No.
2243-16]
West All Kent Court to Seth
Court
Titus Avenue Northerly All From the western
curbline of Main Street
(U.S. Route 206)
westerly for a distance
of 300 feet, assuming
that Titus Avenue runs
east and west
Tudor Lane [Added
8-16-2016 by Ord.
No. 2243-16]
West All Entire length
Tulane Avenue Southerly All Entire length
U.S. Route 1 Both All Entire length
U.S. Route 1
Alternate
Both All Entire length
U.S. Route 206 Easterly All From a point 250 feet
south of the center line
of Wayside Lane to the
southerly curbline of
Windwood Road
§ 435-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-24
1:561
Name of Street Side Hours Location
Vander Veer Drive Both All From Lawrence Road
(U.S. Route 206)
easterly to its
intersection with
Burning Tree Lane, at a
line marked by the
curbline on the
northwesterly side of
Burning Tree Lane at
said intersection and its
extension across Vander
Veer Drive in a
southwesterly direction;
and continuing in a
southerly direction
along the west side of
Vander Veer Drive to a
line marked by the
southerly extended
curbline of Twin Oaks
Drive
Van Kirk Road Both All Entire length
West Church Road Both All Entire length
West Long Drive Both All Entire length
Whitehead Road
Extension
Both All From the easterly line of
Brunswick Avenue (U.S.
Highway No. 1) and
extending easterly along
both curblines to the
Township line
Youngs Road Both All Entire length
An unnamed street Easterly end
of Eggerts
Crossing Park
All From its beginning at
Eggerts Crossing Road
to its terminus at the
park parking area
§ 435-24 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-25
1:562
§ 435-25. Stopping and standing permitted at certain hours on
school days. [Amended by Ord. No. 1386-93]
Name of Street Side Location
Craven Lane Southerly From the westerly side of the
Lawrenceville Elementary
School driveway to the westerly
side of the trolley right-of-way
from 12:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
when school is in session
Craven Lane Northerly From the westerly side of the
trolley right-of-way to the
westerly side of the
Lawrenceville Elementary
School driveway except when
school is in session stopping
and standing, not parking, will
be permitted on full days from
12:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
§ 435-26. Stopping, standing and parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park, stop or stand any vehicle at any time upon the
following streets or parts thereof.
Name of Street Side Hours Location
U.S. Route 1 Both All Between the intersection
of Providence Road and
a point 600 feet
southerly thereof
§ 435-27. Stopping or standing prohibited at all times, except
during religious services.
A. No person shall stop or stand any vehicle at any time upon the following
streets or parts thereof except during times of religious services at
churches:
Name of Street Side Location
U.S. Route 206 Both From the Brunswick traffic circle
to the Lawrence Township
border with Princeton Township
B. During times of religious services, parking is permitted within 500 feet
of churches on both sides of the street. Each church must arrange with
the department of public safety for "official" times of religious services
when parking is permitted.
§ 435-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-28
1:563
§ 435-28. Stopping, standing or parking prohibited during certain
hours on school days. [Amended by Ord. No. 1596-00; Ord. No.
1757-03; Ord. No. 1859-05]
No person shall stop or stand or park any vehicle during the hours stated:
Name of Street Side Hours Prohibited Location
Craven Lane (on
school days
except to receive
or discharge
passengers)
Northerly Between 7:30 a.m.
and 4:30 p.m.
From George Street
to the westerly line
of the property of
the Township Board
of Education
Lakedale Drive Easterly Between 8:00 a.m.
Monday - Friday
From a point 100
feet northeast of its
intersection with the
curbline of
Whitehead Road in a
northeasterly
direction to its
intersection with the
curbline of Glenview
Drive
Ohio Avenue a. East Between 9:00 a.m.
and 6:00 a.m.
Entire length from
the corner of
Puritan Avenue to
Putnam Avenue
b. West 400 feet from the
southerly curbline of
Putnam Avenue
continuing to the
northerly curbline of
Pilgrim Avenue
Princeton Pike Westerly From 7:30 a.m. to
4:30 p.m.
From the
prolongation of the
northerly curbline of
Lawrence Middle
School driveway
north to a point
opposite the
intersection of the
prolongation of the
southerly curbline of
Hoover Avenue and
Princeton Pike
§ 435-28 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-29
1:564
§ 435-29. Stopping or standing prohibited during certain hours on
certain days. [Amended by Ord. No. 1342-93]
No person shall stop or stand a vehicle between the hours stated upon the
following streets or parts of streets.
Name of Street Side
Hours
Prohibited Location
Lake Drive Southerly Between 2:00
a.m. and 5:00
p.m.
For a distance of
150 feet east of
the easterly
curbline of U.S.
Highway No. 1
(Brunswick Pike)
§ 435-30. Parking time limited on certain streets. [Amended by Ord.
No. 1690-02; Ord. No. 1859-05; Ord. No. 1872-06; Ord. No. 1911-06]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit between the
hours listed on any day (except Sundays and public holidays) upon any of
the streets or parts of streets described.
Name of Street Side Limit Location
Lawrenceville-
Pennington Road
West 1 hour From a point 25
feet south of the
prolongation of the
southwest curbline
of the southern
most intersection
of Lawrenceville-
Pennington Road
and Lawrencia
Drive, continuing
south for an
additional 255 feet
Rydal Drive 1 hour From the
intersection with
Princeton Pike to a
point 125 feet west
thereof on the
south side of the
street
§ 435-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-30
1:565
Name of Street Side Limit Location
U.S. Route 206 Easterly 1 hour From a point
which is 25 feet
south from the
intersection of the
prolongation of the
southerly curbline
of Phillips Avenue,
south to the
intersection of the
northerly curbline
of the main
entrance to the
Lawrenceville
School
U.S. Route 206 Westerly 1 hour From a point
beginning 117 feet
northerly from the
intersection of the
northerly curbline
of Gordon Avenue,
south to the
intersection of the
northerly curbline
of Craven Lane
§ 435-31. Parking time limited on certain streets on school days.
No person shall park a vehicle on any of the following streets on school
days, between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., for longer than 15
minutes.
§ 435-30 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-31
1:566
Name of Street Side Time Limit Location
Lawn Park Avenue
[Amended
4-16-2019 by Ord.
No. 2326-19;
12-17-2019 by
Ord. No. 2353-19]
North 15 minutes
between 7:30 a.m.
and 4:30 p.m.
Beginning at a
distance of 545
feet from the
prolongation of the
northerly curbline
of Lawn Park
Avenue and
Lawrence Road
and continuing for
a distance of 200
feet, excluding the
parking prohibited
area specified in
§ 435-36
Princeton Pike Southbound
15 minutes
between 7:30 a.m.
and 4:30 p.m.
From a point
opposite the
prolongation of the
southern curbline
of Whitemarsh
Drive south to a
point opposite the
prolongation of the
northern curbline
of Hoover Avenue
§ 435-32. Parking time limited on certain streets during certain
hours.
No person shall park a vehicle on the following street or portion thereof.
Name of Street Side
Time Limit
Hours
Restricted Location
Brunswick Avenue North 15 minutes
between 8:00
a.m. and 5:00
p.m. (except
Sundays and
public holidays)
Beginning 184
feet from the
northerly curbline
of Lanning Avenue
to a point 170 feet
north therefrom
Meadowbrook
Avenue
Northerly One-half hour
between 9:00
a.m. and 1:00
p.m. on Sundays
From Lawrence
Road (U.S. Route
206) to the
terminus of
Meadowbrook
Avenue
§ 435-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-33
1:567
§ 435-33. Parking prohibited for street cleaning. [Amended by Ord.
No. 1601-00]
No person shall cause or permit to be parked any motor vehicle upon any
street between the specified hours and days described.
§ 435-34. Parking prohibited at all times on certain streets.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1360-93; Ord. No. 1821-04; Ord. No. 826-05;
Ord. No. 1872-06; Ord. No. 1936-07]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any streets or parts thereof
described.
Name of Street Location
Berwyn Place Entire length
Carr Avenue Entire length
Cherry Tree Lane Entire length
Darrah Lane [Amended 6-20-2017
by Ord. No. 2265-17]
Entire length
East Darrah Lane [Amended
6-20-2017 by Ord. No. 2265-17]
North side, from the easterly side of
the Glenn Avenue intersection, for a
distance of 100 feet
Eldridge Avenue Entire length
Fairfield Avenue Entire length
Gainsboro Road Entire length
Gordon Avenue Entire length
Lawn Park Avenue Entire length
Lawn Park Avenue [Amended
4-16-2019 by Ord. No. 2326-19]
South side, beginning at a distance
of 579 feet from the prolongation of
the southerly curbline of Lawn Park
Avenue and Lawrence Road and
continuing for a distance of 300 feet
A. Sweeper zone. To provide for the orderly and effective sweeping of
Township streets, parking, stopping and standing shall be prohibited at
certain times and at certain location as follows:
Street Location Time
Spruce Street Brunswick Avenue to
the point 50 feet east
of where the easterly
line of Ellis Avenue
would intersect
Spruce Street
Tuesday 12:00 p.m. -
2:00 p.m.
§ 435-33 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-34
1:568
Name of Street Location
Mink Court North side, starting at a point in an
easterly direction 130 feet from the
extended curbline at Princeton Pike
and extending 285 feet
Mulberry Street Entire length
New York Avenue Both sides, from the Lawrence
Township Boundary line with the
City of Trenton for a distance of 250
feet north
Pear Street South side, between easterly line of
U.S. Route 1 and a point 240 feet
easterly therefrom
Phillips Avenue Entire length
Princess Road East side, from the southern
entrance of Cooperfield Drive to
Franklin Corner Road
Princeton Pike Entire length
Slack Avenue Entire length
Texas Avenue Entire length
§ 435-35. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain
streets. [Amended by Ord. No. 1596-00]
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified any day (except
Sundays and public holidays) upon any of the streets or parts of streets
described.
Name of Street Side Time Location
Lakedale Drive Easterly From 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Monday - Friday
From a point 100
feet northeast of
its intersection
with the curbline
of Whitehead
Road in a
northeasterly
direction to its
intersection with
the curbline of
Glenview Drive
§ 435-36. Parking prohibited during certain hours on certain
streets on days when school is in session.
A. Between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on school days.
§ 435-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-36
1:569
Name of Street Side Time Location
Fieldboro Drive Between 8:00
a.m. and 4:00
p.m.
Starting from a
point on the
westerly
curbline 55 feet
north of the
dead end of the
100 block of the
street and
continuing in a
northerly
direction an
additional 30
feet
B. Between 7:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on school days.
Name of Street Sides Time Location
Gainsboro Road North Between 7:30
a.m. and 4:00
p.m.
From the
Northwest corner
of Princeton Pike
to a point 506
feet west of this
intersection
Lawn Park [Added
4-16-2019 by
Ord. No.
2326-19]
Northerly Between 7:30
a.m. and 4:30
p.m.
Beginning at a
distance of 594
feet from the
prolongation of
the northerly
curbline of Lawn
Park Avenue and
Lawrence Road
and continuing
for a distance of
60 feet
Princeton Pike Westerly Between 7:30
a.m. and 4:00
p.m.
From the
northerly curbline
of Carr Avenue
south to a point
350 feet north of
the intersection
with Route 206
§ 435-36 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-36
1:570
§ 435-37. Parking prohibited between 6:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on
Sundays.
No person shall park any vehicle on the following streets between 6:00 a.m.
and 1:00 p.m. on Sundays:
Name of Street Side Location
Lawrence Avenue Northerly From a point 263 feet west of
the westerly curbline of
Lawrence Road (U.S. Route
206) to the curbline of Rossa
Avenue.
§ 435-38. Parking prohibited in any location adjacent to curbside
mailbox.
§ 435-39. Parking of certain trucks, vehicles and trailers prohibited.
No person shall park any truck or vehicle over _____ tons registered gross
vehicle weight (GVW), a school bus, any other type of bus, recreational
vehicle, camper, boat or trailer between the hours specified upon any of the
streets or parts of streets described.
Name of Street Sides Time Location
Princeton Pike Easterly Between 7:30
a.m. and 4:00
p.m.
From the
northerly curbline
of Texas Avenue
north to a point
200 feet south of
the southerly
curbline of
Whitemarsh Drive
Princeton Pike Westerly Between 7:30
a.m. and 4:00
p.m.
From the
northerly curbline
of Gedney Road
north to a point
opposite the
intersection of
the southerly
curbline of
Whitemarsh Drive
and Princeton
Turnpike
A. Parking is prohibited between 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. from Monday
through Saturday (except federal holidays) in any location where a
parked vehicle will inhibit vehicular access to a curbside mailbox.
B. Violators of this section will be subject to a fine of $25.
§ 435-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-39
1:571
Name of Street Side Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 435-40. Parking of trailers and mobile homes.
This section refers to vehicles that are intended to be used as a conveyance
upon public streets or highways and licensed as such, and shall include selfpropelled
and non- self-propelled vehicles.
Name of Street Side Time Limit
All Township streets Both 2 hours
§ 435-41. Residential permit parking. [Amended by Ord. No.
1491-97; Ord. No. 1523-98; Ord. No. 1665-01; Ord. No. 1688-02;
Ord. No. 1818-04; Ord. No. 1888-04; Ord. No. 1874-06; Ord. No.
1937-07]
No person shall park a vehicle on streets or parts of streets as described
within the following sections unless an appropriate and current parking
permit as issued by the Township of Lawrence is displayed on said vehicle
for those streets or parts of streets as described or listed within the
following section:
A. The Township will issue special parking permits to residents of
designated streets, which allow for the parking of vehicles on those
streets.
B. Permit parking.
(1) During the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m. when school is in session
no person shall stop or stand a vehicle on any street or part of any
street listed below unless the vehicle has a valid permit:
Name of Street Location
Berwyn Place East from Birchwood Knoll
Coolidge Avenue Entire length
Fieldboro Drive From Review Avenue 160 feet south to
the Dead End From Gainsboro Road 175
feet north to the Dead End
Florham Drive Entire length
Foch Avenue From Lannigan Drive to Hughes Avenue
Gainsboro Road Northside from a point 470 feet west of
Princeton Pike to a point 1,250 feet west
of Princeton Pike
Gainsboro Road Southside from the intersection with
Princeton Pike to a point 1,250 feet west
therefrom
§ 435-39 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-41
1:572
Name of Street Location
Glenn Avenue Hughes Avenue to Johnson Road
Hillsdale Drive Entire length
Hoover Avenue Entire length
Hughes Avenue Princeton Pike to Glenn Avenue
Lannigan Drive Entire length
Lawnside Drive Entire length
Millbrook Lane Entire length
Mink Court Entire length
Oaklyn Terrace Birchwood Knoll to Veterans Park
Review Avenue East from Bayless Drive
Rydal Drive Entire length
Whitemarsh Drive Entire length
(2) During the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on the
below-listed street unless the vehicle has a valid permit. [Added
8-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2024-09]
Name of Street Location
Mayflower Avenue From its intersection with U.S. Route No.
1 to a point 500 feet east on both sides
of the street
(3) During the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday,
no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on the below-listed
street unless the vehicle has a valid permit: [Added 12-17-2019
by Ord. No. 2352-19]
Name of Street Location
Lawn Park Avenue Northerly side, beginning at a
distance of 745 feet from the
prolongation of the northerly
curbline of Lawn Park Avenue
and Lawrence Road and
continuing for a distance of 138
feet
C. Any resident who qualifies for such special parking permit must
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Township that:
(1) They are legal residents of property abutting the street or roadway.
(2) A legal resident is defined as a person that uses the residence as a
primary domicile.
§ 435-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-41
1:573
(3) A person that owns a residence and does not reside there is not
eligible for a special parking permit for their vehicle. However, the
tenants that reside in the residence are eligible for special parking
permits for their vehicles.
D. A permanent permit will be issued for a specific motor vehicle and such
permit is not transferable provided that:
(1) The motor vehicle is registered to a legal resident of property
abutting the street or roadway.
(2) If the motor vehicle is leased or is owned by the legal resident's
employer then the legal resident must provide proof that the motor
vehicle is principally garaged at a property abutting the street or
roadway. A letter from an employer will serve as valid proof.
E. Temporary Parking Permits are available to Special Parking Permit
holders for their distribution to guests who are visiting their residents
or individuals that are performing services at their residence.
Temporary Parking Permits are identified by the identification number
on the resident's Special Parking Permit and is valid only on the street
where the legal resident resides.
F. The Township is hereby empowered to create such rules and
regulations as are necessary to carry out the purpose of this section.
G. The owner or operator of a motor vehicle who violates this section shall
upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $100.
H. Parking permits for nonresidents.
(1) The Township will issue special parking permits for nonresidents of
designated streets, which permits will allow for parking of vehicles
in certain areas identified as "nonresident permit parking" on those
designated streets.
(2) Permit parking: During the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m., when
school is in session, no person shall stop or stand any vehicle on any
street in any area identified as "nonresident permit parking" unless
the vehicle has a valid permit:
Name of Street Location
Same as above In spaces identified as
"nonresident permit parking"
(3) A permanent permit will be issued for a specific motor vehicle and
such permit is not transferable.
(4) The Township Administrator is hereby empowered to create such
rules and regulation as necessary to carry out the purpose of this
section.
§ 435-41 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-41
1:574
§ 435-42. Angle parking.
The following streets or parts of streets are hereby established as Angle
Parking at an angle so indicated below.
Name of Street Side Angle Location
(Reserved)
(5) The operator of a motor vehicle who violates this section shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a fine not to exceed $100.
§ 435-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-42
1:575

ARTICLE IV
Traffic Regulations
§ 435-43. Through streets. [Amended by Ord. No. 1334-92; Ord. No.
1743-03; 8-16-2016 by Ord. No. 2243-16]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the streets or parts of
streets described are hereby designated as through streets. "Stop" signs
shall be installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the
through street except where yield signs are provided for in the designation.
Name of Street Limits
Anthony Lane Dorthea Terrace to its northern
terminus
Ashleigh Drive Entire length
Bakers Basin Road Entire length
Barnett Road Jill Lane to Merritt Drive
Bergen Street Cold Soil Road to terminus
Bergen Street Gordon Avenue to Cold Soil Road
Bergen Street Lawrenceville-Pennington Road to
Gordon Avenue
Brookdale Drive Entire length
Bunker Hill Road Entire length
Canal View Drive Entire length
Coach Drive Entire length
Cold Soil Road Between Route U.S. 206 and Carter
Road
Cole Lane Entire length
Colonial Lake Drive Entire length
Darrah Lane Between U.S. Route 206 and
Princeton Turnpike
Denow Road Between Lawrenceville-Pennington
Road and Federal City Road
Denow Road Federal City Road to Township line
Drift Avenue Entire length
Eggerts Crossing Road Between the Lawrence Township-
Ewing Township line and U.S. Route
206
Fackler Road Entire length
§ 435-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-43
1:577
Name of Street Limits
Federal City Road Between the Ewing Township-
Hopewell Township corporate line
and Lawrenceville-Pennington Road
Federal City Road Entire length
Foch Avenue From Texas Avenue to Lanningan
Drive
Foxcroft Drive Entire length
Glenn Avenue Darrah Lane East to Lotus Lane
Glenn Avenue From Texas Avenue to East Darrah
Lane
Glenview Drive Entire length
Gordon Avenue Between Route 206 and Bergen
Street and between Bergen Street
and the Village Park parking lot
[Added 9-25-2018 by Ord. No.
2308-18]
Hamilton Court Entire length
Hopatcong Drive Brunswick Park to the dead end
J. Russel Smith Road Entire length
Johnson Avenue Entire length
Karena Lane Dorthea Terrace to Alexandria Court
Lakedale Drive Entire length
Laurel Wood Drive From Bergen Street to the
prolongation of north curbline of
Holly Lane
Lawrence Station Road Between U.S. Route 1 and Province
Line Road
Lawrencia Drive Entire length
Lumar Road Entire length
Marchesi Drive Entire length
Merlon Place Penlaw Road (b/w N and S
terminus)
Merritt Drive Entire length
Mulberry Street Entire length
Nassau Drive Dustin Drive to Yeager Drive
Ohio Avenue Between Pear Street and Cherry
Tree Lane
Old Bridal Path Entire length
§ 435-43 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-43
1:578
Name of Street Limits
Orchard Lane Entire length
Pine Knoll Drive Entire length
Princess Road Entire length
Princeton Turnpike Between U.S. Route 206 and the
Lawrence Township-Princeton
Township line
Province Line Road Princeton Twp. Line to DNR Canal
Rolfe Avenue Between Merline Avenue and
Eldridge Avenue
Rossa Avenue Entire length
Rydal Drive Millbrook Lane to Bearfort Way
Stonicker Drive Temple Terrace to Rosalind Road
Stratford Drive Entire length
Sunset Road Entire length
Surrey Drive Entire length
Texas Avenue Between Princeton Turnpike and
U.S. Route 1
Theresa Drive Entire length
Tiffany Woods Road Entire length
Tomlyn Drive Entire length
Tudor Lane Entire length
Vanderveer Drive Entire length
West Long Drive Entire length
Winthrop Road Entire length
Woodfield Lane Entire length
Woodlane Road Between Cold Soil Road and Bergen
Street
Woodmont Drive Entire length
Yeger Drive Entire length
Yorkshire Village Road Cole Lane to Canal View Drive
Zoar Street Entire length
§ 435-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-44
1:579
§ 435-44. Stop intersections. [Amended by Ord. No. 1334-92; Ord.
No. 1413-95; Ord. No. 1544-98; Ord. No. 1720-02; Ord. No. 1743-03;
8-16-2016 by Ord. No. 2243-16]
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as stop intersections. "Stop" signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
Stop Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Abby Drive and Dustin Drive Abby Drive
Albermarie Road and Cheverly Road Cheverty Road
Albermarie Road and Landover
Road
Landover Road
Allegheny Avenue and Heritage Way Heritage Way
Allen Lane and Clementon Road Clementon Road
Allen Lane and Stonicker Drive Stonicker Drive
Altamawr Avenue and Northbrook
Avenue
Northbrook Avenue
Altamawr Avenue and Rubert
Avenue
Rubert Avenue
Ashleigh Drive and Registry Drive Ashleigh Drive N/S
Ashwood Court and Pheasant Drive Ashwood Court
Balsam Court and Balsam Drive Balsam Drive
Bayless Street and Millerick Avenue Bayless Street
Bellview Terrace and Vista Drive Bellview Terrace
Benedek Road and Vista Drive Vista Drive
Bergen Street and Cold Soil Road Bergen Street
Berwyn Place and Review Avenue Review Avenue
Birchwood Knoll and Berwyn Place Birchwood Knoll
Birchwood Knoll and Oaklyn Terrace Oaklyn Terrace
Birchwood Knoll and Wayside Lane Wayside Lane
Birchwood Knoll and Windwood
Drive
Windwood Drive
Bromley Court and Andrew Drive Bromley Court
Brookdale Drive and Laurel Wood
Drive
Brookdale Drive
Buckingham Drive and Chelsea
Court
Chelsea Court
Buckingham Drive and Dorchester
Drive
Dorchester Drive
§ 435-44 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-44
1:580
Stop Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Bunker Hill Avenue and Stevens
Avenue
Stevens Avenue
Bunker Hill Road and Eggerts
Crossing Road
Bunker Hill Road
Burning Tree Lane and Twin Oaks
Drive
Twin Oaks Drive
Cambridge Avenue and Bunker Hill
Avenue
Cambridge Avenue
Cambridge Avenue and President
Avenue
Cambridge Avenue
Canal View Drive and Marchesi
Drive
Marchesl Drive
Canal View Drive and Morrel Road Canal View Drive
Carr Avenue and Hopewell Avenue Hopewell Avenue
Colonial Lake Drive and Hopatcong
Drive
Colonial Lake Drive
Crabapple Lane and Pin Oak Drive Crabapple Lane
Craven Lane and George Street George Street
Cresthill Road and Temple Terrace Temple Terrace
Drift Avenue and Alcazar Avenue Drift Avenue
East Darrah Lane and Glenn Avenue Glenn Avenue
Edgehill Road and Green Avenue Edgehill Road
Edgehill Road and Titus Avenue Edgehill Road
Eldridge Avenue and Drift Avenue Drift Avenue
Eldridge Avenue and Johnson
Avenue
Eldridge Avenue
Eldridge Avenue and Rolfe Avenue Rolfe Avenue
Eldridge Avenue and Short Johnson
Avenue
Eldridge Avenue
Federal City Road and Coach Drive Coach Drive
Federal City Road and Denow Road Denow Road
Federal City Road and Surrey Drive Surrey Drive
Fieldboro Drive and Gainsboro Road Fieldboro Road
Fieldboro Drive and Gedney Road Fieldboro Road
Fieldboro Drive and Roxboro Road Fieldboro Road
Fieldsboro Drive and Bearfort Way Bearfort Way
§ 435-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-44
1:581
Stop Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Fountayne Lane and Fountayne
Boulevard
Fountayne Boulevard
Foxcroft Drive and Bannister Drive Foxcroft Drive
Foxcroft Drive and Princeton Pike Foxcroft Drive
Glenn Avenue and Allen Lane Allen Land
Graf Avenue and Hopewell Avenue Hopewell Avenue
Green Avenue and Titus Avenue Green Avenue
Greenfield Avenue and Northbrook
Avenue
Greenfield Avenue
Greenwood Avenue and Concord
Avenue
Greenwood Avenue
Greenwood Avenue and Grandview
Avenue
Grandview Avenue
Harmony Avenue and Hopewell
Avenue
Hopewell Avenue
Hawthorne Place and Cobblestone
Drive
Cobblestone Drive
Hendrickson Road and Willow Road Willow Road
Holly Lane and Ivy Glen Lane Ivy Glen Lane
Ivy Glen Drive and Holly Lane Ivy Glen Drive
Ivy Glen Lane and Woodbury Lane Woodbury Lane
Johnson Avenue and Albemarle
Road
Albemarle Road
Johnson Avenue and Eggerts
Crossing Road
Johnson Avenue
Johnson Road and Allegheny Avenue Allegheny Avenue
Johnson Road and Allegheny Avenue Allegheny Avenue
Johnson Road and Heritage Place Heritage Place
Keefe Road and Yeger Drive Yeger Drive
Lake Drive and Lake Drive
Jughandle
Lake Drive Jughandle
Lake Drive and Polk Avenue Polk Avenue
Lake Drive and Winchester Avenue Winchester Avenue
Lakedale Drive and Glenview Drive Glenview Drive
Lakedale Drive and Nathan Hale
Avenue
Nathan Hale Avenue
Lannigan Drive and Foch Avenue Foch Avenue
§ 435-44 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-44
1:582
Stop Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Larkspur Lane and Spring Beauty
Drive (both intersects)
Larkspur Lane
Lawn Park Avenue and Elmo Avenue Elmo Avenue
Lawrence Avenue and Rossa Avenue Lawrence Avenue
Lotus Lane and Empress Lane Lotus Lane
Lumar Road and Merritt Drive Lumar Road
Merline Avenue and Rolfe Avenue Rolfe Avenue
Mya Drive and Benedek Road Mya Drive
Nathan Hale Avenue-Lake Drive and
Cambridge Avenue-Lake Drive
Cambridge Avenue-Lake Drive
Oaklyn Terrace and Birchwood Knoll Oaklyn Terrace
Ohio Avenue and Pear Street Ohio Avenue
Orchard Avenue and Emden Avenue Emden Avenue
Overlook Way and Dix Lane Dix Lane (north and south terminus)
Pear Street and Indiana Avenue Indiana Avenue
Pear Street and Michigan Avenue Michigan Avenue
Phillips Avenue and George Street George Street
Poinsett Drive and Tamar Court Poinsett Drive
Port Mercer Road and Baker Street Baker Street
Port Mercer Road and Vacarro Road Vacarro Road
Princeton Pike and Pine Knoll Drive Pine Knoll Drive
Province Line Road and Carson
Road
Carson Road
Review Avenue and Bayless Street Bayless Street
Review Avenue and Fieldsboro Drive Fieldsboro Drive
Rosalind Road and Rosetree Lane Rosetree Lane
Rossa Avenue and Eldridge Avenue Eldridge Avenue
Rossa Avenue and Forrest Avenue Forrest Avenue
Rossa Avenue and Lawrence Avenue Lawrence Avenue
Royal Oak Road and Carnation Place Carnation Place
Royal Oak Road and Cresthill Road Cresthill Road
Royal Oak Road and Rita Road Rita Road
Rubert Avenue and Greenfield
Avenue
Rubert Avenue and Greenfield
Avenue
Slack Avenue and Hopewell Avenue Hopewell Avenue
§ 435-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-44
1:583
Stop Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Spring Beauty Drive and Brandon
Road
Spring Beauty Drive
Stevens Street and Bunker Hill
Avenue
Stevens Street
Stratford Drive and Province Line
Road
Stratford Drive
Sunset Road and Orchard Road Sunset Road
Surwood Way and Wexford Drive Wexford Drive
Temple Terrace and Cresthill Road Cresthill Road
Temple Terrace and Empress Lane Empress Lane
Temple Terrace and Tower Place Tower Place
Tomlyn Drive and Province Line
Road
Tomlyn Drive
Vacarro Road and Baker Street Baker Street
Valerie Lane and Nassau Drive Nassau Drive
Van Kirk Road and Anderson Lane Anderson Lane
Van Kirk Road and Tall Timbers Tall Timbers
Van Kirk Road and Tall Timbers
Drive
Tall Timbers Drive
Van Kirk Road and Toftrees Court Toftrees Court
W. Church Road and Garden Road Garden Road
Wexford Drive and Sturwood Way Wexford Drive
Whitemarsh Drive and Hillsdale
Road
Hillsdale Road
Whitemarsh Drive and Lawnside
Drive
Lawnside Drive
Willow Road and Hendrickson Road Hendrickson Road
Wiltshire Drive and Dickens Drive Dickens Drive
Woodberry Lane and Ivy Glenn
Drive
Woodberry Lane
Woodfield Lane and Branchwood
Court
Branchwood Court
Woodfield Lane and Roseberry
Court
Roseberry Court
Woodfield Lane and Woodlane Road Woodfield Lane
Woodline Road and Woodfield Lane Woodfield Lane
Yeger Drive and Nassau Drive Nassau Drive
§ 435-44 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-44
1:584
Stop Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Yorkshire Village Road and Canoe
Road
Yorkshire Village Road
Yorkshire Village Road and Cole
Lane
Yorkshire Village Road
Yorkshire Village Road and Nash
Court
Nash Court
Yorkshire Village Road and Richards
Road
Yorkshire Village Road
Zoar Avenue and Merline Avenue Merline Avenue
Zoar Street and Lawn Park Avenue Zoar Street
Zoar Street and Manitee Avenue Zoar Street
§ 435-45. Multi-way stop intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections herein
described are designated as multi-way stop intersections. "Stop" signs shall
be installed as provided herein.
Intersection Stop Sign(s) On
Bergen Street and Gordon Avenue
[Added 9-25-2018 by Ord. No.
2308-18]
Bergen Street and Gordon Avenue
§ 435-46. Yield intersections.
Pursuant to the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-140, the intersections described
are hereby designated as yield Intersections. Yield signs shall be installed
as provided therein.
Intersection Yield Sign(s) On
(Reserved)
§ 435-47. One-way streets. [Amended by Ord. No. 1540-98; Ord. No.
1630-00]
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated.
§ 435-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-47
1:585
Name of Street Direction Limits
The unnamed thoroughfare
circling the interior of the
Township Park adjoining
Oaklyn Terrace
Counterclockwise From the entrance to
the park from Oaklyn
Terrace around in a
circle to the exit from
the park upon the same
Oaklyn Terrace
Carr Avenue Southeasterly Between Princeton
Avenue and Hopewell
Avenue
Lake Drive Easterly Between U.S. Route 1
and Lake Drive
Jughandle
Landover Road South From Eggerts Crossing
Road to Albemarle
Road
Lawn Park Avenue Westerly Between Lawrenceville
Road and Elmo Avenue
Lawn Park Avenue Westerly Between Elmo Avenue
and Lawrenceville
Road
Lawn Park Avenue Westerly Between Lawrence
Road and Zoar Avenue
Merline Avenue Easterly Between Elmo Avenue
and Lawrence Road
Merline Avenue Easterly Between Elmo Avenue
and Lawrenceville
Road
Myrtle Avenue Westbound
North Driveway Municipal Square Westbound
South Driveway Municipal Square Eastbound
Stella Drive [Added
5-17-2011 by Ord. No.
2094-11]
Northerly From Gedney Road to
Gainsboro Road
Stokes Alley Westbound From Pear Street to
City of Trenton
§ 435-48. One-way streets between 6:00 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on
Sundays.
The following described streets or parts of streets are hereby designated as
one-way streets in the direction indicated between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
§ 435-47 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-48
1:586
and 1:00 p.m. on Sundays. Standard one-way signs shall be erected and
shall be removed or covered when not in effect.
Name of Street Direction Limits
Parking
Permitted
Forrest Avenue Eastbound Between 6:00
a.m. and 1:00
p.m. on Sundays
Entire Length
§ 435-49. Routes for trucks over five tons.
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:67-16.1, the streets or parts of streets as described
are hereby designated as routes for vehicles over five tons. All trucks having
a total combined registered gross vehicle weight (GVW) of vehicle plus load
in excess of five tons shall be excluded from all municipal streets, except
from those municipal streets listed, State Highways and County Roadways,
which form a part of the truck route system. Vehicles will be permitted on
all streets for the purpose of the pick-up and delivery of materials.
Name of Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 435-50. Vehicles over designated weight excluded from certain
streets.
Vehicles over the gross vehicle weight (GVW) are hereby excluded from the
streets or parts of streets described except for the pickup and delivery of
materials on such streets.
Name of Street Tons Location
Allen's Lane 5
Allwood Drive 5
Altamawr Avenue 5 Entire length
Alyce Court 5
Barnet Road 5
Brandon Road 5
Camelia Court 5
Carnation Place 5
Carson Road [Added
2-7-2017 by Ord. No.
2254-17]
4 Entire length
Cherry Tree Lane 5
§ 435-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-50
1:587
Name of Street Tons Location
Cold Soil Road [Added
5-3-2016 by Ord. No.
2235-16]
4 Entire length
Cresthill Road 5
Darrah Lane 5
Dogwood Drive 5
Drift Avenue 5 Eldridge Avenue to
Arcadia Avenue
East Darrah Lane 5
Empress Lane 5
Fackler Road [Added
10-6-2015 by Ord. No.
2219-15]
4 Entire length
Glenn Avenue 5
Graf Avenue 5
Jill Lane 5
Johnson Avenue 5 Eldridge Avenue to Drift
Avenue
Keefe Road [Added 5-3-2016
by Ord. No. 2235-16]
4 Entire length
Lannigan Avenue 5
Lotus Lane 5
Lumar Road 5
Lynn Place 5
Merline Avenue 5 Entire length
Merritt Drive 5
Monroe Avenue 5
Mulberry Street 5
Myrtle Avenue 5
Northbrook Avenue 5 Entire length
Ohio Avenue 5
Pear Street 5 Between U.S. Highway 1
and Ohio Avenue
Pilgrim Avenue 5 Between U.S. Highway 1
and New York Avenue
Pine Street 5
§ 435-50 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-50
1:588
Name of Street Tons Location
Princeton Pike 5 Entire length
Province Line Road 5 From Rosedale Road to
Princeton Pike
Province Line Road [Added
5-3-2016 by Ord. No.
2235-16]
4 North of U.S. Route 206
Puritan Avenue 5 Between U.S. Highway 1
and New York Avenue
Putnam Avenue 5
Ravona Place 5
Rita Road 5
Rolfe Avenue 5 Eldridge Avenue to
Arcadia Avenue
Rosalind Road 5
Rosetree Lane 5
Royal Oak Road 5
Spring Beauty Drive 5
Stonicker Drive 5
Temple Terrace 5
Texas Avenue 5 Between U.S. Highway 1
and Princeton Pike
Tower Place 5
Trumbull Avenue 5
Tulane Avenue 5 Entire length
Valley Forge Avenue 5
Vermont Street 5
Zoar Avenue 5 Entire length
§ 435-51. Turn prohibitions. [Amended by Ord. No. 1741-03]
No person shall turn at the below described location as indicated.
Intersection Turn Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Executive Plaza-
Private Driveway
Left turn Moving south from Executive Plazaeastbound
Franklin Corner
Road
Left turn Moving east to private driveway
known as Executive Plazanorthbound
§ 435-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-51
1:589
Intersection Turn Prohibited Movement Prohibited
Graf Avenue Left turn Graf Avenue to Whitehead Road
Hendrickson
Road
Left turn From Hendrickson Road southbound
onto Route 206 northbound between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. - Monday
through Friday
Lawrence Avenue Left turn Traffic westbound on Lawrence
Avenue to southbound Rossa Avenue
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
8:00 a.m. on school days
Lawrence Road
(U.S. 206) and
Princeton Pike
Right turn No person shall make a right-hand
turn at any time upon entering
Lawrence Road (U.S. 206) from
Princeton Turnpike while
proceeding southwesterly on
Princeton Turnpike
Monroe Avenue Left turn From Monroe Avenue eastbound
onto Route 206 northbound between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. - Monday
through Friday
Myrtle Avenue Left turn Traffic from Myrtle Avenue into
Princeton Avenue
Phillips Avenue Left turn Phillips Avenue onto U.S. Route 206
weekdays between 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. and 6:00
p.m.
U.S. Route 1 Left turn A. Traffic moving south on U.S.
Route 1 east on President
Avenue
B. Traffic moving south on U.S.
Route No. 1 to east on Bunker
Hill Avenue
C. Traffic moving south on U.S.
Route No. 1 to east on
Mayflower Avenue
§ 435-52. Right turn only.
No person shall make a turn at the below listed location other than a right
turning movement.
Intersection Movement Permitted
(Reserved)
§ 435-51 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-53
1:590
§ 435-53. No turn on red. [Amended by Ord. No. 1742-03]
No person shall make a right turn on the red signal at any location listed.
Intersection Movement Permitted
Princeton Pike and Darrah Lane All approaches between 7:30 a.m.
and 4:30 p.m. on school days
Princeton Pike and Gedney Road Southbound
Princeton Pike and Texas Avenue Northbound
§ 435-54. Mid-block crosswalks. [Amended by Ord. No. 1737-03;
Ord. No. 1744-03]
The following locations are hereby designated as mid-block crosswalks.
Name of Street Location
Blackwell Road [Added
10-26-2010 by Ord. No. 2065-10]
Approximately 750 feet west of the
intersection of Blackwell Road and
Cold Soil Road (adjacent to the Hunt
House entrance driveway)
Bunker Hill Road Beginning at a point 26 feet south of
the southerly curbline of Point
Boulevard to a point 10 feet
southerly therefrom
Bunker Hill Road Beginning at a point 480 feet north
of the northerly curbline of
Stewards Crossing Way to a point
10 feet northerly therefrom
Craven Lane [Added 9-20-2011 by
Ord. No. 2107-11]
At intersection of Johnson Trolley
Line North with Craven Lane
Eggert Crossing Road Beginning at a point 1,315 feet west
of the westerly curbline of Route
U.S. 206 (Lawrenceville Road) to a
point 10 feet westerly therefrom
Keefe Road [Added 7-6-2010 by
Ord. No. 2058-10]
Between Yeger Drive and Cold Soil
Road extending from Village Park to
Northwest County Park
Lawn Park Avenue Beginning at a point 720 feet west
of the westerly curbline of Route
U.S. 206 and extending to a point 10
feet westerly therefrom
Lewisville Road [Added 9-4-2012
by Ord. No. 2133-12]
Between Princeton Pike and
Franklin Corner Road extending
from Bristol Myers Squibb to the
Lawrenceville School
§ 435-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-54
1:591
Name of Street Location
Princeton Pike Beginning at a point 300 feet north
of the northerly curbline of Crest
Hill Road to a point 10 feet
northerly therefrom
Rossa Avenue Beginning from a point 154 feet
north of the northerly curbline of
Eldridge Avenue to a point 10 feet
north therefrom
§ 435-55. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described are designated as lane use reservations and
traffic shall move as indicated.
Intersection or Location Movement
(Reserved)
§ 435-56. Exclusive lane use.
The lane locations described are hereby designated as exclusive lanes for
use by certain vehicles as indicated.
Name of Street Type of Vehicle Direction Limits
(Reserved)
§ 435-57. Bicycle routes/lanes.
The lane locations described are hereby designated as bicycle lanes. Bicycle
lanes shall be a minimum of four feet in width, pursuant to the "Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways."
Name of Street Side Lane Width Limits
(Reserved)
§ 435-58. Speed limits. [Amended by Ord. No. 1338-93; Ord. No.
1465-96; Ord. No. 1666-01; Ord. No. 1674-01; Ord. No. 1683-02;
Ord. No. 1684-02; Ord. No. 1685-02; Ord. No. 1708-02; Ord. No.
1709-02; Ord. No. 1798-04; Ord. No. 1837-05; Ord. No. 1961-07]
A. The speed limits for both directions of traffic along the streets or parts
thereof described below and made a part of this chapter are hereby
established at the rate of speed indicated.
B. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect
the designated speed limits.
§ 435-54 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-58
1:592
Name of Street MPH Limits Approval Date
Bakers Basin Road 35 Entire length
Bunker Hill Road, both
directions
25 Entire length
Blackwell Road 40 Both directions
from the
westerly
Township
municipal
boundary to
Cold Soil Road
Carnegie Road and
Basin Road, both
directions
(1) Zone 1 - Carnegie
Road
30 From Route 1
(Brunswick
Avenue) to the
Assumpink
Creek
Township
boundary)
(2) Zone 2 - Basin Road 35 From the
Assumpink
Creek
(Township
boundary) to
Bakers Basin
Road
Carson Road 25 Between
Carter Road
and Province
Line Road
(entire length)
Cold Soil Road, both
directions
30 Between U.S.
Route 206 and
Woodland
Road
Cold Soil Road, both
directions
40 Between
Woodlane Road
and Carter
Road
Colonial Lake Park
North
25
Darrah Lane 25
§ 435-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-58
1:593
Name of Street MPH Limits Approval Date
Denow Road 35 Between
Federal City
Road and
Lawrenceville
Pennington
Road, both
directions
Eggerts Crossing Road,
both directions
[Amended 8-20-2019
by Ord. No. 2336-19]
35 Entire length
Fackler Road 40
Federal City Road, both
directions [Amended
8-20-2019 by Ord.
No. 2335-19]
35 Entire length
Keefe Road, both
directions
35 Entire length
Lawrence Station Road
(County Route 22 or
Lawrence Station Spur
from 3695 west of
Province Line Road to
Province Line Road)
and commonly called
Bakers Basin Road
40
Pennington Road, both
directions
35
Princeton Pike
(1) Zone 1 40 Between
Franklin
Corner Road
(County Route
546) and
Lewisville
Road
§ 435-58 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-58
1:594
Name of Street MPH Limits Approval Date
(2) Zone 2 45 Between
Lewisville
Road and the
Lawrence
Township
Corporate Line
- Princeton
Township
Corporate
Line, except
for 30 mph
when passing
through the
Chapin School
Zone while "30
mph When
Flashing" signs
are operating
during recess
when the
presence of
children is
clearly visible
from the
roadway or
while children
are going to or
leaving school
during opening
or closing
hours
Princess Road for both
directions of travel:
(1) Zone 1 35 Between
Princeton Pike
and Wiltshire
Drive
§ 435-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-58
1:595
§ 435-59. No-passing zones. [Amended by Ord. No. 1410-95; Ord.
No. 1468-96; Ord. No. 1474-96; Ord. No. 1890-06; Ord. No. 1985-08]
No-passing zones are hereby established and shall be maintained upon the
following described streets or parts thereof.
Location
Blackwell Road, Sketch No. NPZ-3193A, dated December 8, 1994:
Name of Street MPH Limits Approval Date
(2) Zone 2 25 Between
Wiltshire Drive
and Franklin
Corner Road
Certification:
Brenda
Kraemer, PE,
Lawrence
Engineer's
Certification
Seal and
License
Number
24GE03573800
as follows
Province Line Road
[Added 4-1-2014 by
Ord. No. 2176-14]
35 From
Delaware and
Raritan Canal
to U.S. Route
206
Province Line Road 40 From County
Road No. 533
at Port Mercer
to County Road
No. 4,
Rosedale Road
Van Kirk Road 30 Between
Carter Road
and Wildbriar
Lane
Van Kirk Road 35 Between
Wildbriar Lane
and Cold Soil
Road
A. Westbound traffic: From the edge of Cold Soil Road to the Township
Line, a distance of approximately 1,120 feet.
B. Eastbound traffic: From the Township line to the edge of Cold Soil
Road, a distance of approximately 1,120 feet.
§ 435-58 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-59
1:596
Carson Road, for the entire length, approximately 1.02 miles.
Cold Soil Road, from Route U.S. 206 to Carter Road in both directions.
Fackler Road:
A. Eastbound Traffic
(1) From the easterly curbline of U.S. Route 206 to 700 feet west
of the center of Teak Lane, a distance of approximately 2,830
feet
(2) From 330 feet east of the center of Teak Lane to the westerly
curbline of Princeton Pike, a distance of approximately 500
feet
B. Westbound Traffic
(1) From 100 feet east of the center of Teak Lane for the entire
length, approximately 0.76 miles
(2) Lewisville Road, for the entire length, approximately 1.14
miles
Princeton Pike
A. Northbound Traffic
(1) From the northerly curbline of U.S. Route 206 to 108 feet
south of the center of Carr Avenue, a distance of
approximately 708 feet
(2) From 400 feet south of the center of Darrah Lane to the
southerly curbline of Darrah Lane, a distance of
approximately 300 feet
(3) From 750 feet south of the center of the southerly
intersection of Pine Knoll Drive - Rita Drive to 350 feet south
of the center of the southerly intersection of Pine Knoll Drive
- Rita Drive, a distance of approximately 400 feet
(4) From 450 feet north of the center of the southerly
intersection of Pine Knoll Drive - Rita Drive to 370 feet
south of the center of the northerly intersection of Pine Knoll
Drive-Cresthill Road, a distance of approximately 400 feet
(5) From 260 feet south of the center of Franklin Corner Road
to the southerly curbline of Franklin Corner Road, a distance
of approximately 240 feet
(6) From 1,490 feet south of the center of Lewisville Road to 990
feet south of the center of Lewisville Road, a distance of 500
feet
(7) From 1,240 feet south of the center of Fackler Road to
the southerly curbline of Fackler Road, a distance of
approximately 1,220 feet
(8) From 510 feet south of the center of Province Line Road
to 520 feet north of the center of Province Line Road, a
distance of 1,030 feet
§ 435-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-59
1:597
§ 435-60. Bus stops.
The locations described are hereby designated as bus stops. No vehicle
other than an omnibus picking up or discharging passengers shall be
permitted to occupy the location between the hours indicated.
Street Hours
(Reserved)
§ 435-61. Articulated bus stops.
B. Southbound Traffic
(1) From 220 feet south of the center of culvert no. 533-3 to 290
feet north of the center of Province Line Road, a distance of
approximately 1,460 feet
(2) From 70 feet north of the center of Fackler Road to 440 feet
south of the center of Fackler Road, a distance of 510 feet
(3) From 160 feet south of the center of Lewisville Road to 660
feet south of the center of Lewisville Road, a distance of 500
feet
(4) From 400 feet north of center of the northerly intersection
of Pine Knoll Drive - Cresthill Road to the northerly curbline
of the northerly intersection of Pine Knoll Drive - Cresthill
Road, a distance of approximately 380 feet
(5) From 320 feet north of the center of the southerly
intersection of Pine Knoll Drive - Rita Drive to 80 feet south
of the center of the southerly intersection of Pine Knoll Drive
- Rita Drive, a distance of 400 feet
(6) From 600 feet north of the center of Darrah Lane to the northerly
curbline of Darrah Lane, a distance of approximately 580 feet
(7) From 500 feet north of the center of Carr Avenue to 100 feet north
of the center of Carr Avenue, a distance of 400 feet
(8) From 420 feet north of the center of U.S. Route 206 to 160 feet
north of the center of U.S. Route 206, a distance of 260 feet
Province Line Road, from the D & R Canal Bridge to Hopewell
Township line, approximately 4.05 miles
Van Kirk Road, for the entire length, approximately 1.30 miles
A. The locations described are hereby designated as articulated bus stops.
No vehicle other than an omnibus, picking up discharging passengers,
shall be permitted to occupy said location between the hours indicated.
Name of Street Hours
(Reserved)
§ 435-59 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-61
1:598
§ 435-62. Loading zones.
The locations described are hereby designated as loading zones. No person
shall park a vehicle in the location during the times indicated other than for
the loading or unloading of goods and materials.
Name of Street Time Side(s) Location
(Reserved)
§ 435-63. Taxi stands.
The locations described are hereby designated as taxi stands. No vehicle
other than a taxi shall be permitted to occupy these locations during the
times indicated.
Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 435-64. Two-way center left turn lane established. [Amended by
Ord. No. 1961-07]
A two-way center left turn lane shall be established along Princeton Pike
between Franklin Corner Road and Princeton Road.
B. Minimum distances:
(1) Near side: 155 feet
(2) Far side: 140 feet.
(3) Mid-block: 170 feet.
§ 435-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-64
1:599

ARTICLE V
Handicapped Parking
§ 435-65. Handicapped parking on streets.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following street
locations are designated as handicapped parking spaces. Such spaces are
for use by persons who have been issued special identification cards or
plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard
issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in
these places.
Street Location
(Reserved)
§ 435-66. Handicapped parking on streets for private residences.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1395-94; Ord. No. 1965-08; Ord. No. 1993-08;
Ord. No. 2018-09; 8-11-2009 by Ord. No. 2026-09; 12-15-2009 by
Ord. No. 2038-09; 1-20-2010 by Ord. No. 2042-10; 9-21-2010 by
Ord. No. 2063-10; 10-5-2010 by Ord. No. 2064-10; 11-9-2010 by
Ord. No. 2068-10; 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 2099-11; 4-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 2178-14; 12-2-2014 by Ord. No. 2202-14; 4-19-2016 by
Ord. No. 2233-16; 12-6-2016 by Ord. No. 2249-16; 4-18-2017 by
Ord. No. 2260-17; 10-17-2017 by Ord. No. 2278-17]
Restricted parking spaces shall be established as set forth below and only
those persons who are handicapped and who possess a special vehicle
identification shall park in such designated parking space. Such designated
parking spaces and applicable signs shall conform to the current standards
prescribed by the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) as
determined by the Municipal Engineer.
Street Location
1117 Brunswick Avenue 90 feet northbound from the
prolongated curbline of Brunswick
Avenue and Pine Street (north/west
corner) for a distance of 22 feet in front
of 1117 Brunswick Avenue
1279 Brunswick Avenue 70 feet westbound from the prolongated
curbline of Brunswick Avenue and
Lanning Avenue (south/east corner) for
a distance of 22 feet on the side of 1279
Brunswick Avenue
§ 435-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-66
1:601
Street Location
1894 Brunswick Pike 64 feet eastbound from the prolongated
curbline of Brunswick Pike and Valley
Forge Avenue (south/east corner) for a
distance of 22 feet on Valley Forge
Avenue on the south side of 1894
Brunswick Pike
81 Fairfield Avenue 340 feet eastbound from the
prolongated curbline of Rt. 206
(Lawrence Road) and Fairfield Avenue
(south/east corner) for a distance of 22
feet in front of 81 Fairfield Avenue
49 Greenfield Avenue [Added
9-17-2019 by Ord. No.
2339-19]
56 feet southbound from the
prolongated curbline of Greenfield
Avenue and Rupert Street (south/west
corner) for a distance of 22 feet on the
side of 49 Greenfield Avenue
933 Lanning Avenue 570 feet eastbound from the
prolongated curbline of Lanning Avenue
and Princeton Avenue for a distance of
22 feet in front of 933 Lanning Avenue
944 Lanning Avenue 518 feet westbound from the
prolongated curbline of Brunswick
Avenue and Lanning Avenue (north/west
corner) for a distance of 22 feet, in front
of 944 Lanning Avenue
950 Lanning Avenue 548 feet westbound from the
prolongated curbline of Brunswick
Avenue and Lanning Avenue (north/west
corner) for a distance of 22 feet in front
of 950 Lanning Avenue
961 Lanning Avenue [Added
11-8-2019 by Ord. No.
2344-19]
268 feet eastbound from the
prolongated curbline of Princeton
Avenue and Lanning Avenue (south/east
corner) for a distance of 22 feet in front
of 961 Lanning Avenue
139 Michigan Avenue [Added
4-2-2019 by Ord. No.
2324-19]
37 feet southbound from the
prolongated curbline of Pear Street and
Michigan Avenue for a distance of 22
feet in front of 139 Michigan Avenue
51 Myrtle Avenue 324 feet eastbound from the
prolongated curbline of Princeton
Avenue and Myrtle Avenue (south/east
corner) for a distance of 22 feet in front
of 51 Myrtle Avenue
§ 435-66 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-66
1:602
Street Location
55 Myrtle Avenue 285 feet eastbound from the
prolongated curbline of Princeton
Avenue and Myrtle Avenue (south/east
corner) for a distance of 22 feet in front
of 55 Myrtle Avenue
57 Myrtle Avenue 263 feet eastbound from the
prolongated curbline of Princeton
Avenue and Myrtle Avenue (south/east
corner) for a distance of 22 feet, in front
of 57 Myrtle Avenue
766 Pear Street 138 feet eastbound from the
prolongated curbline of Brunswick Pike
and Pear Street (north/east corner) for a
distance of 22 feet in front of 766 Pear
Street
2099 Princeton Pike 155 feet southbound from the
prolongated curbline of the driveway
belonging to West Gate apartments
(south/west corner) on Princeton Pike
for a distance of 22 feet in front of 2099
Princeton Pike
Puritan Avenue and Brunswick
Pike
54 feet eastbound from the prolongated
curbline of Puritan Avenue and
Brunswick Pike, for a distance of 22 feet
716 Puritan Avenue 204 feet westbound from the
prolongated curbline of Ohio Avenue
and Puritan Avenue (north/west corner)
for a distance of 22 feet in front of 716
Puritan Avenue
115 Slack Avenue 180 feet westbound from the
prolongated curbline of Hopewell
Avenue and Slack Avenue (south/west
corner) for a distance of 22 feet in front
of 115 Slack Avenue
135 Slack Avenue 335 feet eastbound from the
prolongated curbline of Slack Avenue
and Princeton Pike (south/east corner)
for a distance of 22 feet in front of 135
Slack Avenue
143 Slack Avenue 141 feet eastbound from the
prolongated curbline of Slack Avenue
and Princeton Pike (south/east corner)
for a distance of 22 feet, in front of 143
Slack Avenue
§ 435-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-66
1:603
Street Location
14 Titus Avenue 370 feet westbound from the
prolongated curbline of Lawrence Road
and Titus Avenue (north/west corner)
for a distance of 22 feet in front of 14
Titus Avenue
§ 435-67. Handicapped parking in municipal parking lots and
Board of Education property.
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following offstreet
parking yards and Board of Education property are designated as
handicapped parking areas. Such spaces are for use by persons who have
been issued special identification cards, plates or placards issued by the
Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of
Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 435-68. Handicapped parking on private property open to the
public and to which the public is invited (retail business).
A. In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following
off-street parking spaces are designated as handicapped parking areas.
Such spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special
identification cards, plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle
Commission, or a temporary placard issued by the Chief of Police. No
other person shall be permitted to park in these spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
B. In any space on public or private property appropriately marked for
vehicles for the physically handicapped pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-197.5,
N.J.S.A. 52:27D-119 et seq., or any other applicable law unless the
vehicle is authorized by law to be parked therein and a handicapped
person is either the driver or a passenger in that vehicle. State, county,
or municipal law enforcement officers or parking enforcement officers
shall enforce the parking restrictions on spaces appropriately marked
for vehicles for the physically handicapped on both public and private
property.
C. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control onto any
such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
§ 435-66 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-69
1:604
§ 435-69. Handicapped parking on all other private property.
[Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the following offstreet
parking locations are designated as handicapped parking. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 435-70. Handicapped parking on municipal parks. [Added at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, the following offstreet
parking locations are designated as handicapped parking. Such
spaces are for use by persons who have been issued special identification
cards, plates or placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary
placard issued by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 435-71. Handicapped parking on postal properties. [Added at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I)]
In accordance with 40 U.S.C. 318B and a written request from the
Postmaster, the off-street locations are hereby designated as handicapped
parking, pursuant to P.L. 1989 c. 201(1) eff. 6-1-1990. Such spaces are for
use by persons who have been issued special identification cards, plates or
placards by the Motor Vehicle Commission, or a temporary placard issued
by the Chief of Police. No other person shall be permitted to park in these
spaces.
Property No. of Spaces Location
(Reserved)
§ 435-72. Signs, pavement, markings, installation and maintenance.
[Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
The owners of the premises referred to in §§ 435-67, 435-68 and 435-71
shall provide and install signs and pavement markings for each parking
space reserved for the use of handicapped persons, which signs and
markings shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
§ 435-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-72
1:605
Devices. The cost of procurement and installation of the signs and pavement
markings shall be the responsibility of the owner of said property. The
owner shall, subsequent to initial procurement and installation, maintain
such signs and pavement markings in good condition at no cost or expense
to the Township of Lawrence. The owner shall be responsible for the repair
and restoration or replacement of same.
§ 435-72 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-72
1:606
ARTICLE VI
Traffic and Parking on Public and Private Property
§ 435-73. Regulation for the movement and the parking of traffic on
municipal property and Board of Education property.
In accordance with the provisions N.J.S.A. 39:4-197, the following Municipal
and Board of Education Property shall have the movement of traffic
controlled by the type of regulation indicated. No person shall operate, or
park a vehicle in violation of the regulations indicated.
A. Lawrence Township Municipal Building.
(1) Applicability of Subtitle 1 of Title 39. The Township of Lawrence
has filed a written request that the provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title
39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be made applicable to the
semipublic roads and parking lots of their Municipal Building in the
Township of Lawrence, County of Mercer, and the following
regulations shall be enforceable.
(2) No parking. No person shall park a vehicle except where stalls are
provided.
(3) Handicapped parking. The handicapped parking regulations are
only those that are shown on the site plan. (The site plan referred to
herein may be found on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk
attached to Ord. No. 1211-90.)
(4) Reserved parking. The parking lot has reserved parking for various
type vehicles which must be properly identified as per site plan.
(The site plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of
the Municipal Clerk attached to Ord. No. 1211-90.)
(5) Speed limits. The speed limit for travel of traffic along all roadways
and parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour. Regulatory and warning
signs shall be erected and maintained to effect the above
designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
(6) Lane use.
(a) Traffic shall move only as indicated below:
[1] Municipal Drive south from East Drive to Route 206.
[a] The right lane shall be for right turns only.
[b] The left lane shall be for left turns only.
(7) One-way streets. The following described street or parts of streets
are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated.
§ 435-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-73
1:607
Name of Street Direction Location
East Drive Southbound From Municipal Drive
North to Municipal Drive
South
Municipal Drive North Westbound From Route 206 to East
Drive
Municipal Drive South Eastbound From East Drive to
Route 206
(8) Stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated stop intersections:
Intersection Stop On
East Drive and Municipal Drive
South
East Drive
Municipal Drive South and
Route 206
Municipal Drive South
(9) Restricted parking. No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon
any of the following described streets or parts of streets.
Name of Street Side Location
East Drive East side Entire length
Municipal Drive North Both sides From Route 206 to
North Parking Lot
Municipal Drive South Both sides From Route 206 to
South Parking Lot
North Parking Lot Along east
curb
Entire length
West Drive Both sides Entire length
(10) Other traffic regulations. All other traffic regulations are those
shown on the attached site plan (The site plan referred to herein
may be found on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk attached to
Ord. No. 1211-90.) and are a part of this section.
(11) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P
("Reserved Parking" sign and penalty plate), in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped
parking permit by the Motor Vehicle Commission.
B. Lawrenceville Fire House. [Added 10-16-2018 by Ord. No. 2312-18]
§ 435-73 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-73
1:608
§ 435-74. Regulation for the movement and the parking of traffic on
private property open to the public and to which the public is
invited (retail business).
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 40:48-2.46, the following
private property that is open to the public and to which the public is invited,
the movement of traffic shall be controlled by the regulations listed herein.
No person shall operate or park a vehicle in violation of the following
regulations.
(1) Parking at Lawrenceville Fire House is restricted to authorized Fire
House personnel, visitors, guests and individuals with direct
business at the Fire House.
(2) Through traffic between Gordon Avenue and Phillips Avenue is
prohibited.
C. Board of Education senior high school.
(1) One-way drive. Main entrance drive, from its intersection with
main parking lot at the southwest to its intersection with Princeton
Pike at the northeast. [Amended by Ord. No. 1434-95]
(2) Parking — one-way drives. No person shall park a vehicle at any
time upon the drive described in Subsection C(1) above.
(3) Use of Berwyn Place gate. No motor vehicles with the exception of
emergency, Board of Education and school omnibus registered
vehicles may enter or exit the senior high school by the Berwyn
Place roadway gate. [Amended by Ord. No. 1435-95]
(4) Use of permit decal. Only vehicles displaying a parking permit
decal issued by the Board of Education of the Township may park in
the designated parking area adjacent to the drive described in
Subsection B, opposite the main entrance to the senior high school.
(5) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the attached site plan and signed with the R7-8 and R7-8P
("Reserved Parking" sign and penalty plate), in the designated
parking areas for persons who have been issued the Handicapped
Parking Permit by the Motor Vehicle Commission.
D. Senior citizen property. [Amended by Ord. No. 1566-99; Ord. No.
1842-05]
(1) Senior citizen drive — one-way drive. The following drive is
designated one-way as indicated: Senior Citizen Drive
(westernmost drive), one-way south.
A. Quaker Bridge Mall.
(1) Perimeter roadway designated through street; "Stop" signs. The
perimeter roadway encircling the entire retail shopping center
§ 435-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-74
1:609
known as "Quaker Bridge Mall" is hereby designated as a through
street, and "Stop" signs shall be installed on the near right side
of each street or designated traffic lane intersecting said through
street.
(2) Yield intersection designated. The south entrance roadway to the
retail shopping center known as "Quaker Bridge Mall" from U.S.
Highway No. 1 for right turn traffic, traffic entering the perimeter
roadway, is hereby designated as a yield intersection, and a "Yield
Right of Way" sign shall be installed as provided by N.J.S.A.
39:4-140.
(3) Parking prohibited at any time. No person shall park a vehicle at
any time upon any roadway or designated traffic lane or along any
building within the retail shopping center known as "Quaker Bridge
Mall," nor at any other location therein except within the stalls
provided for parking and within the painted lines marked on the
pavement for such purpose.
(4) Parking prohibited at any time, except by vehicles bearing special
identification of handicapped persons. No person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any location identified as a restricted
parking space for such use only by handicapped persons within the
Quaker Bridge Mall retail shopping area unless such vehicle shall
have clearly displayed a special handicapped person vehicle
identification card issued by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle
Commission pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-206, or an equivalent
identification card or plate issued by the State of registration of the
vehicle if other than New Jersey.
(5) Identification of restricted parking locations for use only by
handicapped persons. For purposes of this section, each parking
space designated as restricted for such use only be handicapped
persons shall be a minimum of 22 feet in length and a minimum of
12 feet in width and shall be identified by the posting of a sign
entitled "Reserved Parking" bearing the standard handicapped
person symbol prescribed by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle
Commission in accordance with the current "Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways" approved by the
New Jersey Department of Transportation, which sign shall further
be separately posted at or near the curb or front line of each such
restricted parking location in the manner prescribed by law, and
three copies of a facsimile of which are on file in the office of the
Lawrence Municipal Clerk and incorporated herein by reference,
as the same shall be amended from time to time according to law.
(6) Designation of restricted parking locations for use only by
handicapped persons. designation of parking locations restricted
for use only by handicapped persons shall be as requested by the
owner or possessor of the quaker bridge mail retail shopping area
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-138(o), more particularly identified on the
§ 435-74 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-74
1:610
plot map entitled "Quaker Bridge Mall Retail Shopping Area -
Designation of Handicapped Parking Spaces - June 1981," three
copies of which are on file in the office of the Lawrence Municipal
Clerk, and incorporated herein by reference, as the same shall be
amended according to law.
(7) Stop intersections designated.
(a) The following streets or traffic lanes are hereby designated as
stop intersections, said streets being as indicated on "Quaker
Bridge Mall; Plot Plan Phase II," dated February 28, 1977,
which plan is incorporated herein by reference, and "Stop"
signs shall be posted thereon as provided by law, as follows:
Location
Road A and Road B: A "Stop" sign shall be installed on Road
B
Road C and Road D: A "Stop" sign shall be installed on Road
C
Road E and Road R: A "Stop" sign shall be installed on Road
F
Road G and Road H: A "Stop" sign shall be installed on Road
H
Road I and Road J: A "Stop" sign shall be installed on Road J
(b) The owners of the premises referred to in this section shall
provide and install signs and pavement markings as required,
which signage and markings shall be in accordance with the
current "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets
and Highways" (MUTCD). The cost of signs and installations
shall be the responsibility of the owner of said property. The
owner shall, subsequent to the initial procurement and
installation, maintain such signs and pavement markings in
good condition at no cost or expense to the Township of
Lawrence.
(c) The penalty for a violation and conviction of this section shall
be not less than _____ dollars ($_____) nor more than __________
($__________.) and/or imprisonment in the County Jail for a term
not to exceed _____ () days, or by a period of community service
not to exceed _____ () days.
B. Mercer Mall.
(1) Applicability of Subtitle 1 of Title 39. The owners of Mercer Mall
have filed a written consent with the Township that the provisions
of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be
made applicable to the semipublic roads and parking lots in the
§ 435-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-74
1:611
Township of Lawrence, and the following regulations shall be
enforceable.
(2) Parking in stalls only. No person shall park a vehicle except where
stalls are provided.
(3) Stopping and standing prohibited. No person shall stop or stand a
vehicle any time upon any of the following described roadways or
parts of roadways.
Name of Street Side Location
Courtney Drive Both sides Entire length
Lake Drive Both sides Entire length
Mall Drive Both sides Entire length
North Drive Both sides Entire length
South Drive Both sides Entire length
Theatre Drive Both sides Entire length
(4) Handicapped parking. The following locations are hereby
designated as parking spaces for handicapped as per site plan:
Location Number of Spaces
Parking Lot B 2
Parking Lot C 4
Parking Lot D 8
Parking Lot E 2
Parking Lot F 2
Parking Lot H 2
Parking Lot J 3
Front of Building 12 2
Front of Building 14 2
North side of Building 11 3
North Lot of Building 15 2
(5) Through streets. The following described roadways or parts of
roadways are hereby designated as through streets and all
intersecting roadways shall be stop intersections:
Location
Mall Drive: from Province Line Road to northeast corner of
Building 7 as per site plan
North Drive: from U.S. 1 to Mall Drive
§ 435-74 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-74
1:612
Location
South Drive: from U.S. 1 to Mall Drive
(6) Stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections:
Intersection Stop On
Building 12 Exit onto Theatre Drive Building 12 Exit
Building 14 Exit onto Theatre Drive Building 14 Exit
Courtney Drive and Lake Drive Courtney Drive
Courtney Drive and South Drive Courtney Drive
Exit southwest corner Building 15
onto Courtney Drive
Exit from Building 15
Lake Drive and North Drive Lake Drive
Lake Drive and South Drive Lake Drive
Lot G Exit onto South Drive Lot G Exit
Lot I Exit onto Theatre Drive Lot I Exit
Mall Drive and east end of Lot F Mall Drive
Mall Drive and Province Line Road Mall Drive
North Drive and Mall Drive North Drive
North Drive and U.S. 1 North Drive
South Drive and Mall Drive South Drive
South Drive and U.S. 1 South Drive
Theatre Drive and Mall Drive Theatre Drive
Theatre Drive and North Drive Theatre Drive
Theatre Drive and Province Line
Road
Theatre Drive
Theatre Drive and South Drive Theatre Drive
(7) Pedestrian crosswalks designated. The following locations are
hereby designated as crosswalks:
Location
Mall Drive: from west curbline in front of Building 2 to
Pedestrian Walkway, as per site plan
Theatre Drive: from east curbline in front of Building 10 to
Pedestrian Walkway, as per site plan
(8) Loading zone. Rear of building, from Building 1 to Building 7 as per
site plan. All truck deliveries shall be to rear of Mercer Mall.
§ 435-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-74
1:613
(9) Bus stops. The following described location is hereby designated as
a bus stop:
Location
Mall Drive: southbound in front of the northeast portion of the KMart
Store
(10)Weight limitations; trucks over four tons. Trucks over four tons
registered gross weight are hereby excluded from the main parking
area, except for pickup and delivery of materials in area.
(11) Tow-away zone. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrance or exit way, loading
zones, fire hydrants, upon any grass area, pedestrian walk-way, or
present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may be removed by
towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
(12) Speed limits. The speed limit for both directions of traffic along all
roadways and parking lots shall be 15 miles per hour, except 25
miles per hour from Lake Drive to U.S. 1 on North Drive and South
Drive. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the above designated speed limits authorized
by the Department of Transportation.
(13) Effect of regulations.
(a) If any part of this regulation is for any reason held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion of the regulation.
(b) All signs shall be erected and maintained by property owner.
C. Mercer Mall Annex.
(1) Applicability of Subtitle 1 of Title 39. The owners of Mercer Mall
Annex have filed a written consent with the Township that the
provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic roads and parking lots
in the Township of Lawrence, County of Mercer, and the following
regulations shall be enforceable.
(2) Parking in stalls only. No person shall park a vehicle except where
stalls are provided.
(3) Handicapped parking. The handicapped parking regulations are
only those that are shown on the site plan.
(4) Stop intersections. The following intersections are hereby
designated as stop intersections:
§ 435-74 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-74
1:614
Intersection Stop On
Exits from the Mercer Mall
Annex onto Courtney Drive
Exit from Mercer Mall Annex
Exit from Mercer Mall Annex
onto U.S. No. 1
Exit from Mercer Mall Annex
(5) Speed limits. The speed limit for both directions of traffic along all
roadways and parking lots shall be 10 miles per hour. Regulatory
and warning signs shall be erected and maintained to effect the
above-designated speed limits authorized by the Department of
Transportation.
(6) Effect of regulations.
(a) If any part of this regulation is for any reason held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion of the regulation.
(b) All signs shall be erected and maintained by property owner.
D. Lawrence Shopping Center.
(1) Applicability of Subtitle 1 of Title 39. The owners of the Lawrence
Shopping Center have filed a written consent with the Township
that the provisions of Subtitle 1 of Title 39 of the Revised Statutes
of New Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic roads and
areas in the Lawrence Shopping Center, in the Township of
Lawrence, County of Mercer, and the following regulations shall be
enforceable.
(2) No-parking zone. No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon
any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Dunham's Lane East Both Entire length
Dunham's Lane West Both Entire length
Main Road Both Entire length
Shopping Center Drive Both Entire length
Truck Lane Both Entire length
(3) Parking in lot in painted stall lines. All persons parking in the
shopping center lot shall park within the painted stall lines.
(4) One-way street. The following described streets or parts of streets
are hereby designated as one-way streets in the direction
indicated:
§ 435-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-74
1:615
Name of Street Direction Limits
Dunham's Lane East Eastbound From Shopping Center
Drive to Main Road
Dunham's Lane West Westbound From Main Road to
Shopping Center Drive
(5) Stop intersections. The following described intersections are
hereby designated stop intersections:
Intersection Stop Sign On
Dunham's Lane West and
Shopping Center Drive
Dunham's Lane West
Dunham's Lane East and Main
Road
Dunham's Lane East
Shopping Center Drive and
Main Road
Southeast corner of the Acme
on Shopping Center Drive
facing southbound traffic
Traffic lane along west side of H & R Block shall stop for
Shopping Center Drive
(6) Yield intersections.
Intersection Yield Sign On
Main Road and Shopping
Center Drive
Main Road
Shopping Center Drive corner
between Dunham's and the Eric
Theatre
Traffic shall yield to Shopping
Center Drive. A "Yield" sign
should face towards southbound
traffic from Truck Lane.
Truck Lane and Shopping
Center Drive
Truck Lane
(7) Pedestrian crosswalks designated. The following location is hereby
designated as a crosswalk:
Location
From Spa entrance across entire parking lot in a north-westerly
direction to entrance of store known as Norman's. (This raised
portion of parking lot should be painted with white edge lines
and "Pedestrian Walk" legend be painted on same.) The pedestrian
crossing symbol, W11A-2, should be installed on Main Road and
Shopping Center Drive facing each motorist approaching in each
direction.
(8) Loading zone. The following described location is hereby
designated as a loading zone:
§ 435-74 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-74
1:616
Location
Entire perimeter, back of buildings between Dunham's and Acme.
(9) Bus stops. The following described locations are hereby designated
as bus stops:
Location
Main Road
Westbound, north side, in front of CVS Pharmacy.
Westbound, north side, in front of Stacy Shops.
(10) Handicap parking spaces.
(a) Locations. The following locations are hereby designated as
restricted parking spaces for use by persons who have been
issued special identification cards by the New Jersey Motor
Vehicle Commission. No other person shall be permitted to
park in these spaces.
[1] H.R. Block/Spa parking area. First two spaces west end of
H.R. Block/Spa building.
[2] Main parking area:
[a] Two spaces, north end of parking area adjacent to
Allied Vision store.
[b] Two spaces, north end of parking area adjacent to
Channel store.
[c] Two spaces, north end of parking area adjacent to
Young Ages store.
[d] Two spaces, north end of parking area adjacent to the
Sam Goody Stereo store.
[e] Two spaces, north end of parking area adjacent to the
Acme store exit.
[f] Two spaces, south end of parking area in front of Spa.
[3] Restaurant area (Parfait House). Two spaces, south end of
parking area in front of restaurant.
[4] Video store parking area (American Home Theatre). Two
spaces, north end of parking area on east side of video
store.
[5] Bank parking area. One space, southeasterly side of
parking area in front of bank.
§ 435-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-74
1:617
[6] Furniture store parking area (Park Lane). Two spaces,
northeasterly side of parking area in front of Park Lane
furniture store.
[7] Theatre parking area. Two spaces, easterly end of parking
area on southerly side of movie theatre.
(b) Parking prohibited any time, except by vehicles bearing special
identification for handicapped persons. No person shall park a
vehicle at any time upon any location identified as a restricted
parking space for such use only by handicapped persons within
the Lawrence Shopping Center, unless such vehicle shall have
clearly displayed a special handicapped person vehicle
identification card, issued by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle
Commission pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-206, or an equivalent
identification card or plate issued by the state of registration of
the vehicle if other than New Jersey.
(c) Identification of restricted parking locations for use by
handicapped persons. For purposes of this section, each
parking space designated as restricted for such use only by
handicapped persons shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width
and shall be identified by the posting of a sign entitled
"Reserved Parking" bearing the standard handicapped person
symbol prescribed by the New Jersey Division of Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways approved by the
New Jersey Department of Transportation, which sign shall
further be separately posted at or near the curb in front of each
such restricted parking location in the manner prescribed by
law, and three copies of the facsimile of which are on file in the
office of the Lawrence Municipal Clerk incorporated herein by
reference, as the same shall be amended from time to time
according to law.
(d) Designation of restricted parking locations for use only by
handicapped persons. Designation of parking locations
restricted for use only by handicapped persons shall be as
requested by the owner or possessor of the Lawrence
Shopping Center, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 39:4-138(o), more
particularly identified on the plot map entitled "Lawrence
Shopping Center Traffic Regulations," three copies of which
are on file in the office of the Lawrence Municipal Clerk, and
incorporated herein by reference, as the same shall be
amended from time to time according to law.
(11)Weight limitations; trucks over four tons. Trucks over four tons
gross weight are hereby excluded from the main parking area of
the shopping area, except for the pickup and delivery of materials
in area. (The no-truck symbol, R5-2, size 24 inches by 24 inches
with an "over four tons" plate under, should be installed at both
entrances on Route 1 and on the right side of southbound lane of
§ 435-74 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-74
1:618
§ 435-75. Regulation for the movement and the parking of traffic on
all other private property. [Amended by Ord. No. 1436-95;
8-16-2016 by Ord. No. 2243-16]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1, the regulations of
Subtitle 1, Title 39, of the Revised Statutes are hereby made applicable to
the properties listed below.
Shopping Center Drive, approximately four feet south of Truck
Lane intersection, facing southbound traffic and on Shopping
Center Drive at rear of Dunham's store, across from Cinema facing
eastbound traffic.)
(12) Tow-away zone.
(a) Any vehicle parking or standing as to obstruct or impede a
normal flow of traffic, block entrance or exit way, loading
zones, fire hydrants, upon any grass area, pedestrian walkway
or present in any way a safety or traffic hazard, may be
removed by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's
expense.
(b) Warning signs to be erected and maintained at all entrances to
the shopping center's property.
(13) Signs. Traffic-regulating signs, provided by the owner or possessor
of the Lawrence Shopping Center, must conform with the current
"Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highway" approved by the New Jersey Department of
Transportation. Placement of signs shall conform with a plot plan
entitled "Lawrence Shopping Center Traffic Regulations," three
copies of which are on file in the office of the Lawrence Municipal
Clerk, and incorporated herein by reference, as the same shall be
amended according to law.
(14) Speed limits. That speed limits for both directions of traffic along
the roadways and parking area lanes shall be 15 miles per hour.
Speed limit from Princeton Pike to west side of Dunham's on
Shopping Center Drive in both directions of travel shall be 25 miles
per hour. Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the above designated speed limits as
authorized by the Department of Transportation.
A. Lawrence Square Village I.
(1) Applicability of Subtitle 1 of Title 39. Lawrence Square Village I has
filed a written consent with the Township of Lawrence that the
provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39 of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets,
driveways, and parking lots at Lawrence Square Village I located in
the Township of Lawrence, County of Mercer and the following
regulations shall be enforceable.
§ 435-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-75
1:619
(2) Parking in designated areas. All vehicles must park only in
designated areas between the lines provided.
(3) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the attached site plan (The site plan referred to herein may be
found on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk attached to Ord.
No. 1223-90.) and signed with R7-8 ("Reserved Parking" sign and
penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who
have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the New
Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission.
(4) Through streets.
(a) The following described roadways or parts of roadways are
hereby designated as through streets, and all intersecting
roadways shall be stop intersections:
[1] Lawrence Square Boulevard - North: From Quakerbridge
Road to Lawrence Square Boulevard, where it shall be a
stop/yield intersection as indicated on site plan. (The site
plan referred to herein may be found on file in the office of
the Municipal Clerk attached to Ord. No. 1223-90.)
[2] Lawrence Square Boulevard. From the property line as
indicated on site plan in area of Building No. 67, to
property line of Lawrence Square Village II, to property
line of Lawrence Square Village II as indicated on site
plan, in area of Building No. 48. (The site plan referred to
herein may be found on file in the office of the Municipal
Clerk attached to Ord. No. 1223-90.)
(5) Restricted parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the following described roadways or parts of roadways:
Name of Street Side Location
Lawrence Square
Boulevard
Both Entire length
Lawrence Square
Boulevard - North
Both Entire length
(6) Speed limits.
(a) The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 miles per hour.
(b) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
roads are:
§ 435-75 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-75
1:620
Road MPH Limits
Lawrence Square
Boulevard
25 Entire length
Lawrence Square
Boulevard North
25 Entire length
(c) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
(7) Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede
a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones,
oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a
safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at
the owner's or operator's expense.
(8) Installation of signs responsibility of applicant. That all signs,
posts, bolts, or other necessary materials be installed and paid for
by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the Police Department
to insure installations meet state and federal specifications, and all
signing shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
(9) Penalty. Unless other penalty is expressly provided by New Jersey
Statute, every person convicted of a violation of this section or any
supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more than
$200 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or both.
(10) Effect of regulations.
(a) If any part of this regulation is for any reason held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion of the regulation.
(b) All signs shall be erected and maintained as per site plan by
the property owner. (The site plan referred to herein may be
found on file in the office of the Municipal Clerk attached to
Ord. No. 1223-90.)
B. Lawrence Square Village II.
(1) Applicability of Subtitle 1 of Title 39. Lawrence Square Village II
has filed a written consent with the Township of Lawrence that the
provisions of Subtitle One, Title 39, of the Revised Statutes of New
Jersey be made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets,
driveways and parking lots at Lawrence Square Village II located in
the Township of Lawrence, County of Mercer, and the following
regulations shall be enforceable.
(2) Parking in designated areas. All vehicles must park only in
designated areas between the lines provided.
§ 435-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-75
1:621
(3) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown on
the attached site plan (The site plan referred to herein may be
found in the office of the Municipal Clerk attached to Ord. No.
1224-90.) and signed with R7-8 ("Reserved Parking" sign and
penalty plate), in the designated parking areas for persons who
have been issued the handicapped parking permits by the New
Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission.
(4) Through streets.
(a) The following described roadways or parts of roadways are
hereby designated as through streets, and all intersection
roadways shall be stop intersections:
[1] Lawrence Square Boulevard - South. From Quaker-bridge
Road to Lawrence Square Boulevard, where it shall be a
stop/yield intersection as indicated on site plan. (The site
plan referred to herein may be found in the office of the
Municipal Clerk attached to Ord. No. 1224-90.)
[2] Lawrence Square Boulevard. From the property line of
Lawrence Square Village I, as indicated on site plan (The
site plan referred to herein may be found in the office of
the Municipal Clerk attached to Ord. No. 1224-90.), in
areas of Building No. 67, to property line of Lawrence
Square Village I, as indicated on site plan, in area of
Building No. 48.
(5) Restricted parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any time
upon any of the following described roadways or parts of roadways:
Name of Street Side Location
Lawrence Square Boulevard Both Entire length
Lawrence Square Boulevard
- South
Both Entire length
(6) Speed limits.
(a) The speed limits for both directions of traffic in the parking lots
shall be 15 miles per hour.
(b) The speed limits for both directions of travel on the following
roads are:
Name of Street MPH Limits
Lawrence Square
Boulevard
25 Entire length
Lawrence Square
Boulevard - South
25 Entire length
§ 435-75 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-75
1:622
(c) Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and maintained
to effect the above designated speed limits authorized by the
Department of Transportation.
(7) Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or impede
a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways, loading zones,
oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or present in any way a
safety or traffic hazard may be removed by towing the vehicle at
the owner's or operator's expense.
(8) Installation of signs responsibility of applicant. That all signs,
posts, bolts, or other necessary materials be installed and paid for
by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the Police Department
to insure installations meet State and Federal specifications, and all
signing shall conform to the current Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
(9) Penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by New
Jersey Statute, every person convicted of a violation of this section
or any supplement thereto shall be liable to a penalty of not more
than $200 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 15 days or
both.
(10) Effect of regulations.
(a) If any part of this regulation is for any reason held to be invalid,
such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portion of the regulation.
(b) All signs shall be erected and maintained as per site plan by
the property owner. (The site plan referred to herein may be
found in the office of the Municipal Clerk attached to Ord. No.
1224-90.)
C. The Manors at Lawrenceville. [Amended by Ord. No. 1388-94]
(1) The Manors at Lawrenceville Condominium Association has filed a
written consent with the Township of Lawrence that the provisions
of Subtitle One, Title 39, of the Revised Statutes of New Jersey be
made applicable to the semipublic roads, streets, driveways and
parking lots at The Manors at Lawrenceville, located in the
Township of Lawrence, County of Mercer and the following
regulations shall be enforceable:
(a) All vehicles must park only in designated areas and between
the lines provided.
(b) Handicapped parking. All stalls shall be 12 feet wide as shown
on the attached site plan and signed with R7-8 ("Reserved
Parking" sign and penalty plate), in the designated parking
areas for persons who have been issued the handicapped
parking permits by the New Jersey Motor Vehicle Commission.
§ 435-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-75
1:623
(c) Through streets. The following street or parts of streets are
hereby designated as through streets. "Stop" signs shall be
installed on the near right side of each street intersecting the
through streets, except where Yield signs are provided for in
the designation:
Name of Street Limits
Manor Boulevard Between Lawrenceville-
Pennington Road and Yeger
Drive
(d) Stop intersections.
Stop Intersections Stop Signs On
Manor Boulevard and Yeger
Drive
Manor Boulevard
(e) Speed limits.
[1] The speed limits for both direction of travel on the
following roads are:
Name of Street MPH Limits
All roads 25 Entire limits
[2] Regulatory and warning signs shall be erected and
maintained to effect the above designated speed limits
authorized by the Department of Transportation.
(f) Tow-away. Any vehicle parked or standing as to obstruct or
impede a normal flow of traffic, block entrances or exit ways,
loading zones, oil fills, any grass area, pedestrian walkway, or
present in any way a safety or traffic hazard may be removed
by towing the vehicle at the owner's or operator's expense.
(g) Restricted parking. No person shall stop or stand a vehicle any
time upon any of the streets or parts of streets described:
Name of
Street Side Hours Location
All roads Both All Entire length
(h) That all signs, posts, or other necessary materials be installed
and paid for by the applicant. Work shall be checked by the
Police Department to insure installations meet state and
federal specifications, and all signing shall conform to the
current Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
§ 435-75 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-75
1:624
§ 435-76. Regulation for the movement and the parking of traffic on
municipal park property. [Amended by Ord. No. 1694-02]
In accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-4, the regulations of
Subtitle 1, Title 39, of the Revised Statutes are hereby made applicable to
the properties listed below.
Property Time Limit Parking
Veteran's Park Two-hour parking: Parking of
vehicles at Veteran's Park shall be
for a period not to exceed two hours
when school is in session
Fine: Violators shall be subject to a
fine of not more than $50
(i) Penalties for violations hereof shall be as provided in N.J.S.A.
39:1-1 et seq. or by Chapter 1, Article III, of the Lawrence
Township Code.
D. Notre Dame High School.
(1) One-way driveways. The following driveways located on lands of
the Notre Dame High School on Route No. 206 be designated as
one-way driveways as indicated:
Location
North Drive, one-way west
South Drive, one-way east
§ 435-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-76
1:625

ARTICLE VII
Miscellaneous Regulations
§ 435-77. Pedestrian walkways.
§ 435-78. Closing of school streets.
The governing body of any municipality may, by ordinance, authorize the
Mayor or other Chief Executive Officer of the municipality, or the officer in
charge of streets in any municipality not having a chief executive officer, if
he shall find that a safety problem exists for ingress and egress to any public
or private school or for the provision of recreational facilities for children
attending such school, or both, due to a lack of a suitable area surrounding
the school, to close by regulation any portion of any street within the block
upon which such school is located to the use of through traffic during such
time as he shall determine, not to exceed one hour between 7:30 a.m. and
10:00 a.m., two hours between 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m., and one hour
A. Definition. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY — A pathway, owned and/or maintained by
the Township of Lawrence, which is not more than 10 feet in width,
and which is paved with bituminous concrete or other suitable paving
material.
B. Identification signs. Each pedestrian walkway shall be identified by a
sign, at or near its entry points, stating that it is a pedestrian walkway,
as defined herein.
C. Motorized vehicles prohibited; exception. No person shall operate any
motorized vehicle of any kind whatsoever upon any designated
pedestrian walkway, except for maintenance vehicles with the express
permission of the Director of Public Works, and for emergency vehicles
being utilized in the line of duty by any duly authorized emergency
vehicle operator.
D. Walkways designated. The following pathways are hereby designated as
"pedestrian walkways."
From To
Fieldsboro Drive Oaklyn Terrace
Franklin Corner Road Stonicker Drive
Laurelwood Drive Edgewood Avenue
Merion Place Green Avenue
Merion Place Hendrickson Road
Reeder Avenue Intermediate School
Woodlane Road Gordon Avenue
§ 435-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 435-78
1:627
between 2:30 p.m. and 4:30 p.m., on any days upon which such school is
in session, and to permit the use of said portion of said street, during said
hours, for ingress and egress to such school and for the use by the pupils
of such school for recreational purposes under proper supervision, and to
provide adequate Police facilities for such supervision and for the control
of traffic upon such portion of said street, which ordinance shall provide
for the posting of proper warning signs in said street, indicating that said
street is so closed and the purpose thereof, during the time when the same
is so closed, and shall provide penalties for the violation of terms of such
ordinance or of any regulation promulgated there under.
Name of Street Hours Limits
(Reserved)
§ 435-79. Rossa Avenue closed during certain times; through traffic
prohibited.
A. The Township Manager is authorized, when and if he shall find that a
safety problem exists for ingress and egress to St. Ann's private school,
or that there is a need for the provision of recreational facilities for
children attending such school, or both, due to lack of a suitable area
surrounding the school, to close by regulation that portion of Rossa
Avenue between its intersections with Eldridge and Lawrence Avenues,
such portion being within the block upon which the school is located,
during the periods set forth herein, to the use of through traffic.
B. The hours during which such portion of Rossa Avenue may be closed to
the use of through traffic by registration issued by the Township
Manager shall not exceed one hour between 7:30 a.m. and 10:00 a.m.,
two hours between 11:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m., and one hour between
2:30 p.m. and 4:30 p.m. on any day upon which such school is in
session, thereby to permit the use of such portion of such street for the
purpose set forth in (a) of this section.
C. This section shall not be effective unless, upon each instance of its
implementation, there is provided by the Township proper supervision
and adequate Police facilities for such supervision and for the control of
traffic thereon, and shall be subject to the posting of proper crossing
signs in such street indicating that it is so closed, and the purpose
thereof, during all applicable periods when it is so closed.
D. Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this section
or any regulation adopted pursuant thereto shall be liable for the
penalty stated in Chapter 1, Article III.
§ 435-78 LAWRENCE CODE § 435-79
1:628
Chapter 442
VEHICLES, RECREATIONAL
§ 442-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TRAILERS, CAMPERS and MOTOR HOMES — Any vehicle used or intended
to be used as a conveyance upon public streets or highways and duly
licensed as such; and shall include self-propelled and non-self-propelled
vehicles so designed and constructed and reconstructed or added to by
means of accessories in such manner as to permit the occupancy thereof as
a temporary dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons and having
no foundation other than wheels, jacks or skirtings so arranged as to be
integral with or portable by the trailer or motor home.
§ 442-2. Parking of trailers, campers and motor homes.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any trailer, camper or motor
home on any street in the Township or on any premises within the Township
except in conformity with the traffic regulations of the Township, and under
no circumstances for a longer period than two hours; provided, that such
time limit shall not apply to a trailer, camper or motor home undergoing
repair in a recognized public garage or automobile repair shop, nor where
such trailer, camper or motor home is placed in dead storage on private
property.
§ 442-3. Use of trailer, camper or motor home as dwelling
prohibited.
No trailer, camper or motor home whether properly parked on a public
street or on private property, or undergoing repairs or in dead storage, shall
be used by any person as a dwelling or sleeping place.
Derivation Table
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1971 Code to 2019 Code
Chapter/Title From 1971 Code Location in 2019 Code
Ch. 1, General Provisions
§ 1-1 Superseded by AO
§ 1-2 Ch. 1, Art. II
§ 435-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:629
Chapter/Title From 1971 Code Location in 2019 Code
§ 1-3 Superseded by AO
§ 1-4 Superseded by AO
§ 1-5 Superseded by AO
§ 1-6 Ch. 1, Art. III
Ch. 2, Administration
Art. I, In General
§§ 2-1 – 2-2 Ch. 2, Art. I
§§ 2-3 – 2-6 Ch. 2, Art. II
Art. II, Council Ch. 2, Art. III
Art. III, Township Manager Ch. 2, Art. IV
Art. IV, Officers and Employees
§§ 2-35 – 2-45 Ch. 2, Art. V
§§ 2-46, 2-47. 2-52 Ch. 2, Art. VI
§§ 2-48 – 2-49 Ch. 2, Art. VII
Art. V, Departments Ch. 20
Art. VI, Other Committees
§ 2-93 Not Included
§ 2-94 Not Included
§ 2-95 Ch. 15, Art. I
Art. VII, Public Emergencies Ch. 26
Art. VIII, First Aid Squad Not Included
Ch. 2A, Alarm Systems Ch. 76
Ch. 3, Alcoholic Beverages Ch. 83, Art. I
Ch. 4, Animals and Fowl Ch. 89
Ch. 4A, Anti-Discrimination Not Included
Ch. 5, Buildings
Art. I
§§ 5-1 – 5-6, 5-6A Superseded by UCC
§§ 5-7 and 5-11.1 Ch. 130, Art. II
§§ 5-8 – 5-11 Not Included
Art. II Ch. 118
Art. III Ch. 112
Art. IV Not Included
§ DT-1 LAWRENCE CODE § DT-1
1:630
Chapter/Title From 1971 Code Location in 2019 Code
Art. V Repealed by Ord. No.
2234-16
Ch. 5AA, Cable Television
§§ 5AA-1 – 5AA-14 and 5AA-16 – 5AA-22 Expired/NCM
§ 5AA-15 Ch. 15, Art. II
Ch. 5A, Construction Code Ch. 130, Art. I
Ch. 6, Electricity Superseded by UCC
Ch. 6AA, Farming Ch. 152, Art. I
Ch. 6A, Fees Ch. 156
Ch. 7, Finance
Art. I Ch. 32, Art. I
Art. II Ch. 32, Art. II
Art. III Ch. 32, Art. III
Art. IV Ch. 32, Art. IV
Ch. 7A, Claims Against Fire Insurance
Proceeds
Ch. 161
Ch. 8, Fire Prevention
Art. I
§§ 8-1 – 8-2 Not Included
§§ 8-3 – 8-8 Ch. 38
§§ 8-9 – 8-11 Ch. 167, Art. I
Art. II Repealed by Ord. No.
2234-16
Art. III Ch. 167, Art. III
Ch. 8A, Flood Control Repealed by Ord. No.
2237-16
Ch. 8B, Flood Plain Area Land Use and
Control
SS by Land Use
Ch. 9, Food and Food Establishments
Art. I Ch. 192, Art. I
Art. II Ch. 192, Art. II
Art. III Ch. 192, Art. III
Ch. 10, Garbage and Refuse Repealed by Ord. No.
2307-18
Ch. 10A, Historic Landmarks Not Included
Ch. 11, Housing Standards Ch. 220
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:631
Chapter/Title From 1971 Code Location in 2019 Code
Ch. 12, Licenses
Art. I No content in prior Code
Art. II Ch. 144, Art. I
Art. III Ch. 252
Ch. 12A, Loitering Ch. 237
Ch. 13, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 435
Ch. 14, Nuisances Superseded by Ord. No.
1366-93
Ch. 14A, Noise Control Superseded by Ord. No.
1935-07
Ch. 14B, Nonresidential Property
Maintenance Code
Ch. 309, Art. I
Ch. 15, Offenses – Miscellaneous
Art. I
§ 15-1 Ch. 101, Art. I
§ 15-2 Not Included
§§ 15-3 – 15-4 Ch. 174
§ 15-5 Ch. 271
§ 15-6 Ch. 277
§ 15-7 Repealed by Ord. No.
2185-14
Art. II Not Included
Art. III Not Included
Art. IV Not Included
Ch. 16, Parks and Recreation Ch. 285
Ch. 17, Peddlers and Solicitors Superseded by Ord. No.
2246-16
Ch. 17A, Pedestrian Walkways Not Included
Ch. 18, Plumbing Superseded by UCC
Ch. 19, Police Department Ch. 20
Ch. 19A, Rent Control Ch. 325
Ch. 20, Sewers and Sewage Disposal
Art. I Ch. 360, Art. I
Art. II Ch. 57
Art. III
§ DT-1 LAWRENCE CODE § DT-1
1:632
Chapter/Title From 1971 Code Location in 2019 Code
Div. I Ch. 360, Art. II
Div. II Ch. 360, Art. III
Div. III Ch. 360, Art. IV
Ch. 20A, Soil Removal, Erosion and
Sedimentation Damage
Not Included
Ch. 21, Streets and Sidewalks
Art. I Ch. 384, Art. I
Art. II Ch. 384, Art. II
Art. III Ch. 384, Art. III
Ch. 22, Subdivisions Repealed by Ord. No.
836-79
Ch. 23, Swimming Pools Ch. 392, Art. I
Ch. 24, Taxicabs Ch. 410
Ch. 25, Theaters Ch. 416
Ch. 26, Trailers and Trailer Parks Ch. 442
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
KEY:
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2024-09 8-11-2009 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2026-09 8-11-2009 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2027-09 8-11-2009 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2028-09 9-1-2009 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2034-09 10-6-2009 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2038-09 12-15-2009 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:633
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2042-10 1-20-2010 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2043-10 1-20-2010 Massage and Somatic Therapy
Establishments Amendment;
Fees Amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No.
2155-13
2046-10 2-16-2010 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2047-10 3-2-2010 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2049-10 4-21-2010 Departments Amendment Ch. 20
2055-10 6-15-2010 Boards, Commissions and
Committees: Green Team
Advisory Committee
Superseded by
Ord. No.
2145-13
2058-10 7-6-2010 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2059-10 8-3-2010 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2061-10 8-3-2010 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2062-10 9-7-2010 Fire Prevention and Fire
Protection: Local Amendments
to Uniform Fire Safety Code
Amendment
Ch. 167, Art. III
2063-10 9-21-2010 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2064-10 10-5-2010 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2065-10 10-26-2010 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2068-10 11-9-2010 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2070-10 11-23-2010 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2071-10 11-23-2010 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2075-11 1-18-2011 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2077-11 2-1-2011 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2078-11 2-1-2011 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2079-11 2-1-2011 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2080-11 2-1-2011 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2083-11 3-15-2011 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
§ DL-1 LAWRENCE CODE § DL-1
1:634
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2084-11 3-15-2011 Boards, Commissions and
Committees: Growth and
Redevelopment Committee
Amendment
Ch. 15, Art. I
2085-11 3-15-2011 Boards, Commissions and
Committees
Ch. 15, Art. IV
2087-11 3-15-2011 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2088-11 4-5-2011 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2089-11 4-21-2011 Alcoholic Beverages and
Drugs: Possession and/or
Consumption by Persons Under
Legal Age on Private Property
Amendment
Ch. 83, Art. II
2090-11 4-21-2011 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2094-11 5-17-2011 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2099-11 6-21-2011 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2103-11 9-6-2011 Towing and Storage of Motor
Vehicles
Superseded by
Ord. No.
2201-14
2105-11 9-6-2011 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2107-11 9-20-2011 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2109-11 10-18-2011 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2113-11 11-1-2011 Administration of Government
Amendment
Ch. 10
2114-11 12-6-2011 Dealers in Precious Metals,
Gems and Jewelry
Superseded by
Ord. No.
2261-17
2115-11 12-22-2011 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2120-12 5-15-2012 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2125-12 6-19-2012 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2130-12 8-21-2012 Nuisances Ch. 265
2133-12 9-4-2012 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2134-12 9-4-2012 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2139-12 12-18-2012 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:635
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2140-12 12-18-2012 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2141-12 12-18-2012 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2142-12 12-18-2012 Solid Waste Repealed by
Ord. No.
2307-18
2145-13 1-8-2013 Boards, Commissions and
Committees: Environmental
and Green Advisory Committee
Ch. 15, Art. X
2146-13 1-8-2013 Boards, Commissions and
Committees: Trails, Open
Space and Stewardship
Advisory Committee
Ch. 15, Art. VII
2147-13 1-22-2013 Administration of Government
Amendment
Ch. 10
2148-13 2-19-2013 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2154-13 5-7-2013 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2155-13 5-7-2013 Massage and Somatic Therapy
Establishments
Ch. 244
2160-13 7-16-2013 Solid Waste Repealed by
Ord. No.
2307-18
2164-13 9-17-2013 Alcoholic Beverages:
Consumption in Public
Amendment; Peace and Good
Order: General Provisions
Amendment
Ch. 83, Art. IV;
Ch. 293, Art. I
2165-13 12-3-2013 Cable Television Franchise
Agreement
NCM
2176-14 4-1-2014 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2178-14 4-16-2014 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2182-14 4-16-2014 Peace and Good Order:
Aggressive Panhandling
Ch. 293, Art. II
2185-14 5-20-2014 Retail Businesses: Hours of
Operation
Ch. 333, Art. I
2189-14 7-15-2014 Animals Amendment Ch. 89
2198-14 9-2-2014 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
§ DL-1 LAWRENCE CODE § DL-1
1:636
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2201-14 10-21-2014 Towing and Storage of Motor
Vehicles
Superseded by
Ord. No.
2222-15
2202-14 12-2-2014 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2204-14 12-17-2014 Dealers in Precious Metals,
Gems and Jewelry Amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No.
2261-17
2213-15 4-21-2015 Alcoholic Beverages and
Drugs: Alcoholic Beverages
Amendment
Ch. 83, Art. I
2216-15 7-21-2015 Intergovernmental
Agreements: Mutual Aid
Agreement for Emergency
Police Services
Ch. 44, Art. IV
2218-15 9-1-2015 Towing and Storage of Motor
Vehicles Amendment; Fees
Amendment
Superseded by
Ord. No.
2222-15
2219-15 10-6-2015 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2221-15 11-5-2015 Departments Amendment Ch. 20
2222-15 12-15-2015 Towing and Storage of Motor
Vehicles
Superseded by
Ord. No.
2280-17
2224-16 3-15-2016 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2233-16 4-19-2016 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2234-16 5-3-2016 Fire Prevention and Fire
Protection: Enforcement of
Uniform Fire Safety Code
Ch. 167, Art. II
2235-16 5-3-2016 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2237-16 5-17-2016 Floodplain Management Ch. 185
2243-16 8-16-2016 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2246-16 9-20-2016 Peddling, Soliciting and
Related Activities
Ch. 300
2247-16 10-18-2016 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2249-16 12-6-2016 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:637
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2254-17 2-7-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2260-17 4-18-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2261-17 5-2-2017 Dealers in Precious Metals,
Gems and Jewelry
Repealed by
Ord. No.
2300-18
2264-17 5-2-2017 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2265-17 6-20-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2278-17 10-17-2017 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2279-17 11-9-2017 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2280-17 11-9-2017 Towing and Storage of Motor
Vehicles
Ch. 423
2281-17 12-5-2017 Departments Amendment Ch. 20
2282-17 12-19-2017 Solid Waste Repealed by
2307-18
2283-17 12-19-2017 Land Use Amendment NI
2284-17 12-19-2017 Land Use Amendment NI
2285-17 12-19-2017 Land Use Amendment NI
2286-18 2-6-2018 Appropriation NCM
2287-18 2-20-2018 Animals Amendment Ch. 89
2288-18 2-20-2018 Salaries NCM
2289-18 2-20-2018 Bond Amendment NCM
2290-18 2-20-2018 Bond Amendment NCM
2291-18 3-6-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2292-18 3-20-2018 Solid Waste Repealed by
Ord. No.
2307-18
2293-18 3-20-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2294-18 4-3-2018 Exceed Budget; Cap Bank NCM
2295-18 4-3-2018 Salaries NCM
2296-18 5-1-2018 Bond NCM
2297-18 5-1-2018 Appropriation NCM
§ DL-1 LAWRENCE CODE § DL-1
1:638
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2298-18 6-19-2018 Safe Exchange Zone Ch. 339
2299-18 6-19-2018 Bond Amendment NCM
2300-18 7-17-2018 Secondhand Goods, Dealers in Ch. 351
2301-18 7-17-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2302-18 8-28-2018 Land Use Amendment NI
2303-18 8-28-2018 Land Use Amendment NI
2304-18 8-28-2018 Land Use Amendment NI
2305-18 8-28-2018 Salaries NCM
2306-18 8-28-2018 Administration of Government
Amendment
Ch. 10
2307-18 9-25-2018 Solid Waste Ch. 375
2308-18 9-25-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2309-18 9-25-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2310-18 9-25-2018 Appropriation Amendment NCM
2311-18 10-16-2018 Salaries NCM
2312-18 10-16-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2313-18 10-16-2018 Sewers: Sewer Use
Regulations of the Ewing-
Lawrence Sewerage Utility
NCM
2314-18 11-8-2018 Appropriation Amendment NCM
2315-18 11-8-2018 Boards, Commissions and
Committees: Environmental
and Green Advisory Committee
Amendment
Ch. 15, Art. X
2316-18 11-8-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435
2317-18 12-4-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2318-18 12-4-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 156
2319-19 1-2-2019 Salaries Amendment NCM
2320-19 2-19-2019 Providing for Sidewalk
Improvements
NCM
2321-19 3-5-2019 Administration of Government
Amendment
Ch. 10
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:639
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2322-19 3-19-2019 Boards,
Commissions and
Committees: Shade
Tree Advisory
Committee
Amendment
Ch. 15, Art.
IV
1
2323-19 3-19-2019 Lease NCM 1
2324-19 4-2-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435 1
2325-19 4-2-2019 Exceed Budget; Cap
Bank
NCM 1
2326-19 4-16-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435 1
2327-19 5-7-2019 Fees Amendment Ch. 156 1
2328-19 5-7-2019 Bond NCM 1
2329-19 5-7-2019 Appropriation NCM 1
2330-19 5-7-2019 Special Amusements
Permit
NCM 1
2331-19 7-23-2019 Salaries NCM 1
2332-19 7-23-2019 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I 1
2333-19 7-23-2019 Administration of
Government
Amendment
Ch. 10 1
2334-19 7-23-2019 Sale of Land NCM 1
2335-19 8-20-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435 1
2336-19 8-20-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435 1
2337-19 10-1-2019 Special Assessment NCM 1
2338-19 8-20-2019 Agreement NCM 1
2339-19 9-17-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435 1
2340-19 9-17-2019 Zoning Map
Amendment
NCM 1
2341-19 9-17-2019 Salaries NCM 1
2342-19 10-1-2019 Bond Amendment NCM 1
2343-19 10-1-2019 Agreement NCM 1
2344-19 11-8-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435 1
§ DL-1 LAWRENCE CODE § DL-1
1:640
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2345-19 12-3-2019 Sale of Property NCM 1
2346-19 12-3-2019 Bond NCM 1
2347-19 12-3-2019 Appropriation
Amendment
NCM 1
2348-19 12-3-2019 Appropriation
Amendment
NCM 1
2349-19 12-3-2019 Bond NCM 1
2350-19 12-17-2019 Land Use
Amendment
NI 1
2351-19 12-17-2019 Land Use
Amendment
NI 1
2352-19 12-17-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435 1
2353-19 12-17-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 435 1
2354-19 12-17-2019 Sewer and Water
Regulations:
Emergency
Conservation of
Water
Ch. 360, Art.
VIII
1
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:641

Recodified through December 17, 2019
and
Ordinance No. 2351-19

Mercer County, New Jersey
Adopted by the Lawrence Township Council
Pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-62
December 16, 1997
Effective Date: January 28, 1998
Recodified through December 17, 2019
Ordinance No. 2351-19

Ordinance No. 1511-97
A comprehensive Ordinance regulating and limiting the uses of land and
the uses and locations of buildings and structures; regulating and
restricting the height and bulk of buildings and structures and determining
the area of yards and other open spaces; regulating and limiting the
density of population; dividing the Township of Lawrence into districts for
such purposes; adopting a map of said Township showing boundaries and
the classification of such districts; establishing rules, regulations and
standards governing the subdivision of land within the Township;
establishing a Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment, Historic
Preservation Advisory Commission, and Affordable Housing Board; and
prescribing penalties for the violation of its provisions.
? ? ?
Township of Lawrence
2207 Lawrenceville Road
P.O. Box 6006
Lawrenceville, New Jersey 08648
(609) 844-7000
www.lawrencetwp.com
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
i
ARTICLE I. TITLE AND PURPOSE
§ 100 Title. ................................................................................................................................. 1
§ 101 Short Title. ...................................................................................................................... 1
§ 102 Purpose and Intent. ........................................................................................................ 1
§ 103 Interpretation of Standards. ......................................................................................... 5
§ 104 Prohibited Uses. .............................................................................................................. 5
§ 105 Time of Compliance. ...................................................................................................... 5
§ 106 Proposed Public Dedications. ........................................................................................ 5
§ 107 Public Notice for Variances. .......................................................................................... 5
§ 108 Expiration of Variances. ................................................................................................ 6
§ 109 Date of Approval. ........................................................................................................... 6
§ 110 Conformance with Regulations; Exceptions. ............................................................... 6
A. Required Conformance .......................................................................................... 6
B. Principal Building; Yard and Lot Regulations ...................................................... 6
C. Unlawful Encroachment ........................................................................................ 6
D. Exception for Certain Utilities and Other Infrastructure ....................................... 7
E. Frontage on Public Street ...................................................................................... 7
F. Dedication of Right-of-Way .................................................................................. 7
G. Yards ..................................................................................................................... 7
ARTICLE II DEFINITIONS
§ 200 Word Usage. ................................................................................................................... 8
§ 201 Definitions. ...................................................................................................................... 8
ARTICLE III ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
§ 300 Zoning Districts. ........................................................................................................... 53
§ 301 Zoning Map. ................................................................................................................. 54
§ 302 Interpretation of Boundaries. ..................................................................................... 54
§ 303 Applicability within Each District. ............................................................................. 54
ARTICLE IV ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 400 General Regulations and Permitted Modifications ................................................... 55
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
ii
A. Relationship to Other Articles. ............................................................................ 55
B. Variances ............................................................................................................. 55
C. Special Minimum Setback Requirements ........................................................... 55
D. Requirements for Special Lots ............................................................................ 56
E. Permitted Modifications for Infill Development ................................................. 56
F. Non-conforming Lots .......................................................................................... 56
G. Non-Conforming Structures and Uses ................................................................ 57
H. Accessory Buildings ............................................................................................ 58
I. Height Limits ....................................................................................................... 59
§ 401 Environmental Protection 1 (EP-1) District. ............................................................. 60
A. Purpose. ............................................................................................................... 60
B. Permitted Uses. .................................................................................................... 60
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. .................................................................................. 60
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. ................................................................................ 61
E. Lot Area, Density and Open Space Requirements .............................................. 61
F. Yard and Building Coverage for Residential Uses .............................................. 62
G. Transfer of Development Credits ........................................................................ 64
§ 402 Environmental Protection 2 (EP-2) District. ............................................................. 65
A. Purpose ................................................................................................................ 65
B. Permitted Uses ..................................................................................................... 65
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................... 65
D. Conditional Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 66
E. Lot Area, Density and Open Space Requirements .............................................. 66
F. Yard and Building Coverage for Residential Uses .............................................. 68
G. Transfer of Development Credits ........................................................................ 69
§ 403 Residential 1 (R-1) District .......................................................................................... 70
A. Purpose ................................................................................................................ 70
B. Permitted Uses ..................................................................................................... 70
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................... 70
D. Conditional Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 70
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ........................................................ 71
§ 404 Residential 2A (R-2A) District .................................................................................... 74
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
iii
A. Purpose ................................................................................................................ 74
B. Permitted Uses ..................................................................................................... 74
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................... 74
D. Conditional Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 74
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ........................................................ 75
§ 405 Residential 2B (R-2B) District. .................................................................................... 77
A. Purpose ................................................................................................................ 77
B. Permitted Uses ..................................................................................................... 77
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................... 77
D. Conditional Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 77
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ........................................................ 77
§ 406 Residential 3 (R-3) District. ......................................................................................... 80
A. Purpose ................................................................................................................ 80
B. Permitted Uses ..................................................................................................... 80
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................... 80
D. Conditional Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 80
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ........................................................ 80
§ 407 Residential 4 (R-4) District. ......................................................................................... 83
A. Purpose ................................................................................................................ 83
B. Permitted Uses ..................................................................................................... 83
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................... 83
D. Conditional Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 83
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ........................................................ 84
§ 408 Residential 5 (R-5) District. ......................................................................................... 86
A. Purpose ................................................................................................................ 86
B. Permitted Uses ..................................................................................................... 86
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................... 86
D. Conditional Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 86
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ........................................................ 86
§ 409 Apartment and Townhouse (AT) Residential District. ............................................. 89
A. Purpose ................................................................................................................ 89
B. Permitted Uses ..................................................................................................... 89
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
iv
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................... 89
D. Conditional Use Permitted .................................................................................. 89
E. Required Use ....................................................................................................... 90
F. General District Regulations ............................................................................... 90
G. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ........................................................ 91
§ 410 Senior Citizen Residential (SCR) District. ................................................................. 93
A. Purpose ................................................................................................................ 93
B. Permitted Uses ..................................................................................................... 93
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................... 93
D. Conditional Uses ................................................................................................. 94
E. Required Use ....................................................................................................... 94
F. General District Regulations ............................................................................... 94
G. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ........................................................ 95
H. Additional District Regulations ........................................................................... 98
§ 411 Planned Village Development 1 (PVD-1) Zone. ......................................................... 99
A. Purpose. ............................................................................................................... 99
B. Permitted Uses ..................................................................................................... 99
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................... 99
D. General District Standards ................................................................................. 100
E. Area, Yard, and Building Coverage Requirements ........................................... 100
F. Refuse and Recyclables ..................................................................................... 102
G. Facilities for Pedestrians, Bicyclists and Vehicles ............................................ 103
H. Circulation ......................................................................................................... 103
I. Energy Use Considerations ............................................................................... 103
J. Phasing .............................................................................................................. 103
K. Planned Development........................................................................................ 103
§ 412 Planned Village Development 2 (PVD-2) District. .................................................. 104
A. Purpose .............................................................................................................. 104
B. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................... 104
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 105
D. General Tract Requirements .............................................................................. 105
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ...................................................... 106
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
v
F. Non-Residential Uses ........................................................................................ 108
G. Refuse and Recyclables ..................................................................................... 108
H. Facilities for Pedestrians, Bicyclists and Vehicles ............................................ 108
I. Circulation ......................................................................................................... 109
J. Energy Use Considerations ............................................................................... 109
K. Phasing .............................................................................................................. 109
L. Planned Development........................................................................................ 109
§ 413 Neighborhood Center 1 (NC-1) District. .................................................................. 110
A. Purpose .............................................................................................................. 110
B. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................... 110
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 110
D. Conditional Uses Permitted ............................................................................... 111
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ...................................................... 111
F. Additional Requirements ................................................................................... 113
§ 414 Neighborhood Center 2 (NC-2) District. .................................................................. 114
A. Purpose .............................................................................................................. 114
B. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................... 114
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 114
D. Conditional Use Permitted ................................................................................ 115
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ...................................................... 116
F. Additional Requirements ................................................................................... 116
§ 415 Mixed Use 1 (MX-1) District. .................................................................................... 118
A. Purpose .............................................................................................................. 118
B. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................... 118
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 118
D. Conditional Use Permitted ................................................................................ 119
E. Required Use ..................................................................................................... 119
F. General Tract Requirements .............................................................................. 119
G. Height Limitations ............................................................................................. 120
H. Standards for Development ............................................................................... 120
§ 416 Professional Office (PO) District. ............................................................................. 122
A. Purpose .............................................................................................................. 122
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
vi
B. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................... 122
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 122
D. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ...................................................... 122
§ 417 Office (O) District ....................................................................................................... 124
A. Purpose .............................................................................................................. 124
B. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................... 124
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 124
D. Conditional Use Permitted ................................................................................ 124
E. General District Regulations ............................................................................. 125
F. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ...................................................... 125
§ 418 Research and Development 1 (RD-1) District. ......................................................... 128
A. Purpose .............................................................................................................. 128
B. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................... 128
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 128
D. Conditional Uses Permitted ............................................................................... 128
E. General District Regulations ............................................................................. 128
F. Additional Requirements ................................................................................... 129
G. Site Elements and Buffering .............................................................................. 130
§ 419 Research and Development 2 (RD-2) District. ......................................................... 131
A. Purpose .............................................................................................................. 131
B. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................... 131
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 131
D. Conditional Uses Permitted ............................................................................... 131
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ...................................................... 132
F. Additional Regulations ...................................................................................... 134
§ 420 Highway Commercial (HC) District. ........................................................................ 135
A. Purpose .............................................................................................................. 135
B. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................... 135
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 135
10. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use .................................. 136
D. Conditional Uses Permitted ............................................................................... 136
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ...................................................... 139
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
vii
F. Additional Regulations ..................................................................................... 139
§ 421 Regional Commercial (RC) District. ........................................................................ 141
A. Purpose. ............................................................................................................. 141
B. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................... 141
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 141
D. Conditional Use Permitted ................................................................................ 141
E. General District Regulations ............................................................................. 142
F. Area, Yard, and Height ...................................................................................... 143
G. Additional Regulations ...................................................................................... 143
§ 422 Mixed Use 2 (MX-2) District. .................................................................................... 146
B. Purpose .............................................................................................................. 146
C. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................... 146
D. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 146
E. Conditional Uses Permitted ............................................................................... 147
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ...................................................... 148
F. Additional Regulations for Non-residential Uses .............................................. 149
§ 423 Mixed Use 3 (MX-3) District. .................................................................................... 150
A. Purpose .............................................................................................................. 150
B. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................... 150
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 150
D. Conditional Uses Permitted ............................................................................... 151
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ...................................................... 151
§ 424 Limited Industrial (LI) District. ............................................................................... 153
A. Purpose .............................................................................................................. 153
B. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................... 153
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 153
D. General District Regulations ............................................................................. 153
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ...................................................... 153
§ 425 Open Space (OS) District. .......................................................................................... 155
A. Purpose .............................................................................................................. 155
B. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................... 155
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 155
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
viii
D. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ...................................................... 155
§ 426 Education, Government & Institutions (EGI) District. .......................................... 157
A. Purpose .............................................................................................................. 157
B. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................... 157
C. Accessory Uses Permitted ................................................................................. 157
D. Conditional Use Permitted ................................................................................ 158
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage ...................................................... 158
§ 427 Flood Prevention. ....................................................................................................... 160
§ 428 Residential Cluster Optional Development. ............................................................. 161
A. Permitted Uses ................................................................................................... 161
B. Open Space ........................................................................................................ 161
C. Minimum Required Open Space ....................................................................... 161
D. Use of Open Space Land ................................................................................... 161
E. Lands for Public Dedication .............................................................................. 161
F. Public or Community Utility Systems Required ............................................... 162
G. Planned Development........................................................................................ 162
§ 429 Additional Requirements for Residential Uses. ....................................................... 163
A. Accessory Apartments ....................................................................................... 163
B. Community Shelters .......................................................................................... 163
C. Decks/Patios ...................................................................................................... 164
D. ECHO Housing ................................................................................................. 164
E. Family Day Care ............................................................................................... 164
F. Farm Stands and Consumer Crop Picking Operations ...................................... 165
G. Fences and Walls ............................................................................................... 165
I. Home Occupations ............................................................................................ 167
J. Off-Street Parking and Private Garages ............................................................ 167
K. Outdoor Recreational Facilities ......................................................................... 168
L. Parking of Trucks and Buses in Residential Zones ........................................... 168
M. Recreational Vehicle Storage ............................................................................ 168
N. Reserved. ........................................................................................................... 169
O. Residential Swimming Pools and Cabanas ....................................................... 169
P. Residential Tool Shed ....................................................................................... 169
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
ix
Q. Satellite Dish and Television Antennae ............................................................ 170
R. Yard and Garage Sales ...................................................................................... 170
§ 430 Conditional Use Criteria. ........................................................................................... 171
B. Bed and Breakfast Accommodation .................................................................. 171
C. Child Care Centers ............................................................................................ 171
D. Farm Market ...................................................................................................... 172
E. Golf Course ....................................................................................................... 172
F. Houses of Worship ............................................................................................ 173
G. Public and Private Day Schools. ....................................................................... 173
§ 431 Provisions Applying to All Districts. ........................................................................ 175
A. [RESERVED] .................................................................................................... 175
B. Christmas Tree Sales ......................................................................................... 175
C. Communications Towers ................................................................................... 175
D. Delaware and Raritan Canal State Park............................................................. 175
E. Emergency Housing .......................................................................................... 176
F. Groundwater Remediation ................................................................................ 176
G. Public Election Voting Places ........................................................................... 176
H. Public and Local Utilities and Cable Television and Interstate Natural Gas
Pipeline Facilities ............................................................................................. 176
I. Sales Offices ...................................................................................................... 177
J. Stream Buffers ................................................................................................... 177
K. Temporary Construction Trailers ...................................................................... 179
L. Temporary Uses ................................................................................................ 179
M. Antennas. ........................................................................................................... 180
N. Wind and Solar Energy Systems ....................................................................... 180
ARTICLE V PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN STANDARDS PART I: RESIDENTIAL
SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
§ 500 Relationship of Article V to the Residential Site Improvement Standards. ......... 185
§ 501 RSIS General Provisions ........................................................................................... 186
A. Scope and Applicability .................................................................................... 186
B. Definitions and Abbreviations ........................................................................... 187
C. Administration and Enforcement ...................................................................... 187
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
x
D. RSIS Approval .................................................................................................. 187
E. RSIS Violations ................................................................................................. 187
F. Operative Date ................................................................................................... 187
§ 502 RSIS Application and Review Procedures ............................................................... 188
A. RSIS Application and Review Procedures ........................................................ 188
B. RSIS Application Form and Checklist .............................................................. 188
§ 503 RSIS Exceptions, Waivers, and Special Area Standards ....................................... 188
§ 504 RSIS Streets and Parking. ......................................................................................... 188
A. Street Hierarchy ................................................................................................. 188
B. Cartway Width .................................................................................................. 188
C. Curbs or Curbs and Gutters ............................................................................... 188
D. Shoulders ........................................................................................................... 188
E. Sidewalks and Graded Areas ............................................................................. 188
F. Bikeways ........................................................................................................... 188
G. Utility Areas ...................................................................................................... 188
H. Right-of-way and Cartway ................................................................................ 188
I. Street Grade and Intersections ........................................................................... 188
J. Pavement ........................................................................................................... 188
K. Street and Site Lighting ..................................................................................... 188
L. Underground Wiring ......................................................................................... 188
Table 5.1 Residential Street Cartway and Right-of-Way Widths. ..................... 189
M. Street and Traffic Signs ..................................................................................... 192
N. Residential Parking: Number of Spaces ............................................................ 192
Table 5.2 Parking Requirements for Residential Land Uses (1) ........................ 192
O. Residential Parking Space Size ......................................................................... 193
P. Parking Areas .................................................................................................... 194
Q. Curb Construction Standards ............................................................................. 194
R. Sidewalks and Bikeways Construction Standards ............................................. 194
S. Street Grade, Intersections, Pavement, and Lighting Construction Standards .. 194
T. Curves ................................................................................................................ 194
§ 505 RSIS Water Supply. ................................................................................................... 194
A. Water Supply System ........................................................................................ 194
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
xi
B. Capacity ............................................................................................................. 194
C. System Design and Placement .......................................................................... 194
D. Fire Hydrants ..................................................................................................... 194
§ 506 RSIS Sanitary Sewers. ............................................................................................... 194
A. Sanitary Sewer Systems .................................................................................... 194
B. System Planning, Design and Placement .......................................................... 194
§ 507 RSIS Stormwater Management. ............................................................................... 194
A. Stormwater Management .................................................................................. 194
B. Runoff Estimation Techniques .......................................................................... 194
C. Runoff Collection System Design ..................................................................... 194
D. Stormwater Management: System Design ........................................................ 194
E. Stormwater Management: System Design ........................................................ 194
F. Stormwater Management: Water Quality .......................................................... 194
G. Corrugated Metal Pipe Specifications ............................................................... 194
§ 508 Referenced Standards. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-8.1 et seq. .............................................. 194
§509-519 Reserved. ..................................................................................................................... 194
ARTICLE V PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN STANDARDS PART II - LAWRENCE
TOWNSHIP STANDARDS
§ 520 Performance Standards for All Uses. ....................................................................... 195
A. Electrical and/or Electronic Devices ................................................................. 195
B. Glare .................................................................................................................. 195
C. Heat ................................................................................................................... 195
D. Noise.................................................................................................................. 195
E. Odor ................................................................................................................... 195
F. Storage and Waste Disposal .............................................................................. 195
G. Ventilation ......................................................................................................... 196
H. Vibration ............................................................................................................ 196
§ 521 Commercial and Industrial Buildings Design Standards. ...................................... 197
A. Design Goals for All Building Types ................................................................ 197
B. Design Guidelines for All Building Types ........................................................ 197
C. Roof Design Guidelines .................................................................................... 197
D. Building Lighting .............................................................................................. 198
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
xii
E. Long Term Care Facility, Congregate Care, and Assisted Living Facility ....... 198
F. Neighborhood Center Design Standards ........................................................... 198
G. Professional Office District Design Standards .................................................. 199
H. Retail Design Standards .................................................................................... 199
I. Industrial and Warehousing Use Design Standards .......................................... 200
J. New and Used Automobile Sales Buildings ..................................................... 200
§ 522 Drainage and Storm Water Management. ............................................................... 201
A. Purpose .............................................................................................................. 201
B. Storm Water Management Goals ...................................................................... 201
C. Best Available Technology (BAT) Required .................................................... 201
D. Lot Grading ....................................................................................................... 201
E. Storm Water System Strategy and Design ........................................................ 202
F. Storm Water Management Basins ..................................................................... 202
G. Landscaping ...................................................................................................... 204
H. Detention Facility Maintenance ........................................................................ 204
I. Easement Requirements .................................................................................... 205
§ 523 Energy Conservation. ................................................................................................ 207
A. Promotion of Conservation ............................................................................... 207
B. Lot, Principal Structures, Subdivision Plans, and Site Plan Solar Standards .... 208
§ 524 Fences and Walls. ....................................................................................................... 210
§ 525 Landscaping. ............................................................................................................... 211
A. General Provisions ............................................................................................ 211
B. Landscape Design Guidelines ........................................................................... 211
C. Street Trees ........................................................................................................ 212
Table 5.4 Recommended Small Street Trees. .................................................... 213
Table 5.5 Recommended Medium Street Trees. ................................................ 213
Table 5.6 Recommended Large Street Trees. .................................................... 214
D. Additional Recommended Trees ....................................................................... 214
Table 5.7 Additional Recommended Trees. ....................................................... 215
E. Fall Planting Hazard .......................................................................................... 216
F. Recommended Shrubs ....................................................................................... 216
Table 5.8 Recommended Shrubs. ..................................................................... 216
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
xiii
G. Recommended Plants for Wet Conditions ........................................................ 219
Table 5.9 Trees and Shrubs Recommended for Wet Conditions. ...................... 219
H. Buffers. .............................................................................................................. 221
Table 5.10 Required Minimum Buffer Widths. .................................................. 222
Table 5.11 Minimum Plant Density for Buffers ................................................. 223
Table 5.12 Allowable Reductions in Buffer Widths and Plant Densities .......... 223
I. Cul-de-Sacs ....................................................................................................... 224
J. Stormwater Facilities ......................................................................................... 224
K. Open Space Landscaping .................................................................................. 225
L. Parking and Loading Area Landscaping ........................................................... 226
M. Historic District Landscaping ............................................................................ 227
N. Site Protection and General Planting Requirements ......................................... 227
O. Planting Details ................................................................................................. 228
§ 526 Land Use Restrictions and Easements. .................................................................... 229
A. Drainage Easements .......................................................................................... 229
B. Conservation Easements .................................................................................... 229
C. Clear Sight Easements ....................................................................................... 229
D. Utility Easements .............................................................................................. 229
E. Cross-Access Easements ................................................................................... 229
F. Other Land Use Restrictions ............................................................................. 229
§ 527 Lighting. ...................................................................................................................... 230
A. General Requirements ....................................................................................... 230
B. Street Lighting ................................................................................................... 230
C. Illumination for Surface Parking ....................................................................... 231
Table 5.13 Minimum Illumination for Surface Parking .................................... 231
D. Pedestrian Way Illumination ............................................................................. 232
Table 5.14 Pedestrian Way Illumination Requirements. ................................... 232
§ 528 Monumentation. ......................................................................................................... 233
A. Major Subdivision ............................................................................................. 233
B. Minor Subdivision ............................................................................................. 233
C. Performance Bonding of Monuments ............................................................... 233
§ 529 Open Space Standards. .............................................................................................. 234
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
xiv
A. Design Guidelines for Parks and Recreation Areas .......................................... 234
B. Design Objectives for Parks and Recreation Areas ........................................... 234
C. Area Requirements for Open Space .................................................................. 234
D. Frontage Requirements for Open Space ............................................................ 234
E. Minimum Width Requirements for Open Space ............................................... 235
F. Design Guidelines for Greenways ..................................................................... 235
G. Greenway Clearing and Grubbing Limits ......................................................... 235
Table 5.15 Clearing Limits for Greenway Trails. ............................................. 235
H. Greenway Specifications ................................................................................... 235
I. Open Space Organization Requirements ........................................................... 236
§ 530 Parking, Loading Areas and Driveways. ................................................................. 237
A. Requirements ..................................................................................................... 237
B. Parking Location ............................................................................................... 237
C. Off-Street Parking: Number of Spaces .............................................................. 237
Table 5.16 Parking Requirements for Non-Residential Uses. .......................... 237
D. Parking Space Size ............................................................................................ 239
E. Driveway Setback ............................................................................................. 240
F. Parking Lot Setback .......................................................................................... 240
G. Parking Lot Interconnection .............................................................................. 240
H. Reserve Parking ................................................................................................. 240
I. Parking Area Design ......................................................................................... 241
J. Landscaping ...................................................................................................... 242
K. Off-Street Loading ............................................................................................ 242
L. Solid Waste Disposal Standards ........................................................................ 243
M. Lighting. ............................................................................................................ 243
N. Paving and Curbing ........................................................................................... 243
O. Access Drive Intersections with Streets ............................................................ 244
P. Location of Parking and Loading ...................................................................... 244
Table 5.17 Minimum Parking Aisle Widths. ...................................................... 245
Q. Parking Management Plan – Regional Commercial District............................. 245
§ 531 Residential Building Design Standards. ................................................................... 248
A. Apartments ........................................................................................................ 248
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
xv
B. Single Family Detached Residential Building Appearance .............................. 248
C. Townhouses ....................................................................................................... 249
D. Planned Developments ...................................................................................... 250
§ 532 Sanitary Sewers for Non-Residential Uses. .............................................................. 252
A. General Requirements ....................................................................................... 252
B. System Design and Placement .......................................................................... 252
§ 533 Sidewalks and Bikeways for Non-Residential Uses. ................................................ 253
A. Sidewalks .......................................................................................................... 253
B. Bikeways ........................................................................................................... 254
C. Bicycle Parking ................................................................................................. 255
§ 534 Sight Triangles. ........................................................................................................... 256
§ 535 Signs............................................................................................................................. 257
A. Purpose and Intent ............................................................................................. 257
B. Performance ...................................................................................................... 257
C. Sign Permit ........................................................................................................ 257
D. Maintenance ...................................................................................................... 258
E. General Provisions ............................................................................................ 258
F. Design Standards ............................................................................................... 260
G. Signs Allowed Without Permit .......................................................................... 260
H. Sign Area Calculation ....................................................................................... 262
I. Illumination ....................................................................................................... 262
J. Required Street Numbering ............................................................................... 263
K. Temporary Signs ............................................................................................... 263
L. Prohibited Commercial Signs ............................................................................ 266
M. Awning Sign Requirements ............................................................................... 267
N. Changeable Copy Sign Requirements ............................................................... 268
M. Directional Sign Requirements ......................................................................... 269
P. Directory Sign Requirements ............................................................................ 270
Q. Façade Sign Requirements ................................................................................ 270
R. Freestanding Sign Requirements ....................................................................... 271
S. Off-Premise Sign Requirements ........................................................................ 272
T. Historic District Signs ....................................................................................... 272
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
xvi
U. Signs Permitted in the EP-1, EP-2, R-1, R-2A, R2-B, R-3, R-4 and R-5 Districts
........................................................................................................................... 274
V. Signs Permitted in the AT, SCR, PVD-1, PVD-2 and MX-1 Districts ............. 275
W. Signs Permitted in the NC-1, NC-2 and PO Districts ....................................... 275
X. Signs Permitted in the O, RD-1, RD-2, MX-2, MX-3 and LI Districts ............ 276
Y. Signs Permitted in the HC District .................................................................... 277
Z. Signs Permitted in the RC District .................................................................... 278
AA. Signs Permitted in the OS and EGI Districts ..................................................... 279
BB. Non-Conforming Signs ..................................................................................... 280
§ 536 Siting of Buildings ...................................................................................................... 281
A. Design Guidelines for Siting Buildings ............................................................. 281
B. Solar Orientation ............................................................................................... 281
§ 537 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control .......................................................................... 282
A. Purpose: ............................................................................................................. 282
B. Applicability: ..................................................................................................... 282
C. Soil Disturbance Permit..................................................................................... 283
D. Soil Removal Permit ......................................................................................... 284
E. Conditions Applicable to Issuance of Either Soil Disturbance or Soil Removal
Permits ............................................................................................................... 285
F. Appeal ............................................................................................................... 285
G. Performance Guarantee ..................................................................................... 286
H. Inspection and Enforcement .............................................................................. 286
I. Fees.................................................................................................................... 286
J. Penalty ............................................................................................................... 286
§ 538 Solid Waste ................................................................................................................. 287
§ 539 Streets and Curbing ................................................................................................... 288
A. General .............................................................................................................. 288
B. Design Guidelines for Residential Streets ......................................................... 288
C. Right-of-Way for Non-Residential Streets ........................................................ 288
D. Specifications for Non-Residential Streets ........................................................ 289
E. Lighting. ............................................................................................................ 290
F. Street Signs ........................................................................................................ 290
G. Additional Standards ......................................................................................... 290
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
xvii
H. Curbs and Gutters for Non-Residential Streets ................................................. 291
I. Graded Shoulders for Non-Residential Streets .................................................. 292
J. Roadway Excavation ......................................................................................... 292
§ 540 Subdivision Layout. ................................................................................................... 294
A. Lot Configuration .............................................................................................. 294
B. Blocks ................................................................................................................ 294
§ 541 Tree Removal and Tree Cutting. .............................................................................. 295
A. Purpose. ............................................................................................................. 295
B. Permit or Board Approval Required ................................................................. 295
C. Exemptions ........................................................................................................ 295
D. Application Procedures ..................................................................................... 295
E. Tree Protection Zone ......................................................................................... 296
Figure 5.1Schematic Tree Save Areas and Location of Utilities. ..................... 297
F. Standards for Tree Retention ............................................................................. 297
G. Methods of Tree Protection ............................................................................... 298
H. Required Tree Density and Replacement From Development .......................... 300
I. Calculations for RTD ........................................................................................ 301
Table 5.20. Conversion from Caliper to Tree Density Units for Deciduous
Replacement Trees. ........................................................................................... 303
Table 5.21 Conversion from Height to Tree Density Units for Coniferous
Replacement Trees. ........................................................................................... 303
J. Plan Review and Enforcement .......................................................................... 303
K. Revocation. ........................................................................................................ 303
L. Fees.................................................................................................................... 303
M. Appeals .............................................................................................................. 303
N. Violations and Penalties .................................................................................... 303
§ 542 Water Supply. ............................................................................................................. 305
A. Public Water Required ...................................................................................... 305
B. Main Extension ................................................................................................. 305
C. Non-Residential Uses ........................................................................................ 305
D. Dry Lines ........................................................................................................... 305
E. Individual Wells ................................................................................................ 305
F. Capacity Requirements...................................................................................... 306
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
xviii
Table 5.22 Water Demand for Selected Non-Residential Uses. ........................ 306
G. System Design and Placement .......................................................................... 307
H. Fire Protection ................................................................................................... 307
Table 5.23 Minimum Flow Capacity Design Parameters for Fire Control. ..... 307
Table 5.24 Short Method for Determining Minimum Flow Capacity Design for
Fire Control.308
ARTICLE VI AGENCY ESTABLISHMENT AND RULES
§ 600 Establishment of the Planning Board ....................................................................... 310
A. Classes of Membership ..................................................................................... 310
B. Terms of Membership ....................................................................................... 311
C. Role of Alternate Members ............................................................................... 311
D. Vacancies. ......................................................................................................... 311
E. Compensation .................................................................................................... 311
F. Removal ............................................................................................................ 311
G. Conflict .............................................................................................................. 311
H. Substitute Members ........................................................................................... 311
I. Reorganization .................................................................................................. 312
J. Funding .............................................................................................................. 312
K. Board Attorney .................................................................................................. 312
L. Staff. .................................................................................................................. 312
§ 601 Powers and Jurisdiction of the Planning Board. ..................................................... 312
§ 602 Establishment of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. ............................................... 313
A. Membership ....................................................................................................... 313
B. Terms of Members ............................................................................................ 313
C. Role of Alternate Members ............................................................................... 313
D. Additional Memberships ................................................................................... 313
E. Compensation .................................................................................................... 313
F. Removal ............................................................................................................ 313
G. Vacancies .......................................................................................................... 313
H. Conflict .............................................................................................................. 313
I. Substitute Members ........................................................................................... 313
J. Reorganization. ................................................................................................. 314
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
xix
K. Funding .............................................................................................................. 314
L. Board Attorney .................................................................................................. 314
M. Staff ................................................................................................................... 314
§ 603 Powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment. ........................................................... 314
§ 604 Establishment of the Historic Preservation Advisory Committee. ........................ 315
A. Classes of Members........................................................................................... 315
B. Terms of Membership ....................................................................................... 316
C. Role of Alternate Members ............................................................................... 316
D. Vacancies .......................................................................................................... 316
E. Compensation .................................................................................................... 316
F. Removal. ........................................................................................................... 316
G. Conflict .............................................................................................................. 316
H. Organization ...................................................................................................... 316
I. Funding .............................................................................................................. 316
J. Rules and Procedures ........................................................................................ 316
K. Role of the HPAC. ............................................................................................ 317
L. Historic Preservation Guidelines ....................................................................... 317
M. Council Liaison ................................................................................................. 317
§ 605 Powers and Responsibilities of the Historic Preservation Advisory Committee. . 317
§ 606 Additional Powers, Duties and Responsibilities. ..................................................... 317
§ 607 Establishment of the Affordable Housing Board. ................................................... 318
A. Establishment .................................................................................................... 318
B. Membership; Terms of Office ........................................................................... 318
C. Role of Alternate Members ............................................................................... 319
D. Compensation. ................................................................................................... 319
E. Removal. ........................................................................................................... 319
F. Vacancies .......................................................................................................... 319
G. Conflict .............................................................................................................. 319
H. Reorganization .................................................................................................. 319
I. Funding .............................................................................................................. 319
J. Staff. .................................................................................................................. 319
K. Quorum .............................................................................................................. 320
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
xx
§ 608 Powers of the Affordable Housing Board. ............................................................... 320
A. Sales and Rentals ............................................................................................... 320
B. Ordinance Amendments .................................................................................... 320
C. Appeals from Office of Housing and Redevelopment Decisions ...................... 320
D. Funding Requests .............................................................................................. 320
E. Use of Funds ...................................................................................................... 320
F. Marketing Plans. ................................................................................................ 320
ARTICLE VII DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES
§ 700 Division of Jurisdiction in Development Applications. ........................................... 321
A. Planning Board .................................................................................................. 321
B. Zoning Board of Adjustment Action in Lieu of Planning Board ...................... 321
§ 701 Provisions Applicable to Both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of
Adjustment. ................................................................................................................ 322
A. Meetings ............................................................................................................ 322
B. Records of the Board ......................................................................................... 322
§ 702 Public Hearings. ......................................................................................................... 323
§ 703 Decisions. ..................................................................................................................... 324
A. Findings and Conclusions ................................................................................. 324
B. Failure to Adopt Resolution .............................................................................. 324
C. Findings for Planned Developments. ................................................................ 324
§ 704 Public Notice of a Hearing. ........................................................................................ 325
A. Notice Required ................................................................................................. 325
B. No Notice Required ........................................................................................... 325
C. Classes of Notice ............................................................................................... 325
D. Property List ...................................................................................................... 326
E. Proof of Service ................................................................................................. 327
F. Contents of Notice ............................................................................................. 327
§ 705 Standards for Review of Applications. ..................................................................... 327
A. Development Compatibility .............................................................................. 327
B. Relationship to Lawrence Master Plan .............................................................. 327
C. Relationship to Township Development Patterns ............................................. 327
D. Conservation of Open Space ............................................................................. 328
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
xxi
E. Appearance and Aesthetic Control .................................................................... 328
F. Review Guidelines. ........................................................................................... 328
§ 706 Standards for Grant of Variance. ............................................................................. 330
§ 707 Appeals and Applications to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. ............................ 330
§ 708 Appeal of a Zoning Board Decision. ......................................................................... 331
A. Right of Appeal. ................................................................................................ 331
B. Time for Appeal ................................................................................................ 331
C. Stay of Proceedings ........................................................................................... 331
D. Basis of Appeal ................................................................................................. 331
E. Appellant Requirements .................................................................................... 331
F. Notice ................................................................................................................ 331
G. Decision of the Governing Body ....................................................................... 331
§ 709 Time Limits for Decisions. ......................................................................................... 332
A. Effect of Variance Request ................................................................................ 332
B. Variance Bifurcation ......................................................................................... 332
§ 710 Notice of Decisions...................................................................................................... 332
A. Mailing of Decision ........................................................................................... 332
B. Newspaper Notice of Decision .......................................................................... 332
C. Filing of Decision .............................................................................................. 332
§ 711 Exceptions, Waivers, and Special Area Standards for the Residential Site
Improvement Standards ............................................................................................ 332
A. Exceptions ......................................................................................................... 332
B. Waiver Request ................................................................................................. 333
C. Waiver Review .................................................................................................. 334
D. Appeal of Waiver Decisions .............................................................................. 335
E. Special Area Standards ...................................................................................... 336
F. Agreement to Exceed Standards ........................................................................ 338
ARTICLE VIII APPLICATION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
§ 800 Conformity Required. ................................................................................................ 339
§ 801 Submission of Application Required. ....................................................................... 339
A. Subdivision and Site Plan Approval Required .................................................. 339
B. Exemptions from Site Plan Review ................................................................... 339
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
xxii
C. Site Plan Review Waiver ................................................................................... 340
§ 802 Submissions Required for All Applications. ............................................................ 340
§ 803 Permissible Division of Responsibility for Plan Preparation. ................................ 342
A. Depiction of Existing Conditions on a Site Plan ............................................... 342
B. Preparation of a Site Plan .................................................................................. 342
C. Preparation of a Major Subdivision Plat ........................................................... 343
D. Environmental Impact Statement ...................................................................... 343
E. Community Impact Statement ........................................................................... 343
F. Circulation Impact Study................................................................................... 343
G. Other Submissions ............................................................................................. 343
§ 804 Completeness of Applications. .................................................................................. 343
A. Certification of Completeness ........................................................................... 343
B. Submission Requirement Waivers .................................................................... 343
C. Correction of Erroneous Information ................................................................ 343
§ 805 Application for Informal (Concept) Review. ........................................................... 344
§ 806 Application for Minor Subdivision and Minor Site Plan. ...................................... 344
A. Submission Required ......................................................................................... 344
B. Criteria for Minor Classification ....................................................................... 344
C. Minimum Review Time Period ......................................................................... 344
D. Review by Professionals ................................................................................... 345
E. Determination of Completeness ........................................................................ 345
F. Time Period for Consideration .......................................................................... 345
G. Remainder of Tract ............................................................................................ 345
H. Board Action on Applications ........................................................................... 345
I. Effect of Approval: Minor Subdivision ............................................................. 345
J. Effect of Approval: Minor Site Plans ................................................................ 346
K. Expiration of Approval ...................................................................................... 346
L. Distribution ........................................................................................................ 346
§ 807 Application for General Development Plan Approval. ........................................... 346
A. Submission Required ......................................................................................... 346
B. Minimum Tract Area ......................................................................................... 346
C. Minimum Review Time Period ......................................................................... 346
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
xxiii
D. Review by Professionals ................................................................................... 346
E. Determination of Completeness ........................................................................ 346
F. Public notice and hearing .................................................................................. 347
G. Substantial Amendment .................................................................................... 347
H. Remainder of tract ............................................................................................. 347
I. Board Action on Applications ........................................................................... 347
J. Effect of approval .............................................................................................. 350
K. Distribution ........................................................................................................ 351
§ 808 Application for Preliminary Major Subdivision and Site Plan. ............................. 351
A. Submission Required ......................................................................................... 351
B. Minimum Review Time Period ......................................................................... 351
C. Review by Professionals ................................................................................... 351
D. Determination of Completeness ........................................................................ 351
E. Public Notice and Hearing ................................................................................ 351
F. Substantial Amendment .................................................................................... 352
G. Remainder of Tract ............................................................................................ 352
H. Board Action on Applications ........................................................................... 352
I. Effect of approval .............................................................................................. 352
J. Expiration of Approval ...................................................................................... 354
K. Distribution ........................................................................................................ 354
§ 809 Application for Final Major Subdivision and Site Plan. ........................................ 354
A. Submission Required ......................................................................................... 354
B. Minimum Review Time Period ......................................................................... 354
C. Review by Professionals ................................................................................... 354
D. Determination of Completeness ........................................................................ 354
E. Hearing .............................................................................................................. 354
F. Board Action on Applications ........................................................................... 355
G. Effect of Approval ............................................................................................. 355
H. Expiration of Approval ...................................................................................... 356
I. Distribution ........................................................................................................ 356
§ 810 Affordable Housing Restrictions. ............................................................................. 357
§ 811 Recording of Final Plat After Approval. .................................................................. 357
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
xxiv
§ 812 Environmental Impact Statement. ........................................................................... 358
A. When Required .................................................................................................. 358
B. Submission Format ............................................................................................ 359
C. Site description and inventory ........................................................................... 359
§ 813 Community Impact Statement. ................................................................................. 361
A. When Required .................................................................................................. 362
B. Submission Format ............................................................................................ 362
§ 814 Circulation Impact Study. ......................................................................................... 363
A. When Required .................................................................................................. 363
B. Submission Format ............................................................................................ 363
Table 8.1. Distribution of Submission Copies .................................................. 365
Table 8.2. Submission Checklist ....................................................................... 367
ARTICLE IX FEES, GUARANTEES, INSPECTIONS AND OFF-TRACT
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 900 Application and Escrow Fees. ................................................................................... 378
A. Fee Schedule ..................................................................................................... 378
B. Purpose of Fees ................................................................................................. 381
C. More Than One Request .................................................................................... 381
D. Costs of Review and Inspection ........................................................................ 381
E. Court Reporter ................................................................................................... 381
F. Waiver of Fees for Affordable Housing ............................................................ 381
§ 901 Affordable Housing Contribution ............................................................................ 381
A. Purpose .............................................................................................................. 381
B. Basic Requirements ........................................................................................... 382
C. Definitions ......................................................................................................... 382
D. Residential Development Fees. ......................................................................... 383
E. Non-Residential Development Fees .................................................................. 384
F. Collection Procedures........................................................................................ 385
G. Affordable Housing Trust Fund ........................................................................ 386
H. Use of Funds ...................................................................................................... 387
I. Monitoring ......................................................................................................... 388
J. Ongoing Collection of Fees ............................................................................... 388
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
xxv
§ 902 Guarantees Required for On- and Off-tract Improvements. ................................. 389
A. Guarantee Required ........................................................................................... 389
B. Time Period for Installation .............................................................................. 390
C. Developer Liability............................................................................................ 390
§ 903 Certification or Guarantee required; Estimate of Guarantee. .............................. 390
A. Improvements to be Installed ............................................................................ 390
B. [Repealed. Ord. 2304-18, 8/28/18] .................................................................... 390
C. [Repealed. Ord. 2304-18, 8/28/18] .................................................................... 390
D. Determination of Maintenance Guarantee Estimate .......................................... 391
§ 904 Approval by Township Attorney. ............................................................................. 391
§ 905 Bonding and Cash Requirements. ............................................................................ 391
§ 906 Inspections and Tests. ................................................................................................ 392
§ 907 Reduction of Guarantee. ............................................................................................ 393
§ 908 Conditions for Acceptance of Improvements; Maintenance Guarantee. .............. 396
§ 909 Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. ...................................................................... 397
§ 910 As-Built Plan Requirements. ..................................................................................... 398
§ 911 Off-Tract Improvements. .......................................................................................... 398
A. Payment of Pro Rata Share ................................................................................ 398
B. Improvements to be Constructed at the Sole Expense of the Applicant ........... 398
C. Other Improvements .......................................................................................... 398
D. Cost Allocation .................................................................................................. 399
E. Costs Included ................................................................................................... 399
F. Performance Guarantee ..................................................................................... 400
G. Refund of Deposit ............................................................................................. 400
H. Deposit of Funds ............................................................................................... 400
I. Redetermination of Assessment Upon Completion of Improvements .............. 400
ARTICLE X AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROCEDURAL AND ELIGIBILITY
REQUIREMENTS
§ 1000 Purpose and General Provisions. .............................................................................. 401
§ 1001 Affordable Housing Required. .................................................................................. 401
§ 1002 Affordable Housing Administrator and Administrative Agent ............................. 402
§ 1003 Submission of Affordable Housing Plan. ................................................................. 404
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
xxvi
§ 1004 Household Income Limitations. ................................................................................. 406
§ 1005 Household Income Verification. ............................................................................... 407
§ 1006 Certificate of Eligibility, Waiting List and Selection .............................................. 410
§ 1007 Unit Standards and Requirements. ........................................................................... 412
Table 10.1 Minimum Size of Affordable Housing Units. .................................. 413
Table 10.2 Required Percentage of Affordable to Market Units. ...................... 413
§ 1008 Initial Selling and Renting Determinations. ............................................................. 414
§ 1009 Affordability Controls for Ownership Units. .......................................................... 416
§ 1010 Affordability Controls on Rental Dwellings. ............................................................ 418
§ 1011 Accessibility Requirements. ....................................................................................... 418
§ 1012 Exempt Transactions.................................................................................................. 420
§ 1013 Leasing Restriction. .................................................................................................... 420
§ 1014 Effect on Landlord and Tenant Relationship. .......................................................... 420
§ 1015 Affirmative Marketing for Affordable Housing....................................................... 421
§ 1016 Violations of Article X Regulations. .......................................................................... 423
ARTICLE XI HISTORIC PRESERVATION
§ 1100 Purpose. ....................................................................................................................... 427
§ 1101 Establishment of Historic Preservation Regulations. ............................................. 427
§ 1102 Designation of Historic Landmarks. ........................................................................ 427
A. Authority ........................................................................................................... 427
B. Criteria for Designation ..................................................................................... 427
C. Compilation of Landmarks ................................................................................ 428
D. Hearing Required .............................................................................................. 428
E. Report of Findings ............................................................................................. 428
F. Planning Board Recommendation ..................................................................... 429
G. Establishment of Historic Designation .............................................................. 429
H. Recording of Historic Status ............................................................................. 429
I. Historic Districts Map ....................................................................................... 429
§ 1103 Actions Requiring Review by the Historic Preservation Advisory Committee. ... 429
§ 1104 Emergency Actions. ................................................................................................... 430
§ 1105 Referral of Development and Permit Applications to the Historic Preservation
Advisory Committee. ................................................................................................. 430
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
xxvii
A. Development Application .................................................................................. 430
B. Building Permit ................................................................................................. 430
§ 1106 Review of Development Applications. ...................................................................... 431
A. Completeness .................................................................................................... 431
B. Report Issuance ................................................................................................. 431
C. Review by Board of Jurisdiction ....................................................................... 431
§ 1107 Review of Permit Applications. ................................................................................. 431
§ 1108 Effect of Project Approval, Denial, Appeal. ............................................................ 432
A. Approval ............................................................................................................ 432
B. Denial ................................................................................................................ 432
C. Postponement of Demolition ............................................................................. 432
§ 1109 Demolitions. ................................................................................................................ 432
§ 1110 Moving Structures. ..................................................................................................... 433
§ 1111 Historic Criteria. ........................................................................................................ 433
§ 1112 Standards for Rehabilitation and Adaptive Reuse. ................................................. 434
§ 1113 Design Elements and Additional Criteria. ............................................................... 435
A. Minimum Consideration.................................................................................... 435
B. Buildings and Structures ................................................................................... 435
C. Building Site ...................................................................................................... 436
§ 1114 Penalties. ..................................................................................................................... 437
§ 1115 Use of Detection Devices. ........................................................................................... 437
§ 1116 Notice of Historic Status in Contracts for Sale. ....................................................... 438
ARTICLE XII ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATIONS, AND
PENALTIES
§ 1200 Administration. .......................................................................................................... 439
§ 1201 Enforcement. .............................................................................................................. 439
§ 1202 Zoning Permit. ............................................................................................................ 440
§ 1203 Certificate of Occupancy Precedents........................................................................ 442
A. Requirements Precedent to the Issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy ........... 442
§ 1204 Violations. ................................................................................................................... 443
§ 1205 Penalties. ..................................................................................................................... 443
A. Fines .................................................................................................................. 443
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County Table of Contents
xxviii
B. Selling Land Before Final Subdivision Approval ............................................. 444
ARTICLE XIII
AMENDMENT, SEVERABILITY, INTERPRETATION REPEALER, AND
ENACTMENT
§ 1300 Amendments. .............................................................................................................. 445
§ 1301 Severability of Ordinance .......................................................................................... 445
§ 1302 Interpretation. ............................................................................................................ 445
§ 1303 Repealer. ..................................................................................................................... 445
§ 1304 Enactment. .................................................................................................................. 445

Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §100 - 110
1
LAND USE ORDINANCE
of the
TOWNSHIP OF LAWRENCE
ARTICLE I.
TITLE AND PURPOSE
§ 100 Title.
A comprehensive Ordinance regulating and limiting the uses of land and the uses and locations of
buildings and structures; regulating and restricting the height and bulk of buildings and structures and
determining the area of yards and other open spaces; regulating and limiting the density of
population; dividing the Township of Lawrence into districts for such purposes; adopting a map of
said Township showing boundaries and the classification of such districts; establishing rules,
regulations and standards governing the subdivision of land within the Township; establishing a
Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment, Historic Preservation Advisory Commission, and
Affordable Housing Board; and prescribing penalties for the violation of its provisions.
§ 101 Short Title.
The short form by which this Ordinance may be known shall be “THE LAND USE ORDINANCE
OF THE TOWNSHIP OF LAWRENCE".
§ 102 Purpose and Intent.
It is the intent and purpose of this Ordinance to exercise the authority delegated to municipalities
under the Municipal Land Use Law (P.L. 1975, c. 291; codified as N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.) to
regulate development.
The implementation of the Master Plan through the provisions of this Ordinance is intended:
A. To guide the appropriate use or development of all lands in a manner that will promote the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare;
B. To secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other natural and manmade disasters;
C. To provide adequate light, air and open space;
D. To ensure that the development of the Township of Lawrence does not conflict with the
development and general welfare of neighboring municipalities, the county and State as a
whole;
E. To promote the establishment of appropriate population densities and concentrations that
will contribute to the well-being of persons, neighborhoods, communities and regions and
preservation of the environment;
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §100 - 110
2
F. To encourage the appropriate and efficient expenditure of public funds by the coordination of
public development with land use policies;
G. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a variety of agricultural, residential,
recreational, commercial and industrial uses and open space, both public and private,
according to their respective environmental requirements in order to meet the needs of all
New Jersey citizens;
H. To encourage the location and design of transportation routes which will promote the free
flow of traffic while discouraging location of such facilities and routes which will result in
congestion or blight;
I. To provide a desirable visual environment through creative development techniques and
good civic design and arrangements;
J. To promote the conservation of historic sites and districts, open space, energy resources and
valuable natural resources and to prevent urban sprawl and degradation of the environment
through improper use of land;
K. To encourage planned unit development which incorporates the best features of design and
relate the type, design and layout of residential, commercial, industrial and recreational
development of the particular site;
L. To encourage senior citizen community housing construction;
M. To encourage the coordination of various public and private procedures and activities
shaping land development with a view of lessening the cost of such development and to the
more efficient use of land;
N. To promote utilization of renewable energy sources;
O. To promote the maximum practical recovery and recycling of recyclable materials from
municipal solid waste through the use of planning practices designed to incorporate the State
Recycling Plan goals and to compliment municipal recycling programs;
P. To discourage the creation of additional highway commercial uses except in areas
specifically designated on the zoning map and to encourage mixed use neighborhood centers;
Q. To discourage small scale office development outside of designated neighborhood
commercial areas;
R. To encourage, within areas identified in the Master Plan, a mixture of land uses that facilitate
non-vehicular and pedestrian access;
S. To place higher density housing only in areas:
1. With sufficient capacity in the transportation system;
2. With access to public transit;
3. Near shopping and other personal convenience services, and;
4. In locations with public sewer and water;
T. To maintain traditional architectural forms in higher density housing by utilizing the highest
possible design standards.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §100 - 110
3
U. To plan adequately for the timely provision of new community facilities, including but not
limited to:
1. Firehouses;
2. Schools;
3. Community Centers;
4. Parks;
5. Bicycle lanes and pedestrian paths;
6. Municipal facilities; and
7. Public transit.
V. To encourage the redevelopment of existing underutilized or abandoned lands and buildings;
W. To promote the redevelopment of the commercial core of the village of Lawrenceville
through coordinated parking, streetscape improvements, signage, and lighting in keeping
with the historic character of this district;
X. To preserve and enhance historic buildings, places and landscapes, encourage the
maintenance of traditional architectural forms in buildings, and retain rural road
characteristics, including but not limited to the following areas:
1. Delaware and Raritan Canal and associated areas;
2. Port Mercer;
3. The Lawrenceville School;
4. Lawrenceville Village;
5. Sites designated on State and National Registers of Historic Places; and
6. Adjacent or nearby sites that by their proximity to listed places influence the nature
of historical places.
Y. To establish design standards to encourage the construction of new buildings to complement
the style and scale of existing buildings;
Z. To protect environmentally sensitive lands from development or other potentially damaging
influences and to control the clearing of land that would adversely affect threatened or
endangered plant and animal species;
AA. To promote the preservation of natural features during land development;
BB. To preserve remaining farmland and rural areas, through:
1. Transfer of development credits from farmland into appropriate receiving areas;
2. Residential clustering in areas adjacent to agriculture;
3. Use of traditional rural design in roadways and landscaping;
4. Limiting the extension of public sewers to areas suitable for more intensive
development;
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §100 - 110
4
CC. To encourage open space dedications in the development review process to maximize the
quantity and quality of such land in accordance with the criteria in the adopted Township
Master Plan, and provide improved access to existing parks;
DD. To create a Greenway Network to preserve and enhance existing stream corridors,
connecting parks and conservation areas and using the Network for pedestrian and bicycling
in areas capable of supporting such activity;
EE. To promote the visual improvement of the Township's major arterials by the coordination of
visual design and character of signage, planting additional street trees, and requiring on-site
landscaping improvements during the redevelopment review process.
FF. To improve streetscapes in existing residential areas, non-residential and rural areas, through:
1. Installing a row of street trees, or a double row where possible, on all collector and
arterial roads;
2. Using textured materials for sidewalks and crosswalks;
3. The use of decorative fencing as a landscape design element in multi-family housing
developments;
4. The installation of hedges and hedgerows; and
5. Requiring underground utilities in development and redevelopment.
GG. To discourage the widening, except for safety purposes or bicycle lanes, of existing collector,
subcollector and residential access roads in existing developments and where rural
development patterns are present, restricting new residential roads to two lanes, preserving
the level of service by reducing curb cuts and discouraging speeding by the use of traffic
calming measures.
HH. To encourage the coordination of development through the connection of commercial
properties by easement and physical improvement.
II. To help retain existing rural character by designing new rural roads with two lanes, narrow
shoulders, drainage ditches and hedges or hedgerows;
JJ. To decrease the visibility and extent of parking lots and access driveways by:
1. Requiring the installation of landscaped traffic islands in parking lots;
2. Screening parking lots from the traveling public and adjacent residents by a
combination of landscaping, berming, walls and fencing; and
3. Reducing the required number of parking spaces in pedestrian-oriented development
and redevelopment.
KK. To provide for the conservation and, where appropriate, the improvement of the entire length
of the Delaware and Raritan Canal State Park to the extent possible by municipal
government and assure that the development of adjoining properties protects and enhances
the resources and qualities of the Canal Park;
LL. To provide for the redevelopment of Alternate Route 1 (Brunswick Pike) south of Colonial
Lake, by promoting a commercial boulevard through the reduction of cartway width, an
increase in the median area and improvements to paving, landscaping, building facades,
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §100 - 110
5
signage and lighting.
MM. To provide, to the greatest extent feasible, the natural control of storm water from land
development while preserving the existing contours and natural features of the site; restrict
development on steep slopes to reduce negative impacts on stream bank stability and to
control erosion.
§ 103 Interpretation of Standards.
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the protection of
the public health, safety, and welfare. Where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction than is
imposed and required by other provisions of the Code of the Township of Lawrence, county, state, or
federal government, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control. Where such other laws,
ordinances, rules, regulations, or resolutions require greater restrictions than are imposed by this
Ordinance, the provisions of such other laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, or resolutions shall
control.
§ 104 Prohibited Uses.
All uses not expressly permitted in this Ordinance are hereby prohibited.
§ 105 Time of Compliance.
All applicable requirements shall be met at the time of erection, enlargement, alteration, moving or
change in use of the principal use and shall apply to the entire structure or structures whether or not
the entire structure or structures were involved in the erection, enlargement, alteration, moving or
change in use.
§ 106 Proposed Public Dedications.
Approval of final plans by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be,
shall constitute an acceptance of proposed dedications for streets, parks, and other public uses or
purposes. Nonetheless, such approval shall not constitute an acceptance of physical improvements on
such dedicated land and shall not impose on the Township any obligation of jurisdiction or
maintenance of such improvements. The acceptance of such physical improvements shall be by
action of the Township Council in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.
§ 107 Public Notice for Variances.
Public notice shall be given for applications otherwise excepted from the requirements of public
notice whenever variance relief is requested.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §100 - 110
6
§ 108 Expiration of Variances.
In the event a variance is granted for an application exempt from the requirements of site plan or
subdivision review, the applicant shall secure a building permit, or, in the case where no building
permit is required, a certificate of occupancy, within one year from the date of approval; otherwise
the granting of the variance shall be deemed null and void. In the event a variance is granted for a
bifurcated application for development, the applicant shall apply for site plan or subdivision approval
within one year of the date of approval of the variance; otherwise the granting of the variance shall be
deemed null and void (see also §706.B). The Board of Jurisdiction may extend the grant of the
variance for a period of up to one year if the applicant proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the
Board that the applicant was barred or prevented, either directly or indirectly, from obtaining a
building permit, or, in the case where no building permit is required, a certificate of occupancy within
the one year time period from the date of approval.
§ 109 Date of Approval.
The time period for the effect of approval shall begin with the date of the adoption of the resolution
memorializing such approval of the subject application by the Board of Jurisdiction.
§ 110 Conformance with Regulations; Exceptions.
A. Required Conformance. No building shall be erected and no existing building shall be
moved, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt, nor shall any land be designed, used or intended to be
used for any purpose other than as permitted within the zoning districts so described by this
Ordinance, nor shall any open space or yard area be encroached upon or reduced in any
manner except in strict conformity with the regulations contained herein.
B. Principal Building; Yard and Lot Regulations.
1. More than one principal building shall be permitted on a lot except for any lot
containing atrium, duplex, patio home, semi-detached, single family detached and
fee simple quadraplex and townhouse dwellings. Multiple buildings on a single lot
may be used for different purposes in accordance with the use regulations
established for the zoning district in which the buildings are located or by duly
authorized variance. [Ord. 2159-13, 5/21/13]
2. Unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance, where a lot is formed from part of a lot
already occupied by a building, any subdivision shall be executed in such a manner
so as to not create or exacerbate any violation of the requirements of the ordinance
with respect to the existing building and all yard, setback, buffers and open space in
connection therewith. All resulting lots shall have dimensions consistent with the
requirements of the zoning district in which they are located. [Ord. 1941-07, 9/4/07]
C. Unlawful Encroachment. In the event of any unlawful encroachment or reduction of open
space or yard area, the building or structure, as the case may be, shall be deemed in violation
of the provisions of this Ordinance and the certificate of occupancy for such building or
structure shall be null and void.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §100 - 110
7
D. Exception for Certain Utilities and Other Infrastructure. The provisions for review by a
Board of competent jurisdiction shall not apply to utility distribution or collection lines for
water, sewerage, storm water, natural gas, and electric, nor telephone, and cable television or
other telecommunications lines supplied by a public or local utility, or cable television
company which are located in a public street providing service to private property.
E. Frontage on Public Street. Every principal use shall be located on a lot with frontage upon a
public street which has been improved in accordance with the applicable Township standards
or for which such improvement has been insured by the posting of a performance guaranty in
accordance with this Ordinance.
F. Dedication of Right-of-Way. No subdivision or site plan involving any street(s) requiring
additional right-of-way width as specified in the Master Plan or Official Map and the street
requirements of this Ordinance shall be approved unless such additional right-of-way, either
along one or both sides of said street(s), as applicable, shall be deeded to the municipality or
other appropriate governmental agency.
G. Yards. No open space provided around any principal building for the purposes of complying
with the front, side, or rear yard requirements of this Ordinance shall be considered as
providing for the required yard areas of another principal building.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
8
ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS
§ 200 Word Usage.
Any word or term not defined herein shall be as defined in the Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A.,
40:55D-1 et seq., or shall be utilized in standard usage for the context in which the word is used. In
interpreting this Article words in one tense shall include other tenses or derivative forms; words in
the singular shall include the plural and in the plural, the singular; either gender shall include the
other; the word "shall" is mandatory; the word "may" is permissive; the word "used" shall include
"arranged," "designed," "constructed," "altered," "converted," "rented," "leased," or "intended to be
used"; the word "lot" includes the words "plot," and "premises".
§ 201 Definitions.
Definitions identified with the initials "MLUL" are taken from the Municipal Land Use Law
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). "RSIS" means the definition was taken from the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq.). Unlabeled definitions pertain only to this Ordinance.
The following definitions shall have the meanings indicated:
AADT (Average annualized daily traffic): the total yearly traffic volume in both directions of travel
divided by 365.
ACCESS: A single vehicular entrance and/or exit between a street and a lot.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT: One or more rooms with private bath, kitchen facilities and a private
entrance comprising an independent, self-contained dwelling unit on a single lot occupied by a single
family detached dwelling as the principal use of the property. [Ord. 2350-19, adopted 12/17/19]
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE: A use or structure subordinate to the principal use of a
building or structure on the same zone lot and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the use of
the principal building.
ADDITION: The construction of a new improvement which changes the exterior appearance of a
building or structure which comprises an existing improvement.
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER: The Director of the Division of Planning and Redevelopment of the
Township of Lawrence or designee responsible for administering the responsibilities and authorities
specified for the Administrative Officer in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-3.
ADT: See AADT.
ADULT DAY CARE: A non-residential facility operating for 6 and not more than 18 hours per day
that provides meals, social and recreational activities under general supervision for elderly persons
and adult persons with disabilities not eligible for school-based services. [Ord. 2350-19, adopted
12/17/19]
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
9
ADULT MEDICAL DAY CARE: An adult day care facility that also provides care for persons with
Alzheimer’s and related dementias with one or more medical assistants or nurses on site during
operating hours. [Ord. 2350-19, adopted 12/17/19]
ADVERSE EFFECT: Conditions or situations created by a proposed development that impose,
aggravate or lead to impractical, unsafe or unsatisfactory conditions on the subject site, adjoining
properties or the surrounding community; or a deviation from the standards of this Ordinance not
approved by a Board of competent jurisdiction.
ADVISORY DATA: Information on a changeable copy sign presented in a manner that can be read
and comprehended in one second or less time, including but not limited to, the time, the temperature
and date. [Ord. 2072-10, 12/21/10]
AESTHETIC IMPROVEMENT CUT: The removal to the extent possible of the minimum number,
smallest and poorest specimens of trees so as to permit land development while retaining the
maximum number of larger and better specimens of trees.
AFFECTING A LANDMARK OR HISTORIC DISTRICT: Any action which alters or changes a
historic landmark or an improvement within a historic district.
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT: A low or moderate income dwelling unit.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING BOARD (AHB): A board appointed by the governing body pursuant to
§607 of this Ordinance.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENT: A development included in the Housing Element and
Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to, an inclusionary development, a municipal
construction project or a 100 percent affordable development. [Ord. 2012-09, 5/5/09]
AFFORDABLE RENTAL CHARGES: A monthly rent including utilities charged to an eligible low
or moderate income family which shall not exceed 30% of their monthly gross income as calculated
by N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(f).
AFFORDABLE SALES PRICE: The initial price for owner-occupied affordable housing such that
the costs of ownership do not exceed 28% of gross monthly income pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-7.4(e).
AGE-RESTRICTED DEVELOPMENT: A residential development including accessory buildings
and required or permitted social, cultural, medical and recreational facilities limited to certain age
groups conforming to 24 CFR Part 100 Subpart E, Housing for Older Persons, of the federal Fair
Housing Amendments Act of 1988, as it may be amended or superseded.
AGRICULTURAL USE: The use of land for common farmsite activities including but not limited to:
production, harvesting, storage, grading, packaging, processing, marketing and sales of same; and,
the use and application of techniques and methods of soil preparation and management, fertilization,
weed, disease, and pest control, disposal of farm waste, irrigation, drainage and water management
and grazing.
AIR SAFETY AND HAZARD ZONE: Any such district delineated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 16:62-6.
AISLE: The traveled way by which cars enter and depart parking spaces. [RSIS]
ALLEY: A public or private street primarily designed to serve as secondary access to the side or rear
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
10
of those properties whose principal frontage is on some other street.
ALTERATIONS OR ADDITIONS, STRUCTURAL: Any change in or additions to the supporting
members of a building such as walls, columns, beams, girders, posts or piers.
ANIMAL KENNEL: Any building, structure or premises in which animals are kept, boarded, bred or
trained for commercial gain.
ANIMAL SHELTER: Any place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment. Use
as a kennel shall be limited to short-term boarding and shall be incidental to such hospital use.
ANTENNA: Any exterior transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower, building or structure
and used in communications that radiate or capture electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog
signals, radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunication signals or other
signals. [Ord. 1585-99, adopted 9/7/1999]
APARTMENT: See DWELLING UNIT.
APPLICANT: A developer submitting an application for development. [MLUL]
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT: The application or appeal forms, together with the required
fees and all accompanying documents required by this Ordinance for approval of a subdivision plat,
site plan, planned development, conditional use, zoning variance or direction for issuance of a permit
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 or N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36. [MLUL]
APPROVED IMPROVEMENTS: Capital improvements made to an affordable housing unit with the
prior written consent of the Affordable Housing Board.
APPROVING AUTHORITY: The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment of the
municipality unless a different agency is designated by Ordinance. [MLUL]
AQUIFER: A saturated geologic formation(s) or unit(s) which is sufficiently permeable to transmit
water to a pumping well in usable and economic quantities. The upper level of an unconfined aquifer
may vary over time; the term "aquifer" applies to the full saturated zone at any time.
AQUIFER RECHARGE AREA: A geologic formation through which water enters an aquifer.
ARTERIAL ROAD OR STREET: See STREET, ARTERIAL.
AS-BUILT PLAN: A survey by a New Jersey licensed land surveyor that indicates improvements on,
above, and below the ground after construction pursuant to a final site plan or subdivision approval
precedent to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
ASSISTED LIVING RESIDENCE: A facility which is licensed by the NJ Department of Health and
Senior Services to provide apartment-style housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted
living services are available when needed, for four or more adult persons unrelated to the proprietor.
In the context of this definition, "apartment" shall mean a dwelling unit offering at a minimum, one
unfurnished room, private bathroom, kitchenette, and a lockable door on the unit entrance.
AUTO BODY SHOP: An establishment that repairs and repaints motor vehicles after collision, fire
damage, water damage, or other natural disaster or for the purpose of restoration.
AUTOMOBILE SALES: The use of any building, land or other property for the display and sale of
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
11
new and used automobiles, light trucks and vans, trailers or recreational vehicles and including
vehicle preparation, repair and auto body work as accessory uses.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING: An establishment that recycles parts and other materials from motor
vehicles or otherwise disposes of same.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE CENTER: A service station which does not sell fuel. [Ord. 1941-07,
9/4/07]
AWNING: A roof-like cover that is temporary or movable in nature and that projects from the wall of
a building for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements and that may be
periodically retracted against the face of the building.
BALCONY: An unroofed outdoor living area cantilevered from the face of a building on second or
higher floors extending no more than 10 feet therefrom. Compare with DECK and PORCH.
BASEMENT: The portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade.
BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CARE FACILITY: A building or portion of a building, whether private
profit or non-profit, or institutional, principally engaged in providing services for inpatient and
outpatient services for treatment of victims of addiction, psychiatric, psychological, or other
behavioral health condition where care may be provided on a short term or long term basis whose
operators are licensed to provide such services by the State of New Jersey, but not to include
hospitals and other health care facilities, or residential medical detoxification centers; a Level I, Level
II.1, Level II.5, Level III.1, Level III.5, or Level III.7 treatment facility as classified by the Division
of Addiction Services, NJ Department of Human Services. [Ord. 2174-14, 3/18/2014]
BED AND BREAKFAST: A facility providing overnight accommodations with a morning meal to
transients for compensation.
BEDROOM: A room planned or used primarily for sleeping.
BELGIAN BLOCK: A type of paving stone used as curbing generally cut in a truncated pyramidal
shape, laid with the base of the pyramid down.
BERM: A mound of soil, either natural or constructed, used for one or more of the following
purposes: screen, buffer, separator, landscape feature, noise attenuator, dam, or stormwater control.
[RSIS]
BICYCLE-COMPATIBLE ROADWAY: A road designed to accommodate the shared use of the
roadway by bicycles and motor vehicles.
BICYCLE LANE (BIKE LANE): A portion of a roadway which has been designated by striping,
signing, and pavement markings for the preferential or exclusive use of bicyclists. [RSIS]
BICYCLE PATH (BIKE PATH): A bikeway physically separated from motorized vehicular traffic
by an open space or barrier, and either within the highway right-of-way or within an independent
right-of-way or easement. [RSIS]
BIKEWAY: Any road, path, or way which in some manner is specifically designated as being open
to bicycle travel, regardless of whether such facilities are designated for the exclusive use of bicycles
or are to be shared with other transportation modes. [RSIS]
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
12
BILLBOARD: See SIGN, OFF-PREMISE.
BLOCK: The area bordered by one or more streets or a municipal boundary of sufficient size to
accommodate a lot or lots of the minimum size required in this chapter.
BLOW OFF: A device to allow the escape of air, fluid, or sediments from a pipe within which fluid
is flowing under pressure greater than atmospheric pressure. [RSIS]
BOARD or BOARD OF JURISDICTION: The Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Adjustment
of the Township of Lawrence, as the case may be.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT: The Zoning Board of Adjustment established pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-69.
BOARDING HOUSE: Any building, together with any related structure, accessory building, and land
appurtenant thereto, and any part thereof, which contains two or more units of dwelling space
arranged or intended for single room occupancy, exclusive of any such unit occupied by an owner or
operator, and wherein personal or financial services are provided to the residents.
BUFFER: A yard area inclusive of yard setbacks; an area within a property or site, generally adjacent
to and parallel with the property line, either consisting of natural existing vegetation or created by the
use of trees, shrubs, fences, and/or berms, designed to continuously limit view of and/or sound from
the site to adjacent sites or properties; also termed a buffer yard. [Ord. 1585-99, adopted 9/7/1999]
BUILDABLE AREA: The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard and open space
requirements of this Ordinance have been met and excluding 100-year flood plain, freshwater
wetlands, and freshwater wetlands transition buffers.
BUILDING: A combination of materials to form a construction adapted to permanent, temporary, or
continuous occupancy and having a roof. [MLUL]
BUILDING COVERAGE: The horizontal square footage or other area measurement by which all
buildings occupy a lot as measured by a vertical plane established by the outside edge of the roof or
roofs.
BUILDING HEIGHT: The vertical distance measured to the highest point from the mean elevation of
the finished grade at the foundation along the side(s) of the building facing a street. In all cases
where this Ordinance provides for height limitations by reference to a specific height and a specified
number of stories, the intent is to limit height to the specified maximum footage and the specified
number of stories within said footage.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A structure in which is conducted the principal use of the site on which it
is situated.
BULK REGULATIONS: Standards and controls that establish the maximum size of building and
structures on a lot and the buildable area within which the building may be located, including area,
coverage, setback, height, floor area ratio, and yard or other requirements affecting the physical
placement of buildings and structures on a lot.
BUSINESS PARK: A non-residential land use developed as a single entity combining office,
research and development, and laboratory uses which may contain ancillary personal services,
overnight accommodation, and eating establishments primarily for use by employees and visitors to
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
13
the complex.
CABANA: An accessory building used in conjunction with a private residential swimming pool for
use as a changing room and pool equipment storage and which may contain showering facilities.
CABLE TELEVISION COMPANY: A cable television company as defined pursuant to N.J.S.A.
48:5A-3. [MLUL]
CAFETERIA: See RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD
CALIPER: For measurement of nursery stock, the diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches at a
point 12 inches above natural grade. For woodland management or tree surveying, the diameter of a
tree trunk measured 4 ½feet above natural grade.
CAMPER: Any of the following:
A. A self-propelled, vehicular structure built as one unit on a chassis and designed for
temporary living for travel, recreation, vacation or other short-term uses which may contain
cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities.
B. An immobile structure containing cooking and sleeping facilities for travel, recreation,
vacation or other short-term uses and designed to be attached to the body of another vehicle
for transporting from one location to another.
C. A portable, vehicular structure built on a chassis, designed for camping, the body of which is
basically rectangular with a flat top not more than 4 feet above the surface of the ground.
The camper is designed to have a temporary tent erected above the 4 foot level for camping
activities.
D. A portable structure built on a chassis designed for towing and as temporary dwelling for
travel, recreation, vacation and other short-term uses and having an outside body width not
exceeding 8 feet and a length not exceeding 30 feet, and which may contain cooking,
sleeping and sanitary facilities.
CANOPY: A roof-like structure, open to the elements on four sides, which is used to protect outdoor
equipment, such as motor fuel pumps or a pedestrian walkway.
CAPPED SYSTEM: A completed water supply and/or sewerage system put in place for future use
(contingent upon expansion), rather than to meet immediate development needs. [RSIS]
CARTWAY: The actual road surface area from curbline to curbline which may include travel lanes,
parking lanes, and deceleration and acceleration lanes. Where there are no curbs, the cartway is that
portion between the edges of the paved, or hard surface, width. [RSIS]
CAR WASH: Any building or premises or potions thereof used for washing automobiles, light trucks
and vans for compensation.
CELLAR: See BASEMENT.
CEMETERY: A use of land for the burial of the dead.
CENTERLINE OF STREET: The mean width of any public right-of-way.
CENTERLINE OFFSET OF ADJACENT INTERSECTIONS: The gap between the centerline of
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
14
roads intersecting a common road, as measured along the centerline of the intersected road. [RSIS]
CERTIFICATION, AFFORDABLE HOUSING: The approval of an applicant as an eligible
purchaser or renter of an affordable housing unit by the Affordable Housing Board or its designee.
CERTIFICATION, SOIL EROSION: Written endorsement by the Municipal Engineer of a plan for
soil erosion and sediment control which indicates that the plan meets the standards established by the
Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey as promulgated by the State Soil
Conservation Commission (N.J.S.A. 4:24-39 et seq.).
CERTIFIED PLAN, SOIL EROSION: A plan for soil erosion and sediment control which meets the
Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey as promulgated by the State Soil
Conservation Commission as determined and approved by the Municipal Engineer, or a soil erosion
and sediment control plan which the municipality has not acted upon within the time specified in this
Ordinance for review of such plan.
CHANNEL: Any natural or man-made waterway or course through which to convey the constant or
intermittent flow of water. [RSIS]
CHILD CARE CENTER: Any home or facility that is maintained for the care, development, or
supervision of six or more children under 13 years of age who attend the center for less than 24 hours
a day and may include, but not be limited to, day care centers; drop-in centers; night-time centers;
recreation-type centers sponsored and operated by a county or municipal government recreation or
park department or agency; day nurseries; nursery and play schools; cooperative child centers;
centers for children with special needs; centers serving sick children; infant-toddler programs;
school-age child care programs; employment-related centers; centers that had been licensed by the
Department of Human Services prior to the enactment of the Child Care Center Licensing Act of
1984; and kindergartens and pre-kindergartens that are not an integral part of a private educational
institution or system offering elementary education in grades kindergarten through sixth grade
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq. [Ord. 2350-19, adopted 12/17/19]
CIRCULATION: Systems, structures and physical improvements for the movement of people, goods,
water, air, sewage or power by such means as streets, highways, railways, waterways, towers,
airways, pipes and conduits, and the handling of people and goods by such means as terminals, transit
stops, station, warehouses and other storage buildings or transshipment points. [MLUL]
CIRCULATION IMPACT STUDY: A written and, if appropriate, graphic analysis combining a
planning report and traffic impact report projecting the effect of a proposed development on the
Circulation Element of the Master Plan, Greenway Network, and adjacent or nearby roads and
intersections (see Article VIII).
CIVIC BUILDING: A building owned, operated and utilized for municipal purposes.
CLEAR CUTTING: The removal of all standing trees on a lot or portion of a lot.
CLUB, OUTDOOR: A private organization principally for the enjoyment of outdoor recreation such
as golf, tennis, swimming, riding, hiking and fishing. Accessory facilities may be included if clearly
subordinate to the outdoor use such as covered tennis courts fewer in number than open courts, yearround
pools, lockers and incidental eating and social functions.
CLUB, SOCIAL OR FRATERNAL: A private organization for social purposes in which the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
15
principal use is in enclosed buildings and limited outdoor sports are involved.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT: See PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.
COAH: The New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing.
COLLECTOR ROAD OR STREET: See STREET, COLLECTOR.
COMMERCIAL EXPRESSION OR MESSAGE: Any sign wording, logo, figure, symbol, color,
illumination, fixture, projection, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises,
or calls attention to a business product, service, or other commercial activity. [Ord. 2072-10,
12/21/10]
COMMERCIAL VEHICLES: Vehicles used in the conduct of business, retail, service or industrial
purposes.
COMMON LATERAL: See LATERAL, COMMON.
COMMON OPEN SPACE: An open space area within or related to a site designated as a
development, and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents and owners of the
development. Common open space may contain such complementary structures and improvements
as are necessary and appropriate for the use or enjoyment or residents and owners of the
development. [MLUL]
COMMON PROPERTY: A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water, or a combination of land
and water, together with the improvements thereon which are designed and intended for the
ownership, use and enjoyment shared by the residents and owners of the development. Common
property may contain such complementary structures and improvements as are necessary and
appropriate for the benefit of the residents and owners of the development.
COMMUNITY IMPACT STATEMENT: A written and, if appropriate, graphic analysis projecting
the impact of the proposed development on existing municipal facilities and services, and projecting
future requirements for such facilities and services, together with their estimated cost (see Article
VIII).
COMPLETE APPLICATION: An application for development complete for purposes of
commencing the applicable time period for action by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment, as the case may be, when so certified by the Board or its authorized designee as
indicated in Article VIII of this Ordinance.
CONCEPT PLAN: See PLAN, CONCEPT
CONDITIONAL USE: A use permitted in a particular zoning district only upon a showing that such
use in a specified location will comply with the conditions and standards for the location or operation
of such use as specified in this Ordinance.
CONFERENCE CENTER: A facility including one or more buildings totaling not more than
110,000 square feet with space for business and social activities, which may contain accommodations
for eating and sleeping, not to exceed 100 guest rooms. [Ord. 1779-04, adopted 3/2/2004]
CONGREGATE CARE APARTMENT: A rental apartment often developed as part of a continuing
care retirement community with communal dining facilities and services, such as housekeeping,
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
16
organized social and recreational activities, transportation services, and other similar support services
for residents.
CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY: An age-restricted development that provides
a continuum of accommodations and care, from independent living to long-term bed care and which
enters into contracts to provide lifelong care in exchange for the payment of monthly fees plus an
entrance fee in excess of one year of monthly fees conforming to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-330 et seq.
CONVENIENCE STORE: A retail store which sells a limited variety of prepackaged sundries, dry
goods and food. [Ord. 2159-13, 5/21/13]
CONVENTIONAL DEVELOPMENT: Development other than planned development. [MLUL]
COURT: Any open space, unobstructed from the ground to the sky, that is bounded on three or more
sides by the exterior walls of buildings.
COURTYARD: Any open, unoccupied area which is bounded by three or more attached building or
walls.
CRITICAL AREAS: Water bodies (including streams, ponds and lakes), 100-year flood plains,
freshwater wetlands, aquifer recharge areas, habitats of threatened or endangered species, high water
table within one foot of the surface and slopes in excess of 25%; areas with sediment-producing,
highly erodible or severely eroded soils.
CUL-DE-SAC: See STREET, CUL-DE-SAC
CULVERT: A closed or open conduit designed for the purpose of conveying an open channel
watercourse under a road, highway, pedestrian walk, railroad embankment, or other type of overhead
structure. [RSIS]
CURB: A vertical or sloping edge of a roadway constructed of concrete, Belgian block, or stone.
DAMS AND EMBANKMENTS: Artificial dikes, levees, or other barriers, with appurtenances, for
the purpose of impounding or retaining water. [RSIS]
DAY CARE CENTER: See Child Care Center. [Ord. 2350-19, adopted 12/17/19]
DAYS: Calendar days. [MLUL]
DECK: A raised unroofed platform either attached to a dwelling or freestanding in the approved yard
area. Compare with BALCONY and PORCH. [Ord. 1810-04, adopted 9/21/2004]
DEDICATION: An appropriation of land to some public use made by the owner and accepted for
such use by or on behalf of the public. [RSIS]
DEMOLITION: The partial or total razing or destruction of any building or of any improvement to
land.
DENSITY: The permitted number of dwelling units per gross area of land to be developed [MLUL];
gross density.
DENSITY, NET: Density of a housing development after roads, common open space and storm
water management areas are deducted, calculated by dividing area by total units.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
17
DENSITY, RESIDENTIAL: The number of dwelling units per gross acre of residential land area
including streets, easements, and open space portions of a development.
DESIGN ENGINEER: A person professionally qualified and duly licensed to perform engineering
services that may include but not necessarily be limited to development of project requirements,
creation and development of project design, and preparation of drawings and specifications. [RSIS]
DESIGN GUIDELINES: Instructions that provide a general framework for sound planning and
improvements to real property.
DESIGN STANDARDS: Regulations that set forth specific improvement requirements. [RSIS]
DETENTION BASIN: A man-made or natural water collector facility designed to collect surface or
subsurface water in order to impede its flow and to release collected water gradually at a rate not
greater than that existing prior to the development of the property, into natural or man-made outlets.
DEVELOPER: The legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land proposed to be
included in a proposed development, including the holder of any option or contract to purchase, or
any other person having enforceable proprietary interest in such land. [MLUL]
DEVELOPMENT: The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more parcels, the construction,
reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any building or other
structure, or any mining, excavation of landfill, and any use or change in use of any building or other
structure or land or extension of use of land, for which permission may be required. [MLUL]
DEVELOPMENT FEE: Money paid by a developer for the improvement of property as permitted in
N.J.A.C. 5:97-8.3. [Ord. 2012-09, 5/5/09]
DEVELOPMENT REGULATION: A zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance, site plan ordinance,
official map ordinance or other municipal regulation of the use and development of land, adopted
pursuant to the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.). [MLUL]
DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT: See CALIPER.
DISTRICT: The zoning districts per this Ordinance.
DIVIDED STREET: See STREET, DIVIDED.
DRAINAGE: The removal of surface water or ground water from land by drains, grading, or other
means, including the control of runoff during and after construction or development to minimize
erosion and sedimentation, to assure the adequacy of existing and proposed culverts and bridges, to
induce water recharge into the ground where practical, to lessen non-point pollution, to maintain the
biological function of stream channels, the means necessary to preserve an adequate water supply,
and the prevention or alleviation of flooding. [MLUL]
DRAINAGE FACILITY: Any component of the drainage system. [RSIS]
DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Natural and man-made components that contain, convey, absorb, store,
treat, or dispose of surface water runoff or groundwater. [RSIS]
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY: Lands required along a stream or watercourse for preserving the
channel and providing for the flow of water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage; or,
required for the installation and maintenance of storm sewers and facilities, or drainage ditches and
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
18
swales.
DRIVEWAY: A defined paved or unpaved surface providing vehicular access to a street. A
driveway is not a road, street, boulevard, highway, or parkway. [RSIS]
DROP MANHOLE: An inspection chamber used at changes in horizontal and/or vertical directions
for underground utility conduits where the incoming conduit is two feet or more above the elevation
of the discharge conduit. [RSIS]
DROP PIPE: A vertical pipe used to convey sewage from a higher to a lower elevation. [RSIS]
DRY LINES: See CAPPED SYSTEM
DWELLING UNIT: A room or series of connected rooms designed for permanent human habitation
containing living, cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities for one housekeeping unit.
DWELLING, APARTMENT: One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities comprising
an independent, self-contained dwelling unit in a building comprising three or more such units.
DWELLING, ATRIUM: A single family unit with a courtyard upon which interior doors open.
DWELLING, DUPLEX: A building on a single lot containing two dwelling units each of which is
totally separated from the other, one of which is wholly or partially above the other, with separate
entrances at the ground level.
DWELLING, PATIO HOME: A single family unit with its long axis perpendicular to the street
defined by its offset rectangular halves joined at the middle.
DWELLING, QUADRAPLEX: Four attached dwellings in one building in which each unit has two
open space exposures and shares a common interior wall with one or two adjoining units, with
separate ground floor access for each unit. Units are joined side to side, but are not located one above
another.
DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED: A single family unit attached to one other such unit on one side
by a common unpierced vertical wall from ground to roof on its own separate lot.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED: A building physically separated from other buildings
or portions of buildings which is occupied or intended to be occupied for residential purposes by one
family. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the development of an accessory apartment as otherwise
permitted shall be included in this definition.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE: A single family dwelling in a row of 3 or more such units separated
from one another by an unpierced vertical wall from ground to roof.
EASEMENT: A right to use the real property of another or a restraint from doing something
otherwise lawful on one's land, created by deed or other legal means for the benefit of private persons
or the public, for one or more specific purposes such as access, drainage, provision of utility services,
historic preservation, conservation or agricultural purposes.
EASEMENT, AGRICULTURAL: An easement which restricts land only for agricultural or farm
purposes.
EASEMENT, CONSERVATION: An easement generally prohibiting the construction of buildings
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
19
and intended for protection of environmentally sensitive areas including mature tree stands, flood
plains, important views and critical areas as defined by this Ordinance.
EASEMENT, CROSS ACCESS: A portion of a property which is permanently reserved for the
purpose of enabling vehicular and/or non-vehicular access between adjoining properties and may be
either improved or unimproved. [Ord. 1585-99, adopted 9/7/1999]
EASEMENT, SIGHT: An easement that establishes a clear sight triangle.
EAVE: The projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building.
EDGE DEFINITION: As it pertains to streets, a way of identifying the traveled way from the nontraveled
way, such as by the use of railings, bollards, wheel stops, or edge plantings. [RSIS]
EDUCATIONAL or RESEARCH INSTITUTION: A corporate or non-profit organization
occupying a tract of the minimum size as otherwise specified in this Ordinance involving scientific
investigation, engineering study, product development, or educational activities.
ECHO (Elder Cottage Housing Opportunities) HOUSING: A small, removable modular cottage
placed on a concrete slab or treated wood foundation in a rear or side yard of a single family detached
house lot specifically designed to meet the needs of older or disabled people, connected to the utilities
of the primary dwelling, and designed to be removed when it is no longer necessary.
ELECTRIC VEHICLE PARKING SPACE – A public or private parking space that is served by
battery charging station equipment that has as its primary purpose the transfer of electrical energy (by
conductive or inductive means) to a battery or other energy storage device in an electric vehicle. [Ord.
2351-19, 12/17/19]
ELIGIBLE LOW OR MODERATE INCOME FAMILY: A family whose income does not exceed
the limits established by Article X.
EMERGENCY SHELTER: A building or structure in which a public entity or a private, non-profit
organization provides shelter, or food and shelter, for a limited period of time to individuals and
families having neither a home nor the means to obtain a home or other temporary lodging.
EMERGENCY SPILLWAY: A supplemental spillway whose function is to pass the design storm
flows in the event the principal spillway fails to operate as designed or is blocked. [RSIS]
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS: Critical areas that limit the development potential of a tract.
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT: A written and graphic statement describing,
analyzing and assessing the anticipated effects of a proposed development on environmental
constraints and critical lands pursuant to this Ordinance (see Article VIII).
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS: Critical areas plus their transition buffers.
EQUALIZED ASSESSED VALUE: The assessed value of a property divided by the current average
ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in which the property is situated, as determined in
accordance with sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L.1973, c.123 (C.54:1-35a through C.54:1-35c). [Ord. 2012-
09, 5/5/09]
ERECT: To build, construct, attach, place, suspend, or affix, including the painting of wall signs and
the painting of signs or displays on the exterior surface of the building, structure or material surface.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
20
EROSION: The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water, wind, ice, and gravity.
[MLUL]
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN: A plan which fully indicates necessary land
treatment measures including a schedule of the timing for their installation which will effectively
minimize soil erosion and sedimentation. Such measures shall be at least equivalent to the minimum
standards and specifications contained in the Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in
New Jersey, as promulgated by the State Soil Conservation Committee.
ESCROW: A deed, bond, money, or a piece of property held by a third person to be delivered by him
or her to the grantee only upon fulfillment of a condition or upon the grantor's failure to fulfill a
condition.
EXTENDED STAY LODGING FACILITY: A lodging establishment designed and intended for the
temporary lodging of business travelers which includes a cooking area and related appurtenances in
every room, which has limited maid service, front desk and reception services but which does not
include restaurants, conference facilities or retail/convenience stores. [Ord. 1567-99, adopted
3/2/1999]
EWING-LAWRENCE SEWERAGE AUTHORITY (ELSA): A public body created pursuant to the
Sewerage Authorities Law, C:138, P.L. 1946, as may be amended, to acquire, construct, maintain,
operate or improve works for the collection, treatment, purification or disposal of sewage and other
wastes within the Township of Lawrence and other municipalities.
EXCAVATION OR CUT: Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered,
removed, displaced or relocated.
FACADE AREA - The total area of the exterior face of a building including walls, windows, doors,
and fixtures below the top of the parapet of a building with a flat roof, the cornice line of a building
with a gambrel, gable, or hip roof, or the upper slope line of a building with a mansard roof, that
faces a public street, pedestrian walkway, or mall.
FAMILY: One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as a single household, who are living
together as a stable and permanent living-unit, being a traditional family or the functional equivalent
thereof.
FAMILY DAY CARE: A private residence of a family day care provider, which is registered as a
family day care home pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:5B-16. [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19]
FARM: An area of land which is actively devoted to agricultural, silviculture or horticultural use and
which occupies no less than 5 acres, exclusive of the land upon which any farmhouse is located and
such additional land as may be provided in accordance with N.J.S.A. 54:4-23.4, -23.5 and -23.11.
FARM MARKET: A permanent enclosed building typically operated year round where products
primarily grown or produced on the farm where it is located are sold.
FARM STAND: A structure where products primarily grown or produced on the farm where it is
located are sold and which is open only during the growing and harvesting seasons.
FARMSTEAD: A group of buildings on a farm which includes a residence for the farmer engaged in
agricultural activities on the site, and storage buildings for equipment, livestock, crops, and other
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
21
items used in farming; grange.
FENCE: An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal, or any other
manufactured material or combination of materials. [RSIS]
FINAL APPROVAL: The official action of the Board taken on a preliminary approved major
subdivision or site plan, after all conditions, engineering plans and other requirements have been
completed or fulfilled and the required improvements have been installed or guarantees properly
posted for their completion, or approval conditioned upon the posting of such guarantees. [MLUL]
FIRST FLOOR AREA: The residential portion of a dwelling unit, excluding basements, garages,
carports and breezeways, measured by using the outside dimensions of the residential portion of the
building. For a split-level, bi-level, or tri-level dwelling, the area shall be considered to be the sum of
the areas of two adjoining levels, excluding basements and garages, provided both levels are
connected by permanent, built-in stairs in the interior of the building.
FLAG: A piece of cloth or flexible material, varying in size, shape, color, and design, usually
attached at one edge to a staff or cord, and used as a means of conveying a message or information.
[Ord. 2072-10, 12/21/10]
FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry areas from:
A. Inland or tidal waters; and
B. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface water from any source.
FLOOD, DESIGN: The relative size or magnitude of a flood, expressed as a design discharge in
cubic feet per second; which is developed from hydrologic criteria, represents a major flood of
reasonable expectancy, reflects both flood experience and flood potential, and is the basis of the
delineation of the floodway and the flood hazard area and of the water surface elevation thereof.
FLOOD, DESIGN PROFILE: The elevations of the water surface of the floodway design flood and
the flood hazard area design flood.
FLOOD ELEVATION DETERMINATION: A determination of the water surface elevations of the
design flood, i.e., the flood level that has a 1% or greater chance of occurrence in any given year.
FLOOD FRINGE AREA: The portion of the flood hazard area outside the floodway. See exhibit.
FLOOD HAZARD AREA: Land in the floodplain subject to flooding during a flood having a flow of
125% of a 100-year flood.
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP: An official map of the Township on which the boundaries
of the flood area having special hazards have been designated.
FLOOD INSURANCE MAP: An official map of the Township on which has been delineated the
special flood hazard areas in the Township for flood insurance purposes.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
22
FLOOD OBSTRUCTION: An object that includes, but is not limited to, any structure, fill,
excavation, channel modification, rock, gravel, refuse or matter in, along, across, or projecting into
any channel, watercourse, or flood area which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow
of water either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such water or that is placed
where the flow of water might carry the collected debris downstream to pose a danger to life or
property.
FLOOD PLAIN: The relatively flat area adjoining a water channel which has been or may be covered
by flood water of the channel, including the floodway, flood fringe area, and the flood hazard area.
See exhibit.
FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATION: State or local regulations, in any combination
thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOODWAY: The river or other watercourse and the adjacent land area that must be reserved in
order to discharge the design flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more
than two-tenths (0.2) foot. See exhibit.
FLOOR AREA: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building, measured
from the exterior walls of the building. Floor area shall not include areas devoted to mechanical
equipment serving the building, areas devoted exclusively to off-street parking for motor vehicles,
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
23
and truck loading and unloading spaces, open or roofed spaces designed for pedestrian movement
from parking/loading areas, nor any space where the floor-to-ceiling height shall be less than 6½ feet.
[Ord. 1941-07, 9/4/07]
FLOOR AREA, GROSS (G.F.A.): The plan projection of all roofed areas on a lot multiplied by the
number of full stories under each roof section, provided that the area under any roof overhang of 2
feet or less shall not be included in the G.F.A. calculation. GFA shall not include: areas in a roofed
structure devoted exclusively to off-street parking for motor vehicles and truck loading and unloading
spaces; and open or roofed spaces designed for pedestrian movement from parking/loading areas.
Basements which satisfy applicable construction code definitions of habitable space shall be included
in the G.F.A. for residential uses. [Ord. 1941-07, 9/4/07]
FLOOR AREA, NET HABITABLE (N.H.F.A.): The finished and heated area fully enclosed by the
inside surfaces of walls, windows, doors and partitions and having a headroom of at least 6½ feet
including working, living, eating, cooking, sleeping, stair, hall, service and storage areas, but
excluding garages, carports, parking spaces, cellars, half-stories and unfinished attics and basements.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (F.A.R.): The sum of the area of all floors of buildings or structures
compared to the total area of the site. [MLUL]
FORESTRY: See SILVICULTURE.
FRONTAGE: See LOT FRONTAGE.
GARAGE: A deck, building, or parking structure, or part thereof, used or intended to be used for the
parking and storage of vehicles.
GARAGE, COMMERCIAL: An accessory structure used for the parking and storage of vehicles
used in the operation of a non-residential use, or their customers or employees, that is not available to
the general public.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A structure that is accessory to a residential building and that is used for the
parking and storage of vehicles owned and operated by the residents thereof that is not a commercial
enterprise available to the general public for such use.
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A structure, building or portion thereof used for the parking and storage of
vehicles, but not repair, available to the general public for commercial gain.
GARAGE, REPAIR: Any building, premises and land in which, or upon which, a business, service or
industry involving the maintenance, servicing or repair of vehicles is conducted or rendered.
GARDEN CENTER: A retail or wholesale operation which sells nursery plants, seasonal plants,
gardening supplies and equipment.
GAS STATION: See SERVICE STATION
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN: A comprehensive plan for the development of a planned
development pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.2. [MLUL]
GOLF COURSE: A tract of land laid out for at least nine holes for playing the game of golf and
improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards that may include a clubhouse, dining and
refreshment facilities, driving ranges and miniature golf courses as accessory uses.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
24
GOVERNING BODY: The Township Council of the Township of Lawrence.
GRADE: The slope of a road, path, driveway, swale or other surface or the average finished ground
elevation adjoining a building at project completion.
GRANITE BLOCK CURB: Also known as Belgian block curb, means a curb constructed of
rectangular-shaped stone or granite blocks, usually placed vertically in a concrete foundation. [RSIS]
GREEN BUILDING STRATEGIES: Those strategies that minimize the impact of development on
the environment, and enhance the health, safety and well-being of residents by producing durable,
low-maintenance, resource-efficient housing while making optimum use of existing infrastructure
and community services. [Ord. 2012-09, 5/5/09]
GREENHOUSE: An enclosed temperature controlled structure of glass or clear plastic used for the
purpose of growing plants for subsequent sale or personal enjoyment.
GREENWAY: Any of the following:
A. A linear open space established along either a natural corridor, such as a riverfront,
stream valley, or ridge line, or overland along a railroad right-of-way converted to
recreational use, a canal, a scenic road, or other route; or
B. Any natural or landscaped course for pedestrian or bicycle passage; or
C. An open space connector linking parks, natural reserves, cultural features, or historic
sites with each other and with populated areas.
GROSS DENSITY: See DENSITY
GROSS LEASABLE AREA (GLA): The total of all leasable square footage including closets,
mechanical rooms and hallways except that in a regional shopping mall the following shall be
excluded from GLA: the floor area of any roofed structure used for parking, loading and unloading;
open or roofed spaces designed for pedestrian movement from parking/loading areas; and interior
common areas which provide for pedestrian access to the individual businesses/shops within the mall.
[Ord. 1941-07, 9/4/07]
GROUND COVER: Low-growing plants or sod that in time form a dense mat covering the area in
which they are planted.
GROUP HOME: A profit or nonprofit boarding home for the sheltered care of four or more adult
persons, providing personal care or service in addition to food and shelter.
GUTTER: A shallow channel, usually set along a curb or the pavement edge of a road, for purposes
of catching and carrying off runoff water. [RSIS]
HABITABLE FLOOR: Any floor with a minimum height of 6½ feet including the basement, usable
for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreational functions, or a
combination thereof. A floor usable only for storage shall not be considered a habitable floor.
HEALTH CARE FACILITY: A building or portion of a building such as a hospital, whether private
or an institution, principally engaged in providing inpatient and outpatient services for physical health
maintenance, diagnosis (including testing) and treatment of human diseases, pain or other physical
condition of patients; acute care facility; rehabilitation hospital; ambulatory surgical center. Care may
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
25
be provided on a short term or long term basis. Outpatient services may also be provided as a
secondary service. Such facilities may include laundries, cafeterias, gift shops, laboratories, and
medical offices as accessory uses. [Ord. 2174-14, 3/18/2014]
HISTORIC DISTRICT: One or more historic sites and intervening or surrounding property
significantly affecting or affected by the quality and character of the historic site or sites [MLUL];
such sites exhibit the following characteristics:
A. Represent a significant period in the history of the Township; or
B. Have a distinctive character resulting from their architectural style, relationship to other
buildings, spaces, scale or other design elements; or
C. Because of their distinctive character, can readily be viewed as an area or neighborhood
distinct from surrounding portions of the Township; and
D. Should be preserved because of its importance to cultural, historical, or architectural
purposes and motives.
HISTORIC LANDMARK (or LANDMARK): Any buildings, structures, sites, objects, or districts
which possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, or association, and
which have been determined, pursuant to the terms of this Ordinance, to be historically important.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION ADVISORY COMMITTEE: The body which, for the purposes of this
Ordinance, acts as the historic preservation commission pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107.
HISTORIC SITE: Any real property, man-made structure, natural object, or configuration or any
portion or group of the foregoing historical, archaeological, cultural, scenic, or architectural
significance. [MLUL]
HMFA - The New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency.
HOME OCCUPATION: An activity carried out for gain by a resident, conducted entirely within a
dwelling unit, which occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the lot for residential
purposes, pursuant to the criteria in §429.
HORTICULTURE: The growing or raising of nursery plants for sale for landscape purposes.
HOTEL: A building consisting of individual sleeping units designed for transient travelers and not
for permanent residency, except that up to 3% of the total units may be provided for the sole use of
resident employees, typically with a height of three or more stories, with a centralized lobby and
elevator bank.
HOUSE OF WORSHIP: A building used for religious purposes.
HOUSEHOLD: A family living together in a single dwelling unit, with common access to and
common use of all living and eating areas and all areas and facilities for the preparation and serving
of food within the dwelling unit.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT: See HOUSEHOLD.
IES: Illuminating Engineering Society of North America. [RSIS]
ILLUMINANCE: The amount of light measured in foot-candles that falls onto an object or plane.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
26
[Ord. 2199-14, 10/7/14]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: A surface that has been compacted or covered with a layer of material so
that it is highly resistant to infiltration by water. [RSIS] For the purposes of this Ordinance, detention
and retention basins and dry wells shall not be considered impervious surfaces; however graveled
areas shall be considered impervious surfaces.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO: The total area of impervious surfaces divided by the total site
area.
IMPOUNDMENT: A man-made body of water, such as a pond, confined by a dam, dike, floodgate
or other barrier. [RSIS]
IMPROVED PUBLIC STREET: For subdivision purposes or site plan, any street which complies in
width and construction with municipal standards. [RSIS]
IMPROVEMENT: Any constructed element which becomes part of, is placed upon, or is affixed to
real estate. [RSIS]
INCLUSIONARY DEVELOPMENT: A residential housing development in which at least 5% of the
housing units in the development are affordable housing.
INFILL DEVELOPMENT: The development of a new building on a lot which is located within a
built-up area. For purposes of application of the Neighborhood Context standards for residential
development in certain districts infill development shall consist of all new development and certain
expansion/renovation of single family detached houses on lot(s) within the applicable districts after
[effective date of Ordinance] including development on pre-existing lots as well as development on
lots created by minor and major subdivision applications approved after March 6, 2007. [Ord. 1920-
07; 3/6/07]
INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION: An educational institution of higher learning chartered
by the State, or a private educational institution approved by and subject to regulations prescribed by
the State and giving instructions or affording facilities for study and research in academic or technical
subjects primarily at or above the college level.
INTERESTED PARTY: Any of the following:
A. In a criminal or quasi-criminal proceeding, any citizen of the State of New Jersey; and
B. In the case of a civil proceeding in any court or in an administrative proceeding before a
municipal agency, any person, whether residing within or without the municipality, whose
right to use, acquire, or enjoy property is or may be affected by any action taken under this
Ordinance, or whose rights to use, acquire, or enjoy property under this Ordinance, or under
any other law of this State or of the United States have been denied, violated or infringed by
an action or a failure to act under this act. [MLUL]
INTERSTATE NATURAL GAS PIPELINE FACILITY: Any interstate natural gas pipeline facility
regulated by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and the United States Department of
Transportation. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
ISLAND: In street design, a raised area, usually curbed, placed to guide traffic and separate lanes, or
used for landscaping, signing, or lighting. [RSIS]
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
27
ITEMS OF INFORMATION: A syllable, symbol, logo, initial, abbreviation, an unbroken group of
numbers; each word in a registered trademark or service mark; or, a broken geometric plane.
ITE: Institute of Transportation Engineers. [RSIS]
JUNK YARD: Any space, whether inside or outside a building, used for the storage, keeping or
abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling,
demolition, salvage, resale or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts
thereof.
KENNEL: See ANIMAL KENNEL.
LAKES AND PONDS: Natural or artificial bodies of water which retain water year-round.
LAND: Real property including improvements and fixtures on, above, or below the surface.
LAND (for soil erosion control purposes): Any ground, soil or earth, including marshes, swamps,
drainage ways and areas within the municipality not permanently covered by water.
LAND DISTURBANCES: Any activity involving an excavation or cut, stripping or other
disturbance of land or soil as herein defined.
LANDLOCKED: A lot or parcel of land without direct access to a public street.
LATERAL, COMMON: A lateral serving more than one unit. [RSIS]
LATERAL (PLUMBING/SEWER): Pipes conducting sewage from individual buildings to larger
pipes called trunk, or interceptor, sewers that usually are located in street rights-of-way. [RSIS]
LIGHT MANUFACTURING: Manufacturing or assembly of semi-finished products, not including
chemical or physical change of raw materials into products.
LIGHTING, SAFETY: Lighting which ensures the proper level of illumination to provide safe
passage and the identification of any outdoor hazards. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
LIGHTING, SECURITY: Lighting installed solely to enhance the security of people and property.
[Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
LIVESTOCK: Animals grown, raised or bred for sale for human consumption or pleasure.
LOADING SPACE: An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building or group of buildings
for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading, according to criteria
established in this Ordinance.
LOCAL UTILITY: Any, utility, authority, commission, special district, or other corporate entity not
regulated by the Board of Regulatory Commissioners under Title 48 of the Revised Statutes that
provides gas, electricity, heat, power, water, or sewer service to a municipality or the residents
thereof; any sewerage authority created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14A-1 et seq.; or any utilities
authority created pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:14B-1 et seq. [MLUL]
LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY: An institution or a distinct part of an institution that is licensed or
approved to provide health care under medical supervision for 24 or more consecutive hours to two
or more patients who are not related to the governing authority or its members by marriage, blood, or
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
28
adoption. Long-term care facility shall include the terms skilled nursing facility and intermediate
care facility.
LOT: A designated parcel, tract, or area of land established by plat or otherwise permitted by law and
to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit. [MLUL]
LOT AREA: The area contained within the lot lines of a lot not including any portion of a street
right-of-way.
LOT, CORNER: A lot on the junction of an abutting two or more intersecting streets where the
interior angle of intersection does not exceed one hundred thirty-five (135 °) degrees. Each corner lot
shall have two front yards, one side yard, and one rear yard, as per §400.D.1.
LOT COVERAGE: The total area covered by impervious surfaces on a property, including but not
limited to, buildings, surfaced or unsurfaced parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, patios, pools and
decks.
LOT DEPTH: The shortest horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line drawn parallel to
the front lot line through the midpoint of the rear lot line. See exhibit.
LOT, FLAG: A lot located to the rear of another lot, connected to the public street frontage common
to both lots by a narrow strip of land.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
29
LOT FRONTAGE: The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured along the street line. See
exhibit following.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The lot line abutting a road right-of-way, the STREETLINE.
LOT LINE, REAR: The lot line opposite and most distant from the front lot line or the point at which
the two (2) side lot lines meet, as the case may be.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.
LOT WIDTH: The straight and horizontal distance between side lot lines at setback points on each
side lot line measured an equal distance back from the street line. The minimum lot width shall be
measured at the minimum required building setback line and shall equal lot frontage. See exhibit,
above.
LOW INCOME HOUSING UNIT: A dwelling unit priced to be affordable to low income
households as defined by N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.3, as it may be amended or superseded.
MAIN: In any system of continuous piping, the principal artery of the system to which branches may
be connected. [RSIS]
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE: Any security which may be accepted by Lawrence Township for
the maintenance of improvements required by this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, surety
bonds, letters of credit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.5, and cash. [MLUL]
MANAGEMENT PLAN: The written information containing the proposed methods and procedures
to be employed in conjunction with a tree removal project.
MANHOLE: An inspection chamber located at changes in horizontal and vertical directions for
underground utility conduits whose dimensions allow entry, exit, and working room. [RSIS]
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
30
MANNING EQUATION: A method for calculating the hydraulic capacity of a conduit to convey
water.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A unit of housing which:
A. Consists of one or more transportable sections which are substantially constructed off-site
and, if more than one section, are joined together on site; or
B. Is built on a permanent chassis; or
C. Is designed to be used, when connected to utilities, as a dwelling on a permanent foundation;
and
D. Is manufactured in accordance with the standards promulgated for a manufactured home
pursuant to the "National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974," P.L. 93-383 (43 U.S.C. and 5401, et seq.) and the standards promulgated for a
manufactured mobile home pursuant to the "State Uniform Construction Code Act," N.J.S.A.
52:27D-119, et seq.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: See, STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS.
MASTER PLAN: A composite of one or more written or graphic proposals for the development of
the municipality as set forth and adopted by the Planning Board pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-28.
[MLUL]
MEAN ELEVATION: The average of the ground level measurements computed at the four extreme
corner points of any existing or proposed building.
MEDIAN: That portion of a divided highway separating the traveled ways of traffic proceeding in
opposite directions. [RSIS]
MEDICAL CLINIC: A public health facility, blood donor center, kidney dialysis center, or walk-in
medical office not requiring prior appointment.
MEMBER OF THE IMMEDIATE FAMILY: A spouse, parent, grandparent, child, grandchild, great
grandchild, aunt, uncle, great aunt, great uncle, niece, nephew or spousal equivalent of same.
MIXED USE: Two or more different uses, one of which is residential. [RSIS]
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT: See PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
MLUL: Municipal Land Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1, et seq.
MOBILE HOME: See MANUFACTURED HOME. For the purposes of this Ordinance, travel
trailers and campers shall not be considered mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME LOT: A parcel of land in a mobile home park which is improved with the necessary
utility connections and other appurtenances necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile
home and which is leased by the park owner to the occupants of the mobile home erected on the lot.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSING UNIT: A dwelling unit priced to be affordable to moderate
income households as defined by N.J.A.C. 5:93-1.3, as it may be amended or superseded.
MOTEL: A building or buildings containing a series of rooms for rent to transients, with direct access
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
31
to the exterior of each unit without the necessity for passage through the main lobby.
MOVING LANE: Any traffic lane where traffic movement is the primary if not sole function.
(Compare with PARKING LANE.) [RSIS]
MULCH: A layer of wood chips, dry leaves, straw, hay, plastic, or other materials placed on the
surface of the soil around plants to retain moisture, prevent weeds from growing, hold the soil in
place, and aid plant growth. [RSIS]
MUNICIPAL ENGINEER: A licensed professional engineer of the State of New Jersey appointed by
the governing body of the Township responsible for the administration of engineering concerns
within the municipality.
NEIGHBORHOOD CONTEXT: For the purpose of interpreting the residential infill development
requirements in certain of the Township's residential zoning districts, the term "Neighborhood
Context" shall refer to the structures and improved lots devoted exclusively to residential use within a
specified distance (the "Neighborhood Context Distance") of the subject infill development lot. The
Neighborhood Context Distance, as set forth in the bulk standards of the respective zoning districts,
shall be measured in both directions from the infill development lot along the frontage street (or
streets, in the case of a corner infill development lot) and shall include the structures and improved
lots on both sides of said street(s). See following exhibits: [Ord. 1920-07; 3/6/07]
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
32
NON-CONFORMING LOT: A lot, the area, dimension or location of which was lawful prior to the
adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the
requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment. [MLUL]
NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURE: A structure the size, dimension or location of which was
lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform
to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by reason of such adoption, revision or
amendment. [MLUL]
NON-CONFORMING USE: A use or activity which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or
amendment of a zoning ordinance, but which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning
district in which it is located by reasons of such adoption, revision or amendment. [MLUL]
NURSING HOME: See LONG-TERM CARE FACILITY
OFF-SITE: Located outside the lot lines of the lot in question but within the property (of which the
lot is a part) which is the subject of a development application, or on a contiguous portion of a street
right-of-way or drainage or utility easement. [MLUL]
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE: A temporary storage area for a motor vehicle that is directly
accessible to an access aisle only and that is not located on a dedicated street right-of-way.
OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE: A temporary loading area for a truck or delivery van that is
directly accessible to an access aisle, and that is not located on a dedicated street right-of-way
OFF-TRACT: Not located on the property which is the subject of a development application or on a
contiguous portion of a street right-of-way of drainage or utility easement. [MLUL]
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
33
OFF-TRACT IMPROVEMENTS: Improvements to land located outside of a development site or
tract, including but not limited to roads, utilities, water, sewerage, storm water facilities, public
transit, public facilities, and affordable housing together with any appurtenant land or easements
necessary to construct such improvements.
OFFICE, MEDICAL: A building or portion of a building principally engaged in providing services
for health maintenance, diagnosis (including testing) and treatment of human diseases, pain or other
physical or mental condition of patients solely on an outpatient basis, but not to include a behavioral
health care center or residential medical detoxification facility. No overnight patients shall be kept on
the premises. Examples of medical offices shall include but not be limited to general physicians,
dentists, chiropractors, psychologists, cardiologists and other various specialties. [Ord. 2174-14,
3/18/14]
OFFICE PARK: A non-residential land use developed as a single entity combining general, business,
professional, and medical offices which may contain ancillary personal services primarily for
employees.
OFFICE, RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT: A building or portion of a building principally
engaged in developing new products or procedures, or to improvement of existing products or
procedures. Research and development offices may include laboratory space, pilot manufacturing and
production space and/or office space. [Ord. 2174-14, 3/18/14]
OLD GROWTH WOODLAND: Woodland having a long uninterrupted period of species
development which is substantially free of human interferences or natural disturbances.
ON-SITE: Located on the lot in question. [MLUL]
ON-STREET PARKING SPACE: A temporary storage area for a motor vehicle that is located on a
dedicated street right-of-way.
ON-TRACT: Located on the property which is the subject of a development application or on a
contiguous portion of a street or right-of-way. [MLUL]
OPEN SPACE: Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated,
designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment or for the use and enjoyment of owners
and occupants of land adjoining or neighboring such open space; provided that such areas may be
improved with only those buildings, structures, streets and off-street parking and other improvements
that are designed to be incidental to the natural openness of the land. [MLUL]
OPEN SPACE ORGANIZATION: An incorporated, non-profit organization operating in a planned
development under recorded land agreement through which:
A. Each owner is automatically a member;
B. Each occupied dwelling unit is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of
the expenses for the organization's activities and maintenance, including any maintenance
costs levied against the organization by the Township; and
C. Each owner and tenant has the right to use the common property.
OWNER: Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, partnership or corporation having sufficient
proprietary interest in the land.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
34
PAD SITE: A pad site is a parcel of commercial real estate which may either be leased or subdivided
from a larger parcel and is located in the front of a site for a larger shopping center or retail
establishment where the ratio of pad site to the larger retail establishment site area is not less than 1:3.
[Ord. 2159-13, 5/21/13]
PARKING AREA AISLES: Unobstructed access to parking stalls.
PARKING LANE: A lane usually set on the sides of streets, designed to provide on-street parking.
[RSIS]
PARKING SPACE: A storage area provided for the parking of a motor vehicle. [RSIS]
PATIO: A level, landscaped and/or surfaced area at grade directly adjacent to a principal building or
freestanding in the approved yard area; an unroofed porch. [Ord. 1810-04, 9/21/2004]
PAVEMENT: A surface created to facilitate passage of people and/or vehicles, usually constructed
of brick, stone, concrete, or asphalt. [RSIS]
PEDESTRIAN GENERATOR: A development which will realize high facility usage by persons
arriving on foot. [RSIS]
PENNANT: A non-rectangular or non-square flag. [Ord. 2072-10, 12/21/10]
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE: Any security, which may be accepted by Lawrence Township,
including but not limited to surety bonds, letters of credit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.5 or cash.
[MLUL]
PERMITTED USE: Any use of land or buildings as allowed by this Ordinance.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any
kind.
PERSONAL SERVICES: Establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the care
of a person or his or her goods or apparel, including but not limited to laundering, shoe repair, hair
and body care, funeral services, tailoring, and domestic services.
PERVIOUS SURFACE: Any surface that permits a significant portion of surface water to be
absorbed. [RSIS]
PHOTOVOLTAIC ROOF SHINGLE – A type of covering that serves the dual purpose of
waterproofing a roof and producing electricity through conversion of solar radiation. [Ord. 2351-19,
12/17/19]
PLAN: The map of a subdivision or site plan; used interchangeably in this Ordinance with PLAT.
PLAN, CONCEPT: A preliminary presentation and attendant documentation of a proposed
subdivision or site plan of sufficient accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and
classification [RSIS]; an informal review.
PLAN, FINAL: The final map of all or a portion of the subdivision or site plan which is presented by
the Board of Jurisdiction for final approval in accordance with these regulations.
PLAN, MINOR: The map of a minor subdivision or minor site plan of sufficient accuracy to be used
for the purpose of discussion and meeting the requirements of this Ordinance.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
35
PLAN, PRELIMINARY: The preliminary map indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision or
site plan which is submitted to the Board of Jurisdiction for consideration for preliminary approval,
meeting the requirements of this Ordinance.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT: Any of the following:
A. Residential cluster: A contiguous or non-contiguous area to be developed as a single entity
according to a plan containing residential housing units which have a common or public
open space area as an appurtenance. [MLUL]
B. Planned village development: A contiguous or non-contiguous area to be developed as a
single entity according to a plan containing one or more residential clusters which may
include commercial, public, or quasi-public uses, all primarily for the benefit of the
development, intermediate in scale and intensity between residential clusters and planned
unit development.
C. Planned unit development: An area with a specified minimum contiguous or non-contiguous
acreage to be developed as a single entity according to a plan, containing one or more
residential clusters or planned unit residential developments and one or more public, quasipublic,
commercial or industrial areas in such ranges of non-residential uses to residential
uses as shall be specified herein. [MLUL]
D. Planned commercial development: An area of a minimum contiguous or non-contiguous
size as specified by this Ordinance to be developed as single entity containing one or more
structures with appurtenant common areas to accommodate commercial or office uses or
both and any residential and other uses incidental to the predominate use as may be
permitted herein. [MLUL]
PLANNING BOARD: The municipal agency established pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-23. [MLUL]
PORCH: An outdoor living space with a roof supported by columns attached to a dwelling.
POTABLE WATER SUPPLY: Water suitable for drinking or cooking purposes. [RSIS]
PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE: An initial meeting between a developer and a municipal
representative(s) which affords a future applicant the opportunity to present their proposal informally.
PRELIMINARY APPROVAL: The conferral of certain rights prior to final approval after specific
elements of a development plan have been agreed upon by the Board of Jurisdiction and the
applicant.
PRELIMINARY FLOOR PLANS AND ELEVATIONS: Architectural drawings prepared during
early and introductory stages of the design of a project illustrating in a schematic form its scope, scale
and relationship to its site and immediate environs. [MLUL]
PRINCIPAL BASIN: A detention or retention basin whose function is controlling or managing the
runoff from a particular area or property that is to be developed. [RSIS]
PROPORTIONATE SHARE: The portion of the total capital improvement costs for off-tract water,
sewer, drainage and street improvements that are reasonably attributable to new development
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43, Pro-rata share.
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE: An open space conveyed or otherwise dedicated to a municipality,
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
36
municipal agency, board of education, state or county agency, or other public body for recreational or
conservational uses. [MLUL]
PUBLIC USE: The use of land or buildings for public administration, public works, and public open
space; municipal use.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any public utility regulated by the Board of Regulatory Commissioners and
defined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 48:2-13. [MLUL]
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM: A water supply providing piped water to the public for
human consumption, if such system has at least 15 service connections or regularly serves at least 25
individuals pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:19-1 et seq.
QUALIFIED PURCHASER OR RENTER: A person who:
A. Submits an application for certification as a qualified purchaser or renter to the management
of the unit;
B. Whose gross aggregate family income at the time of the proposed purchase or rental of an
affordable unit is within low or moderate income levels, as defined herein; and
C. Who obtains certification as a qualified purchaser or renter of an affordable unit from the
Lawrence Township Office of Housing and Redevelopment as set forth in this section.
QUORUM: The majority of the full authorized membership of a municipal agency.
RATIONAL METHOD: A method of calculating stormwater runoff.
RECORDED LOT: A subdivided lot that is recorded with the Mercer County Recorder of Deeds
pursuant to the Map Filing Law.
RECREATION, ACTIVE: Leisure time activities, usually of a formal nature with a set of sanctioned
rules and often performed with others, requiring equipment and taking place at prescribed places,
sites, or fields; including, but not limited to, court games, swimming, track and field events, golf,
playground activities, and field sports.
RECREATION, PASSIVE: Leisure time activities not involving formal rules of play or action with
lesser physical activity than active recreation; including, but not limited to, bird watching, walking,
picnicking, and sunbathing.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle without permanent foundation that can be towed, hauled or
driven, primarily designed as temporary living accommodation for recreation, camping, leisure
activities, and travel use, including but not limited to, travel trailers, truck campers, camping trailers,
and self-propelled motor homes. See CAMPER.
REFERRAL LIST, AFFORDABLE HOUSING: A register of eligible low and moderate income
households for which suitable units are not yet available.
REGIONAL SHOPPING MALL: A group of commercial establishments which draw customers from
a multi-county market area and which is planned, constructed and managed as a unified development
containing a shopping mall structure with enclosed internal common areas along with predominantly
retail businesses and which may include one or more free-standing retail buildings served by on-site
parking and loading. [Ord. 1941-07, 9/4/07]
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
37
REHABILITATION: The process of returning property to a state of utility, through repair or
alteration, which makes possible an efficient contemporary use while preserving those portions and
features of the property which are significant to its historic, architectural, and cultural values.
REPAIR: Any work done on any improvement which:
A. Is not an addition to the improvement; and
B. Does not change the appearance of the exterior surface.
REPLACEMENT: Repairs when a building permit is required for same.
RESIDENTIAL ACCESS STREET: See STREET, RESIDENTIAL ACCESS.
RESIDENTIAL CLUSTER: See PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.
RESIDENTIAL DENSITY: See DENSITY, RESIDENTIAL.
RESIDENTIAL HEALTH CARE FACILITY: Any facility so defined by N.J.S.A. 26:2H-1 et seq.
and regulated by the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services.
RESIDENTIAL MAJOR COLLECTOR: See STREET, RESIDENTIAL MAJOR COLLECTOR
RESIDENTIAL MEDICAL DETOXIFICATION CENTER: Medically monitored intensive
inpatient treatment for substance abuse that provides 24-hour per day physician-supervised evaluation
and withdrawal management in a permanent facility with beds based on substance-specific clinical
protocols and policies and that may include Suboxone induction, or similar medication, for opioid
dependence; a Level III.7D facility as classified by the Division of Addiction Services, NJ
Department of Human Services. [Ord. 2174-14, 3/18/14]
RESIDENTIAL MINOR COLLECTOR: See STREET, RESIDENTIAL MINOR COLLECTOR.
RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD STREET: See STREET, RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD.
RESIDENTIAL ZONE: A zoning district where a prominent principal use is residential. For
purposes of this Ordinance, EP-1, EP-2, R-1, R-2A, R-2B, R-3, R-4, R-5, AT, SCR, PVD-1 and
PVD-2 shall be considered residential zones. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
RESTAURANT: A public eating facility where patrons are seated at tables, booths or counters and
food orders are taken and served to the patrons by waiters or waitresses at such tables, booths or
counters; but not to include drive-in restaurants and fast-food restaurants as otherwise defined in this
Ordinance.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN: Any restaurant, refreshment stand, snack bar, dairy bar, hamburger
stand or hot dog stand where food is served primarily for consumption at counters, stools or bars
outside the building or primarily for consumption in automobiles parked on the premises, whether
brought to said automobiles by the customer or by employees of the restaurant, regardless of whether
or not additional seats or other accommodations are provided for customers inside the building.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD: A public eating facility where patrons purchase food while within
the physical premises of the restaurant or from a drive-thru window, which is obtained by self-service
or from an employee of the establishment over a counter, for consumption either within the
establishment or away from the premises. Cafeterias constitute "fast-food restaurants" under this
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
38
Ordinance.
RESUBDIVISION: The further division or relocation of lot lines of any lot or lots within a
subdivision previously made and approved or recorded according to law; or the alteration of streets or
the establishment of any streets within any subdivision previously made and approved or recorded
according to law, but not including conveyances so as to combine existing lots by deed or other
instrument. [MLUL]
RETAIL SALES: Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for
personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods.
RETAIL SERVICES: Establishments providing services or entertainment, as opposed to products, to
the general public for personal or household use, including eating and drinking places, hotels and
motels, finance, real estate and insurance, personal service, motion pictures, amusement and
recreation services, health, educational, and social services, museums and concert halls.
RETAINING WALL: A structure that is designed and constructed to stabilize two generally
horizontal surfaces which are vertically displaced. [RSIS]
RETENTION BASIN: A stormwater management basin designed to retain some water on a
permanent basis. [RSIS]
RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk,
railroad, road, electric transmission line, gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main,
shade trees, or for another special use. [RSIS]
RIPARIAN: An area of land of water within or adjacent to a surface water body. [Ord. 2032-09,
10/6/09]
ROOMING HOUSE: Any building, together with any related structure, accessory building, and land
appurtenant thereto, and any part thereof, which contains two or more units of dwelling space
arranged or intended for single room occupancy, exclusive of any such unit occupied by an owner or
operator, and wherein personal or financial services are provided to the residents.
RSIS: Residential Site Improvement Standards, pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:21 et seq. In this Article,
those definitions so marked are derived from the Standards.
RURAL: See STREET, RURAL.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA: Any apparatus installed out-of-doors for the purpose of receiving
television, radio or similar electromagnetic radiation from satellites, but not to include conventional
television antennae.
SCREEN: See BUFFER.
SCREENING COMMITTEE: An advisory committee appointed by the chairman or chairwoman of
the Planning Board for the purpose of reviewing, commenting and making recommendations with
respect to subdivision and site plan applications to the full membership of the Board.
SCS: Soil Conservation Service. [RSIS]
SEARCHLIGHT: Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one
or more points not on the same lot as the light source; also any light with one or more beams that
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
39
rotate or move or that creates an illusion of such rotation or movement.
SEDIMENTATION: The deposit of soil that has been transported from its site of origin by water, ice,
wind, gravity or other natural means as a product of erosion. [MLUL]
SEDIMENT BASIN: A barrier or dam built at suitable locations to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt or
other material.
SELECTIVE CUTTING: The removal of larger trees on an individual basis while leaving trees of
lesser size for future harvest.
SENIOR CITIZEN: A person who has attained the age of fifty-five (55) years, or the surviving
unmarried spouse of a deceased senior citizen.
SEPTIC SYSTEM: An underground system with a septic tank used for the decomposition of
domestic wastes. [RSIS]
SEPTIC TANK: A watertight receptacle which receives the discharge of sanitary sewage from a
building sewer or part thereof, and is designed and constructed so as to permit settling of settleable
solids from the liquid, partial digestion of the organic matter, and discharge of the liquid portion into
a disposal field or seepage pit. [RSIS]
SERVICE STATION: Lands and buildings providing for the sale of fuel, lubricants and automotive
accessories; maintenance and minor repairs for motor vehicles may be provided, but not to include
auto body work, automobile painting, automobile wrecking, the sale or rental of passenger vehicles
and trucks, the long-term storage of inoperable vehicles, parking for fee, or car wash facilities.
SETBACK LINE: The line parallel to the street line or lot line formed by the intersection of the plane
of the lot with a plane established by the point of a building nearest to the street line or lot line.
SETBACK, REQUIRED: A line that is established in this Ordinance a minimum horizontal distance
from the street line or the lot line and beyond which a building or part of a building is not permitted
to extend toward the street line or lot line.
SEWER: Any pipe conduit used to collect and carry away sewage or storm water runoff from the
generating source to treatment plants or receiving streams. [RSIS]
SHOPPING CENTER: A group of commercial establishments built on one tract that is planned and
developed as an operating unit; it provides on-site parking in definite relationship to the type and total
size of the stores. The commercial establishments may be located in one or several buildings,
attached or separated.
SHOULDER: The portion of the roadway contiguous with the traveled way for accommodation of
stopped vehicles, for emergency use, and for lateral support of base and surface courses. [RSIS]
SIDEWALK: A concrete way provided for pedestrian use and usually located at the side of a cartway
within the right-of-way.
SIGHT TRIANGLE: A triangular-shaped portion of land established at street intersections in which
nothing is erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as to limit or obstruct the
sight distance of motorists entering or leaving the intersection. [RSIS]
SIGN: Any object, device, display, mural or structure, or a part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors,
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
40
which is used to advertise, identify, display, direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution,
organization, business, product, service, event or location by any means, including words, letters,
figures, design, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images. This definition shall specifically
include any building or part of a building, including walls and facades used for such purposes and
shall further include banners, pennants, flags and similar attention attracting devices. [Ord. 2072-10,
12/21/10]
SIGN, ANIMATED OR MOVING - Any sign which changes physical position by any movement or
rotation or which gives the visual impression of such movement or rotation.
SIGN AREA: The area of the sign, exclusive of the supporting structure, which is used for
calculating the square footage of the sign.
SIGN, ATTACHED: See SIGN, FACADE.
SIGN, AWNING: Any sign which is attached to or part of an awning.
SIGN, BALLOON: Any device or apparatus exceeding four (4) feet in height, width or diameter,
inflated by air or other gas and dependent upon such air or other gas to retain its shape or structure,
which by virtue of its shape, design, color, image or message content thereon, conveys a
communicative message directed to the general public or any portion thereof. Registered and
licensed lighter-than-air aircraft shall not be considered balloon signs in this Ordinance. [Ord. 2072-
10, 12/21/10]
SIGN, BANNER: A sign which may or may not contain a message constructed of cloth, canvas,
plastic, or other flexible material typically suspended or hung by cord, string, or rope from a
structure.
SIGN, BILLBOARD: Any sign, whether on- or off-premises, greater than one hundred thirty (130)
square feet in area, attached or affixed to a structure, erected principally or in large part to serve as a
means of displaying said sign, the design and construction elements of which are such as to be
classified as a structure under the Uniform Construction Code and requiring site plan approval. [Ord.
2072-10, 12/21/10]
SIGN, BUSINESS: An on-premises sign which directs attention for purposes of promoting a
business, commodity, service, industry, or other activity which is sold, offered or conducted on the
premises on which such sign is located or to which it is affixed. [Ord. 2072-10, 12/21/10]
SIGN, CANOPY: A sign that is mounted or painted on, or attached to a canopy that is otherwise
permitted by this Ordinance.
SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY - A sign designed such that the message contained on the sign can be
easily and periodically altered, and whose message does not change more than once per day. [Ord.
2350-19, 12/17/19]
SIGN, COMMERCIAL: Any sign or symbol which directs attention for purposes of promoting any
business, commodity, service or industry for transactional purposes. [Ord. 2072-10, 12/21/10]
SIGN, DEVELOPMENT: A sign designating the name of a subdivision of residential homes,
whether single-family or multi-family, attached or detached or an apartment complex.
SIGN, DILAPIDATED: A sign which is structurally unsound, contains faulty wiring or loose
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
41
fastenings, or is otherwise detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: Any sign which is designed and erected solely for the purpose of traffic or
pedestrian direction which is placed on the property to which or on which the public is directed.
SIGN, DIRECTORY: A sign that provides a listing of tenants and/or their location within a multitenanted
building or multi-building development. [Ord. 2072-10, 12/21/10]
SIGN, ELECTION: A temporary sign that relates to a particular election for public office,
referendum, or other plebiscite at the federal, state, or local level.
SIGN, EXTERNALLY LIGHTED: Any sign whose sole source of artificial illumination is outside
the display portion of the sign.
SIGN, FACADE: A sign fastened to or painted on the facade of a building or structure in such
manner that the facade becomes the supporting structure for, or forms the background surface of the
sign, and which does not extend more than 12 inches from the supporting facade.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: Any sign not attached to a building, erected, constructed or maintained on
a post or pole, or other bracing or supporting device, being used to support a sign.
SIGN, GRADE LEVEL OF: The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground
where the sign support meets the ground.
SIGN HEIGHT: The highest spot at any one point on the sign measured from the grade level
surrounding the sign.
SIGN, INCIDENTAL: A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the
lot on which it is located. [Ord. 2072-10, 12/21/10]
SIGN, INTERNAL: Any sign erected, constructed or maintained inside of a building and visible
from outside the building, whether illuminated or non-illuminated.
SIGN, INTERNALLY LIGHTED: Any sign whose sole source of artificial illumination is contained
within the display portion of the sign.
SIGN, MOBILE: A sign which is not permanently attached to a building or not placed in the ground
in such a fashion as to be permanent in a manner conforming to the Uniform Construction Code or
which is located or attached to a trailer, on wheels, or other similar attachment such that the sign may
be moved from place to place, either within the lot or to another location.
SIGN, MULTIPLE OCCUPANCY AND TENANCY: A single sign relating to a use or facility, such
as a shopping center, industrial park, or office complex, where there is more than one occupancy
and/or tenancy of uses, where said multiple occupancy and tenancy use a common parking facility
and/or a common private drive or roadway and where the names and professions or business names
of the various tenants and/or occupancy are displayed.
SIGN, OFFICIAL: A sign, symbol or device, erected, constructed or maintained by the Federal,
State, county or local government or any agency thereof, for the purpose of informing or guiding the
public or for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISE NON-COMMERCIAL: An off-premises sign that does not contain a
commercial message which directs attention to an institution, government, governmental entity or
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
42
non-profit corporation and their policies, eleemosynary institution not primarily engaged in
transactional commercial activity, or which is intended for viewpoint communication by either
governmental or non-governmental speakers or contains a message directed to the general public for
health, safety and welfare purposes at a location other than the property on which the sign is located.
[Ord. 2072-10, 12/21/10]
SIGN, PORTABLE: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure;
or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by
means of wheels; signs converted to "A" or "T" frames; menu and sandwich board signs; balloons
used as signs; umbrellas used for advertising; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and
visible from the public right-of-way, unless such vehicles are used in the normal day-to-day operation
of the business.
SIGN, PROJECTING: A sign perpendicular to a wall or facade which is attached to and extends
more than 12 inches from the surface of a building.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE: A sign of an owner of real property or of a licensed real estate broker
designating a property "for sale" or "for lease".
SIGN, RESIDENTIAL: A sign located in a district zoned for residential purposes that does not
contain any commercial message except for goods or services legally offered on the premises on
which the sign is located.
SIGN, ROOF: A sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or which is wholly dependent upon a
building's roof for support and which projects above the parapet of a building with a flat roof, the
cornice line of a building with a gambrel, gable, or hip roof, or above the division between the upper
and lower slopes of a building with a mansard roof.
SIGN SIZE: The surface display area of a sign determined by a computation as otherwise provided
for in this Ordinance.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: A sign which is not permanently attached to a building structure or
permanently affixed to a freestanding structure and which may be erected for a limited period of time
in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
SIGN, V-SHAPED: A single sign structure having two faces in the shape of the letter "V" when
viewed from above, with the faces oriented in opposite directions. [Ord. 2199-14, 10/7/14]
SIGN, VARIABLE MESSAGE: A type of electrical or electronic changeable copy sign capable of
depicting black and white and full color static sign messages. [Ord. 2199-14, 10/7/14]
SIGN, VEHICLE: A commercial sign affixed or painted on a motor vehicle or trailer and parked at a
location conspicuous to the traveling public for a period in excess of 24 continuous hours, where the
design elements and use characteristics of said vehicle or trailer provide evidence that its primary
purpose is to serve as a means of displaying and conveying such signage as a commercial message.
Signage on a commercial vehicle used in the ordinary course of business and principally garaged or
parked at that business location, or at the premises of owners or employees and decorative symbols,
logos, decals, lettering or graphics placed upon a commercial or private passenger vehicle shall not be
deemed vehicle signs under this definition. [Ord. 2072-10, 12/21/10]
SIGN, VIEWPOINT: Any non-commercial sign, symbol, or display, the content of which is
intended to draw attention to, or express advocacy for or against, any idea, belief, person, place,
thing, entity or policy. [Ord. 2072-10, 12/21/10]
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
43
SIGN, WARNING: A sign indicating no trespassing or no fishing and/or hunting or for existing
danger where a warning is legally required.
SIGN, WINDOW: A sign that is applied or attached to the interior of a window or located in such a
manner within a building that it is legible from the lot line which contains said sign. [Ord. 2100-11,
8/2/11]
SILVICULTURE: The growing, harvesting and care of woodland for sale pursuant to a management
plan.
SITE (in the context of historical preservation efforts): The place where a significant event or pattern
of events occurred. It may be the location of prehistoric or historic occupations or activities that may
be marked by physical remains; or it may be the symbolic focus of a significant event or pattern of
events that may not have been actively occupied. A site may also be the location of a ruined
building, structure, or object if the location itself possesses historic, cultural or archaeological
significance.
SITE IMPROVEMENTS: Any construction work on, or improvement in connection with, residential
development limited to streets, roads, parking facilities, sidewalks, drainage structures, and utilities.
[RSIS]
SITE PLAN: A development plan of one or more lots on which is shown:
A. The existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including but not necessarily limited to
topography, vegetation, drainage, flood plains, marshes and waterways; and
B. The location of all existing and proposed buildings, drives, parking spaces, walkways, means
of ingress and egress, drainage facilities, utility services, landscaping, structures and signs,
lighting and screening devices; and
C. Any other information that may be reasonably required in order to make an informed
determination concerning the adequacy of the plan in accordance with the requirements of
this Ordinance. [MLUL]
SITE PLAN, MINOR: A development plan for one or more lots which:
A. Proposes new development in accordance with the criteria established for minor site plans in
§806.B.2 of this Ordinance; [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
B. Does not involve planned development, any new street, or extension of any off-street
improvement which is to be prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42; and
C. Contains any other information reasonably required in order to make an informed
determination as to whether the requirements established by ordinance for approval of a
minor site plan have been met. [MLUL]
SITE PLAN, MAJOR: Any site plan not classified as a minor site plan. [MLUL]
SITE PLAN REVIEW: The examination of the specific development plans for a lot. Wherever the
term "site plan approval" is used in this Ordinance, it shall be understood to mean a requirement that
the site plan be reviewed and approved by the Board of Jurisdiction.
SKETCH PLAT: See PLAN, CONCEPT.
SOIL: The arable layers of unmodified sediments beneath the surface material and above bedrock.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
44
[RSIS]
SOIL CONSERVATION DISTRICT: A governmental subdivision of this State, which encompasses
this municipality, organized in accordance with the provisions of N.J.S.A. 4:24.
SOIL EROSION: The gradual alteration of soil by crustal movement or by processes of weathering,
transportation, and sedimentation. [RSIS]
SOIL STRIPPING - Any activity which significantly disturbs vegetated or an otherwise stabilized
soil surface including clearing and grubbing operations.
SOIL TEST: A test pursuant to N.J.S.A. 7:9A-1 et seq. designed to determine the ability of ground to
absorb water and used in determining the suitability of a soil for drainage or for the use of a septic
system.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM – A facility or structure(s) and all associated equipment, for producing
electrical energy from photovoltaic technologies. [Ord. 2351-19, 12/17/19]
SOLAR PANEL – An elevated panel or plate, or a canopy or array consisting of such panels or plates
that captures and converts solar radiation to produce power or hot water, and includes flat plate or
boxed photovoltaic solar cells; but, shall not include solar reflective or concentrating technology
(e.g., “solar furnace” or similar use). [Ord. 2351-19, 12/17/19]
SOLAR SETBACK ZONE: The area within which a building built to its height limit would interfere
with the availability of direct sunlight to an adjacent building on its northerly side.
SPECIMEN TREE: A tree with a diameter of 30 inches or greater; a unique, rare, or otherwise
specifically selected plant or tree which most typically represents a whole class or group in shape or
form; a tree of historical importance; or a tree specifically designated as such by the municipality.
SQUARE FOOTAGE OF LIVING AREA (SFLA): The total square footage of living area for a
dwelling unit as listed on the current tax assessment records of Lawrence Township; (SFLA) is
generally comprised of the heated floor area within the outer walls of all structures on a residential lot
but not including an unfinished basement or attic, garage or unheated accessory structure. [Ord. 1920-
07; 3/6/07]
STABILIZATION: As it pertains to streets, the ability of a surface to resist deformation from
imposed loads. Stabilization can be accomplished by adequate thicknesses of asphalt base and
surface course, dense graded aggregates, cement treated soil aggregates, or concrete or precast
masonry units set on a base course. [RSIS]
STABILIZED BASE COURSE (BITUMINOUS): Stabilized base course or asphalt concrete base
consists of soil aggregate and bituminous material uniformly mixed and placed on a previously
prepared surface. [RSIS]
STABILIZED EARTH: Earth or soil, strengthened usually by the mixing of cement or lime with the
original material to achieve increased strength, thereby reducing shrinkage and movement. [RSIS]
STABILIZED TURF: Established, mowable vegetation. [RSIS]
STAGGERED SETBACKS: Front setbacks of residential units that are varied in horizontal location.
STEEP SLOPES: Slopes over 20%. [Ord. 2032-09, 10/6/09]
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
45
STORMWATER DETENTION: A provision for temporary storage of stormwater runoff, and the
controlled release of such runoff during and after a flood or storm. [RSIS]
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MEASURES: Broad term for structural and nonstructural
control of stormwater runoff and nonpoint pollution. [RSIS]
STORMWATER RETENTION: A provision for the permanent storage of a fixed volume of water.
[RSIS]
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the
next floor above it or, if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and ceiling next
above it. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the interior of the roof shall not be considered a ceiling.
A half story is the area under a pitched roof at the top of a building, the floor of which is at least 4
feet, but no more than 6 feet below the plate. A basement shall be considered a story where the
finished surface of the floor above the basement is:
A. More than 6 feet above the average grade elevation;
B. More than 6 feet above the finished ground level for more than 50% of the total building
perimeter; or
C. More than 12 feet above the finished ground level at any point.
STREAM: A waterway which has a minimum drainage area of 50 acres; or, as classified by the New
Jersey Department of Environmental Protection as a stream for any reason.
STREET: Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, viaduct, drive or other way meeting any of
the following:
A. Is an existing state, county or municipal roadway;
B. Is shown upon a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law;
C. Is approved by N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.; or
D. Is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county recording officer prior
to the appointment of a planning board and the grant to such board of the power to review
plats; and includes the land between the street lines, whether improved or unimproved, and
may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas and other areas within
the street line. [MLUL]
STREET, ARTERIAL: A higher-order, interregional road in the street hierarchy; conveys traffic
between centers; should be excluded from residential areas. (See STREET HIERARCHY). [RSIS]
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street that distributes traffic between residential access and subcollector
streets, and, arterial order streets in residential subdivision design and between non-residential uses
and arterial roads. Such streets are intended to carry up to 3,000 vehicles per day (AADT).
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC: A street with a single means of ingress and egress and having a
turnaround, the design of which may vary. (See STREET HIERARCHY). [RSIS]
STREET, DIVIDED: A street having an island or other barrier separating moving lanes of traffic.
[RSIS]
STREET FURNITURE: Man-made, above ground items that are usually found in street rights-ofLand
Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
46
way, including benches, kiosks, bicycle racks, canopies, decorative traffic control fixtures, shelters
and phone booths.
STREET HARDWARE: The mechanical and utility systems within a street right-of-way such as
hydrants, manhole covers, traffic lights and signs, utility poles and lines, parking meters, and the like.
[RSIS]
STREET HIERARCHY: The conceptual arrangement of streets based upon function. A hierarchical
approach to street design classifies streets according to function, from high-traffic arterial roads to
streets whose function is residential access. [RSIS]
STREET LINE: The edge of the existing or future street right-of-way, whichever would result in the
widest right-of-way, as shown on the adopted master plan or official map, forming the dividing line
between the street and a lot.
STREET, LOOP: A street that has its only ingress and egress at two (2) points on the same
subcollector or collector street. [RSIS]
STREET, MAJOR ARTERIAL: A street designed to move traffic from municipality to municipality
within a region and to provide connections between higher and lower orders of streets, with an
AADT between 10,000 and 25,000 vehicles typically, though not exclusively, under county
jurisdiction.
STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS: A service street that runs parallel to a higher-order street which
provides access to abutting properties and separation from through traffic. It may be designed as a
residential access street or minor collector as anticipated daily traffic dictates. [RSIS]
STREET, MINOR ARTERIAL: A street which provides connections between major arterials and
residential or non-residential collector streets, and also functions as an intra-municipal travel path,
typically under county jurisdiction. Such streets are intended to handle 3,000 and 10,000 AADT.
STREET, PRINCIPAL ARTERIAL: A street intended to handle large volumes of regional and
through traffic, typically under the jurisdiction of the state or federal government such as the
Interstate highway system, with an AADT exceeding 25,000 vehicles.
STREET, RESIDENTIAL ACCESS: The lowest order, other than rural street type, of residential
street (see STREET HIERARCHY). Provides frontage for access to private lots and carries traffic
having destination or origin on the street itself. Designed to carry traffic at slowest speed. [RSIS]
STREET, RESIDENTIAL MAJOR COLLECTOR: The highest order of residential street (see
STREET HIERARCHY). Conducts and distributes traffic between lower-order residential streets
and higher-order streets (arterials and expressways). [RSIS]
STREET, RESIDENTIAL MINOR COLLECTOR: Middle order of residential streets (see STREET
HIERARCHY). Provides frontage for access to lots, and carries traffic to and from adjoining
residential access streets. [RSIS]
STREET, RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD. A type of residential access street conforming to
traditional subdivision street design, which provides access to building lots fronting on a street and
provides parking on both sides of street (see STREET HIERARCHY). [RSIS]
STREET, RURAL: As it pertains to streets, when density is one dwelling unit per acre or lower, a
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
47
road primarily serving as access to abutting building lots, which has no on-street parking, and lot-tostreet
access is designed so vehicles do not back out of lots onto the street (see STREET
HIERARCHY). [RSIS]
STREETSCAPE - All of the elements that constitute the physical makeup of a street and that, as a
group, define its character, including building frontage, street paving, street furniture, landscaping,
including trees and other plantings, awnings and marques, signs, and lighting.
STREET, STUB: A street which is to be extended when the adjacent property is developed. [RSIS]
STREET TREE: A tree in a public place, street, special easement or right-of-way adjoining a street
constituting a large tree in size when mature.
STRUCTURE: A combination of materials to form a construction for occupancy, use or
ornamentation whether installed on, above, or below the surface of a parcel of land. [MLUL]
STRUCTURE (for flood management purposes): A walled and roofed building, including a gas or
liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground. For insurance purposes, "structure" means a
walled and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground
and affixed to a permanent site. For the latter purpose, the term includes a building while in the
course of construction, alterations or repair but does not include building materials or supplies
intended for use in such construction, alteration or repair, unless such material or supplies are within
an enclosed building on the premises.
STUB STREET: See STREET, STUB.
SUBDIVIDER: Any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation, trust or any
other legal entity commencing proceedings under this Ordinance to affect a subdivision of land
hereunder for himself or for another with the written consent of the owner according to the provisions
of this Ordinance.
SUBDIVISION: The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or
other divisions of land for sale or development. Any of the following shall not be considered
subdivisions within the meaning of this Ordinance if no new streets are created:
A. Divisions of land found by the Planning Board to be for agricultural purposes where all
resulting parcels are 5 acres or larger in size;
B. Divisions of property by testamentary or intestate provisions;
C. Divisions of property upon court order including but not limited to, judgments of
foreclosure;
D. Consolidation of existing lots by deed or other recorded instrument; and
E. The conveyance of one or more adjoining lots, tracts or parcels of land, owned by the same
person or persons and all of which are found and certified by the administrative officer to
conform to the requirements of the municipal development regulations and are shown and
designated as separate lots, tracts or parcels on the tax map or atlas of the municipality. The
term "subdivision" shall also include the term "resubdivision". [MLUL]
SUBDIVISION, MINOR: Any division of land meeting all of the following criteria:
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
48
A. Contains an aggregate of not more than three (3) lots (2 new lots and the remaining parcel);
B. Does not involve a planned development.
C. Does not involve any new street.
D. Does not require the extension of any off-tract improvement, the cost of which is to be
prorated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42.
E. Meets the criteria for filing an application for a minor subdivision as otherwise required in
this Ordinance. [MLUL]
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR: Any subdivision not classified as a minor subdivision. [MLUL]
SUBDIVISION AND SITE PLAN COMMITTEE: See SCREENING COMMITTEE.
SUBGRADE: The prepared surface upon which pavements and shoulders are constructed. [RSIS]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENTS (for the purpose of historic district or landmark regulation):
Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure either:
A. Before the improvement or repair is started;
B. If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the
purpose of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of the building commences,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does
not, however, include either:
C. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with the existing State or local health,
sanitary or safety code specifications solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
D. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State
Inventory of Historic Places.
SURFACE COURSE: The placement of the asphalt concrete material on a previously prepared base
course. [RSIS]
SWALE: A low lying or depressed land area commonly wet or moist, which can function as an
intermittent drainage way. [RSIS]
SWIMMING POOL, COMMERCIAL: Any pool not accessory to a detached single family or twofamily
dwelling, or fee simple townhouse.
SWIMMING POOL, PORTABLE: A swimming pool that is not permanently installed and meets all
of the following criteria: does not require water filtration, circulation and purification; does not
exceed twenty-four (24) inches in depth; does not exceed a water surface of two hundred fifty (250)
square feet; and does not require braces or supports.
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL: A swimming pool, other than a portable swimming
pool, that is located on a lot principally used by one housekeeping unit accessory to a detached single
family or two-family dwelling, or fee simple townhouse.
TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION TRAILER: A trailer for office use or storage used during the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
49
period of construction on a site or tract as otherwise permitted in this Ordinance.
THINNING: The removal of undesirable, competitive, diseased or damaged trees so as to cultivate
and improve the development of remaining trees on a lot.
THREATENED OR ENDANGERED SPECIES: Flora or fauna identified pursuant to N.J.S.A.
23:2A-1 et seq. or 50 C.F.R. 17.11(h) and 17.12(h) as they may be modified or superseded.
TOPSOIL: Either of the following:
A. The natural, undisturbed surface layer of soil having a higher level of organic matter than
subsequent layers, a pH of 5.0 to 7.5, and suitable for satisfactory growth and maintenance of
permanent, locally-adapted vegetation.
B. Where the original surface layer has been removed, the reapplication of soil material used to
cover an area so as to improve soil conditions for establishment and maintenance of adapted
vegetation. The reapplied material must be friable, loamy soil reasonably free of debris,
objectionable weeds, and stones; have a natural pH of 5.0 to 7.5; have an organic matter
content greater than 2.0 percent; and contain no toxic substances which may be harmful to
plant growth. [RSIS]
TOWNHOUSE: See DWELLING UNIT, TOWNHOUSE.
TOWNSHIP: Township of Lawrence, Mercer County, New Jersey
TRACT: A contiguous area of land composed of one or more lots to make one parcel of land meeting
the requirements of this Ordinance for the use(s) intended.
TRANSCRIPT: A typed or printed verbatim record of the proceedings before a municipal agency, or
reproduction thereof. [MLUL]
TRANSITION BUFFER (or AREA): An upland area adjacent to freshwater wetlands which
minimizes adverse impacts on the wetland or serves as an integral component of the wetlands
ecosystem.
TRAVELED WAY: The portion of a cartway used for vehicular travel. [RSIS]
TREE: Any woody perennial plant, having a trunk or main stem with a caliper of 8 inches or greater
at maturity.
TREE PROTECTION ZONE: The entire area of a site exclusive of buildings, parking, driveways,
streets, storm water management facilities and utilities plus a perimeter width around such uses as
determined by this Ordinance in which woodland and individual specimen trees shall be retained or
replaced.
TREE SAVE AREA: An area within the tree protection zone in which woodland shall be retained
and active protection measures shall be taken during land development activities.
TRIBUTARY: A water course feeding a larger stream or water body.
TRIP: A single or one-way vehicle movement to or from a property or study area. [RSIS]
UNIT, BED: A dwelling unit, whether shared or not, within an assisted living, residential health care,
or skilled nursing care facility consisting of a bed and ancillary bathroom and storage.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
50
USCGS: United States Coast and Geodetic Survey (a.k.a. USGS - United States Geological Survey,
USC&G, and USC&GS). [RSIS]
USE: Any activity, occupation, business or operation carried on or intended to be carried on in a
building or other structure or on a tract of land.
USEABLE YARD AREA: A portion of a front, side, or rear yard that is exclusive of any critical
area.
URGENT CARE CENTER: A type of medical clinic in a building or portion of a building, whether
private or institution, principally engaged in providing walk-in, extended-hour access for acute illness
and injury care that is beyond the scope or availability of the typical primary care practice or other
medical clinic. Patients shall be served solely on an outpatient basis and such services shall not
include overnight stays. [Ord. 2174-14, 3/18/14]
UTILITIES: Those services customarily rendered by public utility corporations, municipalities or
municipal authorities, in the nature of electricity, gas, telephone, water and sewerage, including the
appurtenances used in connection with the supplying of such services (buildings, wires, pipes, poles,
and the like).
UTILITY AREA: A flexible space within the right-of-way designated for the installation of utility
lines and facilities. [RSIS]
UTILITY AUTHORITY: Any "sewerage authority" as defined in N.J.S.A.40:14A-3 or any
"municipal authority" as defined in N.J.S.A. 40:14B-3. [RSIS]
UTILITY RIGHT-OF-WAY: The lands required for the installation and maintenance of public
utilities.
VARIANCE: Permission granted to depart from the literal requirements of a zoning ordinance
pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40b, -70c, and -70d. [MLUL]
VIEWPOINT EXPRESSION: An attitude of mind or mental condition communicated to others
through the medium of a sign. [Ord. 2072-10, 12/21/10]
WAIVER: A deviation from a required submission item, performance standard, or design standard.
WET BASIN: See RETENTION BASIN.
WETLAND, FRESHWATER: Lands that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances does
support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly
known as hydrophytic vegetation pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:7A-1.4.
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM – A wind generator and all associated equipment, including any base,
blade, foundation, nacelle, rotor, tower, transformer, vane, wire, inverter, batteries or other
component necessary to fully utilize the wind generator. [Ord. 2351-19, 12/17/19]
WIND GENERATOR – Equipment that converts energy from the wind into electricity. This term
includes the rotor, blades and associated mechanical and electrical conversion components necessary
to generate, store and/or transfer electrical energy. [Ord. 2351-19, 12/17/19]
WIND TURBINE – A monopole, freestanding, or guyed structure that supports a wind generator
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
51
turned by means of wind energy against blades or vanes. [Ord. 2351-19, 12/17/19]
WOODLAND: Areas, groves or stands of trees greater than 6 inches in caliper; or stands of trees
greater than 12 inches in caliper consisting of more than 10 individual trees.
YARD, FRONT: An open space extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the
street line and the closest point of the principal building on the lot. The depth of the front yard shall
be measured horizontally and at right angles to either a straight street line or the tangent lines of
curved street lines. The minimum required front yard shall be the same as the required setback. See
exhibit, following page.
YARD, REAR: An open space extending across the full width of the lot and lying between the rear
lot line and the closest point of the principal building on the lot. The depth of the rear yard shall be
measured horizontally and at right angles to either a straight rear lot line or the tangent of curved rear
lot lines. See exhibit, following.
YARD, SIDE: An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard and lying between each
side lot line and the closest point of the principal building on the lot. The width of the required side
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §200- 201
52
yard shall be measured horizontally and at right angles to either a straight side line or the tangent
lines of curved side lot lines. See exhibit, above.
ZONING OFFICER: The individual responsible for enforcement and interpretation of the zoning
ordinance provisions of the Township of Lawrence as designated by the Township Council's
Administrative Offices.
ZONING PERMIT: A document signed by the Administrative Officer: 1), which is required by
ordinance as a condition precedent to the commencement of a use or the erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, conversion or installation of a structure or building, and 2), which
acknowledges that such use, structure or building complies with the provisions of the municipal
zoning ordinance or variance therefrom duly authorized by a municipal agency. [MLUL]
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §300-303
53
ARTICLE III
ZONING DISTRICTS AND ZONING MAP
§ 300 Zoning Districts.
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the Township of Lawrence is hereby divided into the following
districts [Ord. 2174-14, 3/18/14]:
Zoning District Zoning Symbol
Environmental Protection 1 EP-1
Environmental Protection 2 EP-2
Residential 1 R-1
Residential 2A R-2A
Residential 2B R-2B
Residential 3 R-3
Residential 4 R-4
Residential 5 R-5
Apartment & Townhouse Residential AT
Senior Citizen Residential SCR
Planned Village Development 1 PVD-1
Planned Village Development 2 PVD-2
Neighborhood Center 1 NC-1
Neighborhood Center 2 NC-2
Mixed Use 1 MX-1
Mixed Use 2 MX-2
Professional Office PO
Office O
Research & Development 1 RD-1
Research & Development 2 RD-2
Highway Commercial HC
Regional Commercial RC
Limited Industrial LI
Open Space OS
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §300-303
54
Zoning District Zoning Symbol
Education, Government, & Institutions EGI
§ 301 Zoning Map.
The zoning map entitled "Zoning Map, Lawrence Township, Mercer County, New Jersey," dated
December 16, 1997, last revised September 2019, is hereby adopted and made a part of this
Ordinance. [Ord. 2340-19, 8/20/19]
§ 302 Interpretation of Boundaries.
A. Zoning district boundary lines are intended to follow street centerlines, railroad rights-ofway,
streams and lot or property lines as they exist on lots of record at the time of enactment
of this Ordinance unless otherwise indicated by dimensions on the zoning map. Any
dimensions shown shall be in feet and measured horizontally and, when measured from a
street, shall be measured from the street right-of-way line even if the centerline of that street
is used for the location of a zoning district line. The exact location of any disputed zoning
district boundary line shall be determined by the Board of Adjustment pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-70b.
B. Where boundaries are not fixed by dimensions and where they approximately follow lot lines
and where they do not scale more than 20 feet distant therefrom, the street centerlines,
railroad rights-of-way, streams and lot lines shall be construed to be such boundaries.
C. Where a zoning district boundary divides a lot, the location of the boundary, unless indicated
by dimensions on the zoning map, shall be determined by use of the stated scale on the map.
§ 303 Applicability within Each District.
The zoning standards, controls and designations apply to every structure, lot and use within each
district and the district line extends vertically in both directions from ground level.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §400
55
ARTICLE IV
ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
§ 400 General Regulations and Permitted Modifications
A. Relationship to Other Articles. This Article establishes the use, bulk requirements and other
regulations governing the zones created in Article III. Article II is the compendium of
definitions for terms of art in this Article and throughout the Land Use Ordinance.
Performance regulations and design standards are contained in Article V that provides the
basis for the physical development and redevelopment of land within the zoning
classifications. Article VII contains the standards of review upon which all applications for
subdivision or site plan are measured.
B. Variances. Deviations from the performance and design standards for certain sections in
Article V shall require application and granting of variances prior to the issuance of a
building permit and certificate of occupancy, including:
1. The location of all fences which do not meet setback requirements.
2. The height of all fences which exceed the maximum permitted height.
3. The location of all signs which do not meet setback requirements.
4. The height, number or area of all signs which exceed the maximum limitations.
5. The number of required parking spaces.
6. A landscaping buffer width less than the required distance.
7. A storm water management basin which does not meet setback and other location
regulations. [Ord. 2081-11, 2/15/11]
8. Procedures for waivers and variances for the Residential Site Improvement
Standards shall be as indicated in §711.
C. Special Minimum Setback Requirements.
1. Residential lots. No detached dwelling, accessory building or structure, or driveway
otherwise permitted in this Ordinance shall be located within 5 feet of a side or rear
lot line in order to maintain positive lot drainage unless a lot grading plan is
submitted and approved by the Municipal Engineer.
2. Transmission lines. No building shall be placed within 150 feet of the vertical plane
established by the closest portion of a high voltage transmission line excluding its
support, underground petroleum or natural gas pipeline.
3. Limited access highways. No residential building shall be placed within 150 feet of
the right-of-way line of Interstate 95/295. [Ord.1585-99, 9/7/1999]
4. Delaware and Raritan Canal buffer. Any required yard or required setback shall be
measured from the closest edge of any buffer required by the Delaware and Raritan
Canal Commission.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §400
56
D. Requirements for Special Lots.
1. Corner lot. A corner lot shall be considered to have two front yards, one side yard,
and one rear yard. The rear yard shall be considered the yard area opposite the front
yard that is established by the location of the front door to the building. Houses
angled on the lot where the front door faces the intersection of the rights-of-way
shall have side and rear yards established at the time of construction of the principal
structure and so recorded by the Administrative Officer. In the event that a
residential corner lot abuts three rights-of-way, the front yards shall be considered
those fronting on a residential access or residential subcollector street. The rear yard
shall be considered that portion of the lot abutting an arterial or collector street.
2. Reverse frontage lots. Lots which have frontage on both a residential access or
subcollector street and another street shall establish the front yard facing the interior
lowest order street and the rear yard abutting the higher order street.
3. Frontage on cul-de-sacs or curved streets. The minimum lot frontage may be
reduced on curved alignments with an outside radius of less than 500 feet to not less
than 75% of the required minimum provided that the width of the lot at the building
setback line is equal to or greater than the lot frontage requirement.
4. Frontage on corner lots. The minimum frontage requirement for any lot shall be met
by the lowest order street. In the case of a corner lot with two streets of the same
hierarchy, either residential street frontage may meet the minimum lot frontage
required for that zone.
5. No public sewer. Where no public sewer is available, the minimum lot size shall be
one acre. Area, yard and building coverage restrictions shall be as required for the
R-1 zoning district.
E. Permitted Modifications for Infill Development. The size and intensity of development of
principal dwellings on infill development lots within specified residential districts are limited
by the size and intensity of pre-existing residential development within the Neighborhood
Context of the infill development. The yard areas of principal dwellings on infill
development lots may encroach within the yard areas as otherwise required in this Ordinance
under the following conditions [Ord. 1920-07; 3/6/07]:
1. Front Yard. The front yard depth may be reduced to the average of the setbacks
from the streetline of existing dwellings on both sides of the proposed residence. In
the event an adjacent lot is vacant, the average shall be calculated using the required
setback for the vacant lot.
2. Side Yard. The side yard may be reduced to the depth of the side yard of the
adjacent lot but in no instance shall the distance between dwellings be reduced to
less than 10 feet.
3. Rear Yard. A portion of the principal dwelling may encroach into the rear yard up
to 20% of the required depth provided that the average of the building's distance
from the rear property line meets or exceeds the required setback.
F. Non-conforming Lots. The following requirements shall apply to non-conforming lots:
1. Merging of substandard lots. Except for lots which have been legally created since
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §400
57
December 3, 1969, whenever title to two or more contiguous lots is held by the same
owner, regardless of whether or not each of the lots may have been approved as
portions of a subdivision or acquired by separate conveyance or by other operation
of law, and one or more individual lots should, by reason of exceptional
shallowness, topographical conditions, substandard area or yard space or similar
measurements, not conform with the minimum lot area and dimension requirements
for the zone in which it is located, the contiguous lots shall be merged into a single
lot.
2. Non-conformity from public dedication. Whenever the owner of a lot existing at the
time of adoption of this Ordinance has dedicated or conveyed land to the
municipality in order to meet the minimum street width requirement of the official
map or master plan of the municipality, the construction official shall issue building
and occupancy permits for the lot whose depth and/or areas are rendered
substandard in area only because of such dedication and where the owner has no
other adjacent lands to provide the minimum requirements.
3. Expansion of building on undersized lot. Any existing lot on which a building or
structure is located and which lot does not meet the minimum lot size, or a structure
which violates any yard requirements, may have additions to the principal building
and/or construction of an accessory building without any appeal for variance relief
provided:
a. The existing use(s) on the lot are conforming to the permitted use(s)
stipulated in this Ordinance for the lot in question; and
b. The total permitted building coverage is not exceeded; and
c. The accessory building and/or addition do not violate any other
requirements of this Ordinance including, but not limited to, height, setback,
and parking. Any such building and/or addition may violate a setback
requirement so long as the accessory building or addition intrudes no more
into the required setback than the principal building. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
4. Undersized vacant lots. Any vacant lot existing as a conforming residential lot on
July 6, 1989, whose area or dimensions do not meet the requirements of the district
in which the lot is located, may have a building permit issued for a single-family
detached dwelling and its permitted accessory uses without an appeal for variance
relief provided:
a. Single-family detached dwellings are a permitted use in that district; and
b. The building coverage limit is not exceeded; and
c. Parking requirements are met. Applicants shall have the burden of proof in
establishing that the undersized vacant lot has not been merged by operation
of law by virtue of common ownership of an adjoining lot(s).
G. Non-Conforming Structures and Uses. The following requirements shall apply to nonconforming
structures and uses:
1. Continuance. Any non-conforming use or structure existing at the time of the
passage of this Ordinance may be continued upon the lot or in the structure so
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §400
58
occupied and any such structure may be restored or repaired in the event of partial
destruction thereof. Any such use or structure which is substantially destroyed shall
not be reconstructed or used except in conformance with this Ordinance.
2. Repair. Repairs and maintenance work required to keep a structure in sound
condition may be made to a non-conforming structure containing a non-conforming
use. However, no non-conforming structure or structure containing a nonconforming
use shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed or
structurally altered in any manner without an appeal for variance relief.
3. Certificate of non-conforming use. The prospective purchaser, prospective
mortgagee, or any other person interested in any land upon which a non-conforming
use or structure exists may apply in writing for the issuance of a certificate certifying
that the use or structure existing before the adoption of the ordinance which
rendered the use or structure non-conforming. The applicant shall have the burden
of proof. Application pursuant hereto may be made to the Administrative Officer
within one year of the adoption of the ordinance which rendered the use or structure
non-conforming or at any time to the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The
Administrative Officer shall be entitled to demand and receive for such certificate
issued by him a reasonable fee not in excess of those provided in R.S. 54:5-14 and
R.S. 54:5-15. The fees collected by the official shall be paid by him to the
municipality. Denial by the Administrative Officer shall be appealable to the
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
H. Accessory Buildings. The following regulations shall apply to all accessory buildings:
1. Accessory buildings as part of principal buildings. Any accessory building attached
to a principal building shall be considered part of the principal building and the total
structure shall adhere to the yard requirements for the principal building regardless
of the technique of connecting the principal and accessory buildings.
2. Accessory buildings not to be constructed prior to principal building. No
construction permit shall be issued for the construction of an accessory building
prior to the issuance of a construction permit for the construction of the main
building upon the same premises. If construction of the main building does not
precede or coincide with the construction of the accessory building, the construction
official shall revoke the construction permit for the accessory building until
construction of the main building has proceeded substantially toward completion.
3. Distance between adjacent buildings. The minimum distance between an accessory
building and any other building(s) on the same lot shall be as prescribed in Article
IV except that no poultry or livestock shelter shall be erected closer than 100 feet to
any dwelling or lot line, except when part of a home agriculture use. [Ord. 2251-16,
12/6/16]
4. Location and setback of accessory buildings. An accessory building or structure
may be erected in side and rear yard areas only and shall be set back from property
lines as required in Article IV. In the event that no accessory building or structure
setback is established in the particular district, the setback requirements for principal
buildings shall apply.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §400
59
I. Height Limits. Except for one and two-family dwellings as permitted in this Ordinance,
penthouses or roof structures for the housing of stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, air
conditioning equipment or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building,
skylights, spires, cupolas, flagpoles, chimneys or similar structures may be erected above the
height limits prescribed by this Ordinance but in no case shall such extension exceed 10% of
the maximum height permitted in the district.
J. Shipping Containers. A shipping container shall not be used as a principal or accessory
structure in any district except as permitted by §431.K. [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19]
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §401
60
§ 401 Environmental Protection 1 (EP-1) District.
A. Purpose. The Environmental Protection 1 district is designed for low intensity uses primarily
in the northwest area of the municipality where poor water yields and strata for septic
systems dictate large lot development in an area of little or no public infrastructure and
severe environmental constraints, including but not limited to, a seasonal high water table,
shallow depth to bedrock, and steep slopes along the Stony Brook. Further, the purpose of
the EP-1 district is to protect the environmental resources and qualities of this area, maintain
the rural character of roads and scenic views, and retain farmland. The EP-1 designation is
contrasted with the EP-2 district by being underlain with the Lockatong-Argillite geologic
formation as depicted in the adopted Master Plan. Both the EP-1 and EP-2 districts, though
poorly suited for development, are exceptional areas for non-irrigated agriculture. Because
of this last factor, clustering of residential units is preferred whether under the provisions of
this section or §428.
B. Permitted Uses. In the Environmental Protection 1 zone, no lot shall be used and no
structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Agriculture.
2. Farmstead.
3. Single family detached dwelling.
4. Residential cluster option.
5. Public parks and recreation.
6. Conservation.
7. Municipal use.
8. Cemetery.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use and conforming to the applicable subsection in §429:
1. Private residential swimming pool and cabana.
2. Private residential tool shed.
3. Recreational vehicle storage.
4. Outdoor recreational facilities, including tennis or other court sports.
5. Off-street parking and private garage.
6. Fences and walls.
7. Deck/patio. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
8. Signs.
9. Home occupation.
10. Accessory apartment pursuant to §429.A. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
11. ECHO housing.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §401
61
12. Satellite dish and television antennae.
13. Farm stand and consumer crop picking operations when used in conjunction with an
agricultural use.
14. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted when authorized as a
conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with §430 and §705:
1. Public and private day school.
2. Public and private golf course.
3. Farm market.
4. Bed and breakfast accommodation.
5. Child care center. [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19]
E. Lot Area, Density and Open Space Requirements. Except as otherwise modified, the
following area and open space standards shall apply to all EP-1 districts:
1. Single family detached residential uses without public water or public sewer and
farmsteads:
Average Lot Area
Per Unit (1)
Minimum
Open Space
Maximum Tract
Density
Minimum
Tract Area
4 acres 0% N/A N/A
3 acres 20% 1 unit per 4.2 acres 20 acres
2 acres 40% 1 unit per 3.8 acres 20 acres
1 acre 60% 1 unit per 3.5 acres 20 acres
(1) The minimum lot area shall be at least 90% of the average lot area per unit. The
bulk standards of the average lot size pursuant to -F.1 shall apply to all building
lots.
2. Single family detached residential uses with either public water or public sewer:
Average Lot Area
Per Unit (1)
Minimum
Open Space
Maximum Tract
Density
Minimum
Tract Area
3 acres 0% N/A N/A
2 acres 25% 1 unit per 3.2 acres 20 acres
1 acre 50% 1 unit per 2.6 acres 20 acres
(1) The minimum lot area shall be at least 90% of the average lot area per unit. The
bulk standards of the average lot size pursuant to -F.1 shall apply to all building
lots.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §401
62
3. Single family detached residential uses with both public water and public sewer:
Average Lot Area
Per Unit (1)
Minimum
Open Space
Maximum Tract
Density
Minimum
Tract Area
2 acres 0% N/A N/A
1.5 acres 20% 1 unit per 2.2 acres 20 acres
1 acre 40% 1 unit per 2 acres 20 acres
(1) The minimum lot area shall be at least 90% of the average lot area per unit. The
bulk standards of the average lot size pursuant to -F.1 shall apply to all building lots.
4. Residential cluster option requirements, pursuant to §428.
Minimum and
Maximum Lot Area
per Unit
Minimum
Open Space
Maximum
Tract Density
Minimum
Number of
Lots
Minimum
Tract Area
22,500 sf.
to 1 acre 40% 1 unit per
2 acres 6 20 acres
15,000 sf.
to 22,499 sf. 50% 1 unit per
1.9 acres 6 20 acres
9,000 sf.
to 14,999 sf. 60% 1 unit per
1.8 acres 10 20 acres
8,999 sf.
or less 70% 1 unit per
1.7 acres 10 20 acres
5. The minimum and maximum lot areas in the table immediately above specify ranges
for building lots. Minimum open space is the percentage of the total tract area.
Minimum number of lots is the number of building lots.
F. Yard and Building Coverage for Residential Uses. Except as otherwise modified, the
following bulk requirements shall apply to all buildings:
1. Bulk regulations for subsections -E.1, -E.2, and -E.3, above.
AVERAGE LOT
AREA 4 ACRES 3 ACRES 2 ACRES
1.5
ACRES 1 ACRE
Minimum lot frontage 200 feet 200 feet 200 feet 175 feet 175 feet
Minimum front yard 100 feet 100 feet 75 feet 75 feet 50 feet
Minimum side yard 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet 35 feet 35 feet
Minimum rear yard 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §401
63
AVERAGE LOT
AREA 4 ACRES 3 ACRES 2 ACRES
1.5
ACRES 1 ACRE
Minimum acreage
exclusive of critical
areas
1 acre 1 acre 1 acre .75 acre .75 acre
Minimum useable yard
area
20% of
each yard
20% of
each yard
20% of
each yard
20% of
each yard
20% of
each yard
Maximum impervious
surface ratio .10 .12 .14 .20 .25
a. The minimum buildable area in the table immediately above shall not be
required for lots with both public water and public sewer.
2. Bulk regulations for subsection -E.4 above, pursuant to §428.
MINIMUM LOT AREA 22,500 SF 15,000 SF 9,000 SF < 9,000 SF
Minimum lot frontage 100 feet 100 feet 75 feet 30 feet
Minimum front yard 40 feet 40 feet 30 feet 30 feet
Minimum side yard 15 feet 15 feet 10 feet 0 feet
Minimum rear yard 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet
Maximum impervious
surface ratio .40 .40 .50 .60
a. At least 50% of all building lots shall adjoin common open space.
3. Agricultural uses:
a. Minimum lot size: 5 acres
b. Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 75 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 30 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 100 feet
f. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .05
4. Other Permitted Uses:
a. Minimum lot area: 3 acres
b. Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 100 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 50 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §401
64
f. Minimum buildable area: 1 acre
g. Minimum useable yard area: 20% of each yard
h. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .08
5. Maximum Building Height: [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
a. Principal use: 35 feet
b. Garage: 20 feet
c. ECHO housing: 20 feet
d. Barn or silo: 50 feet
e. Other accessory buildings: 15 feet
6. Accessory Buildings and Uses. The following regulations shall apply to accessory
buildings and uses:
a. No accessory building or use shall be located in a front yard.
b. Residential use accessory building property line setbacks:
(1) Lots 2 acres or larger: A distance > to the structure's
height, but not less than 15 feet
(2) Lots of 15,000 square feet to < 2 acres: 15 feet
(3) Lots < 15,000 square feet: 5 feet
c. Other accessory uses shall conform to the yard requirements for the
principal building, except as otherwise modified by this Ordinance.
G. Transfer of Development Credits. The right to develop a parcel of land in the EP-1 district
may be transferred to any district that is designated as a receiving district in the Land Use
Ordinance. Each tract from which development rights have been purchased shall be
permanently deed restricted under the following criteria:
1. The land shall be deed restricted to those uses permitted under the state agricultural
farmland preservation program or for conservation.
2. The deed restriction shall run to the benefit of Lawrence Township, or land trust or
other suitable entity as approved by the municipality.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §403
65
§ 402 Environmental Protection 2 (EP-2) District.
A. Purpose. The Environmental Protection 2 district is designed for low intensity uses primarily
in the northwest area of the municipality where poor water yields and strata for septic
systems dictate large lot development in an area of little or no public infrastructure and
severe environmental constraints, including but not limited to, a seasonal high water table,
shallow depth to bedrock, and steep slopes along the Stony Brook. Further, the purpose of
the EP-2 district is to protect the environmental resources and qualities of this area, maintain
the rural character of roads and scenic views, and retain farmland. The EP-2 designation is
contrasted with the EP-1 district by being underlain with the Brunswick Shale or Stockton
Sandstone geologic formations as depicted in the adopted Master Plan which yield slightly
better water supplies. Both the EP-1 and EP-2 districts, though poorly suited for
development, are exceptional areas for non-irrigated agriculture. Because of this last factor,
clustering of residential units is preferred whether under the provisions of this section or
§428.
B. Permitted Uses. In the Environmental Protection 2 zone, no lot shall be used and no
structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Agriculture.
2. Farmstead.
3. Single family detached dwelling.
4. Residential cluster option.
5. Public parks and recreation.
6. Conservation.
7. Municipal use.
8. Cemetery.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use and conforming to the applicable subsection in §429:
1. Private residential swimming pool.
2. Private residential tool shed.
3. Recreational vehicle storage.
4. Outdoor recreational facilities, including tennis or other court sports.
5. Off-street parking and private garage.
6. Fences and walls.
7. Deck/patio. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
8. Signs.
9. Home occupation.
10. Accessory apartment pursuant to §429.A. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §403
66
11. ECHO housing.
12. Satellite dish and television antennae.
13. Farm stand and consumer crop picking operations when used in conjunction with an
agricultural use.
14. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted when authorized as a
conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with §430 and §705:
1. Public and private day school.
2. Public and private golf course.
3. Farm market.
4. Bed and breakfast accommodation.
5. Child care center. [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19]
E. Lot Area, Density and Open Space Requirements. Except as otherwise modified, the
following area and open space standards shall apply to all EP-2 districts:
1. Single family detached residential uses without public water or public sewer and
farmsteads:
Average Lot Area
Per Unit (1)
Minimum
Open Space
Maximum Tract
Density
Minimum
Tract Area
3 acres 0% N/A N/A
2 acres 25% 1 unit per 3.2 acres 20 acres
1 acre 50% 1 unit per 2.5 acres 20 acres
(1) The minimum lot area shall be at least 90% of the average lot area per unit. The
bulk standards of the average lot size pursuant to -F.1 shall apply to all building lots.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §403
67
2. Single family detached residential uses with either public water or public sewer:
Average Lot Area
Per Unit (1)
Minimum
Open Space
Maximum Tract
Density
Minimum
Tract Area
2.5 acres 0% N/A N/A
1.5 acres 30% 1 unit per 2.7 acres 20 acres
1 acre 50% 1 unit per 2.5 acres 20 acres
(1) The minimum lot area shall be at least 90% of the average lot area per unit. The
bulk standards of the average lot size pursuant to -F.1 shall apply to all building lots.
3. Single family detached residential uses with both public water and public sewer
Average Lot Area
Per Unit (1)
Minimum
Open Space
Maximum Tract
Density
Minimum
Tract Area
2 acres 0% N/A N/A
1.5 acres 20% 1 unit per 2.2 acres 20 acres
1 acre 40% 1 unit per 2 acres 20 acres
(1) The minimum lot area shall be at least 90% of the average lot area per unit. The
bulk standards of the average lot size pursuant to -F.1 shall apply to all building lots.
4. Residential cluster option requirements, pursuant to §428.
Minimum and
Maximum Lot
Area per Unit
Minimum
Open Space
Maximum
Tract Density
Minimum
Number of
Lots
Minimum
Tract Area
22,500 sf. to
1 acre 40% 1 unit per
2 acres 6 20 acres
15,000 sf. to
22,499 sf. 50% 1 unit per
1.9 acres 6 20 acres
9,000 sf. to
14,999 sf. 60% 1 unit per
1.8 acres 10 20 acres
8,999 sf.
or less 70% 1 unit per
1.7 acres 10 20 acres
a. The minimum and maximum lot areas in the table immediately above
specify ranges for building lots. Minimum open space is the percentage of
the total tract area. Minimum number of lots is the number of building lots.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §403
68
F. Yard and Building Coverage for Residential Uses. Except as otherwise modified, the
following bulk requirements shall apply to all buildings:
1. Bulk regulations for subsections -E.1, -E.2, and -E.3, above.
Average lot area 3 acres 2.5 acres 2 acres 1.5 acres 1 acre
Minimum lot frontage 200 feet 200 feet 200 feet 175 feet 175 feet
Minimum front yard 100 feet 100 feet 75 feet 75 feet 50 feet
Minimum side yard 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet 35 feet 35 feet
Minimum rear yard 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet 50 feet
Minimum acreage
exclusive of critical
areas
1 acre 1 acre 1 acre .75 acre .75 acre
Minimum useable
yard area
20% of
each yard
20% of
each yard
20% of
each yard
20% of
each yard
20% of
each yard
Maximum impervious
surface ratio .12 .13 .14 .20 .25
a. The minimum buildable area in the table immediately above shall not be
required for lots with both public water and public sewer.
2. Bulk regulations for subsection -E.4 above, pursuant to §428.
Minimum lot area 22,500 sf 15,000 sf 9,000 sf < 9,000 sf
Minimum lot frontage 100 feet 100 feet 75 feet 30 feet
Minimum front yard 40 feet 40 feet 30 feet 30 feet
Minimum side yard 15 feet 15 feet 10 feet 0 feet
Minimum rear yard 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet
Maximum impervious
surface ratio .40 .40 .50 .60
a. At least 50% of all building lots shall adjoin common open space.
3. Agricultural uses:
a. Minimum lot size: 5 acres
b. Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 75 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 30 feet
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §403
69
e. Minimum rear yard: 100 feet
f. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .05
4. Other Permitted Uses:
a. Minimum lot area: 3 acres
b. Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 100 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 50 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet
f. Minimum buildable area: 1 acre
g. Minimum useable yard area: 20% of each yard
h. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .08
5. Maximum Building Height: [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
a. Principal use: 35 feet
b. Garage: 20 feet
c. ECHO housing: 20 feet
d. Barn or silo: 50 feet
e. Other accessory buildings: 15 feet
6. Accessory Buildings and Uses. The following regulations shall apply to accessory
buildings and uses:
a. No accessory building or use shall be located in a front yard.
b. Residential use accessory building property line setbacks:
(1) Lots 2 acres or larger: A distance > to the structure's
height, but not less than 15 feet
(2) Lots of 15,000 square feet to < 2 acres: 15 feet
(3) Lots < 15,000 square feet: 5 feet
c. Other accessory uses shall conform to the yard requirements for the
principal building.
G. Transfer of Development Credits. The right to develop a parcel of land in the EP-2 district
may be transferred to any district that is designated as a receiving district in the Land Use
Ordinance. Each tract from which development rights have been purchased shall be
permanently deed restricted under the following criteria:
1. The land shall be deed restricted to those uses permitted under the state agricultural
farmland preservation program or for conservation.
2. The deed restriction shall run to the benefit of Lawrence Township, or land trust or
other suitable entity as approved by the municipality.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §403
70
§ 403 Residential 1 (R-1) District
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Residential 1 district is to provide for low density single family
detached housing on lots of one acre or larger, or in cluster developments on smaller lots.
B. Permitted Uses. In the Residential 1 zone, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be
erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Agriculture.
2. Farmstead.
3. Single family detached dwelling.
4. Residential cluster option.
5. Public parks and recreation.
6. Conservation.
7. Municipal use.
8. Cemetery.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use and conforming to the applicable subsection in §429:
1. Private residential swimming pool and cabana.
2. Private residential tool shed.
3. Recreational vehicle storage.
4. Outdoor recreational facilities, including tennis or other court sports.
5. Off-street parking and private garage.
6. Fences and walls.
7. Deck/patio. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
8. Signs.
9. Home occupation.
10. Accessory apartment pursuant to §429.A. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
11. ECHO housing.
12. Satellite dish and television antennae.
13. Farm stand and consumer crop picking operations when used in conjunction with an
agricultural use.
14. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted when authorized as a
conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with §430 and §705:
1. Public and private day school.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §403
71
2. Public and private golf course.
3. House of worship.
4. Farm market.
5. Child care center. [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19]
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the following
bulk standards shall apply to all buildings:
1. Single family detached residential uses:
a. Minimum lot area: 1 acre
b. Minimum lot frontage: 175 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 50 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 35 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet
f. Minimum useable yard area: 20% of each yard
g. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .25
2. Residential cluster option:
a. Non - Age-restricted:
(1) Minimum tract area: 10 acres
(2) Maximum gross density: 1.25 units per acre
(3) Minimum open space: 60% of total tract area
(4) Minimum number of building lots: 6 lots
(5) Minimum lot area: 9,000 sf.
(6) Minimum lot frontage: 75 feet
(7) Minimum front yard: 35 feet
(8) Minimum side yard: 0 feet for common
wall, 10 feet otherwise
(9) Minimum rear yard: 35 feet
(10) Maximum impervious surface ratio per lot: .50
(11) At least 60% of all building lots shall adjoin common open space.
(12) Criteria pursuant to §428.
b. Age-restricted.
(1) Minimum tract area: 30 acres
(2) Maximum gross density: 1.5 units per acre
(3) Minimum open space: 60% of total tract area
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §403
72
(4) At least 60% of all building lots shall adjoin common open space.
(5) Criteria pursuant to §428. In addition to the dwelling types allowed
pursuant to §428, quadraplexes shall also be permitted.
(6) Area, yard, building coverage and height requirements for single
family detached, semi-detached, quadraplex and townhouse
dwellings shall conform to the requirements of the SCR district,
§410.G.1-6,11. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
3. Agricultural uses:
a. Minimum lot size: 5 acres
b. Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 75 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 30 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 100 feet
f. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .25
4. Other Permitted Uses:
a. Minimum lot area: 3 acres
b. Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 75 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 50 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 75 feet
f. Minimum buildable area: 1 acre
g. Minimum useable yard area: 20% of each yard
h. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .25
5. Maximum Building Height: [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
a. Principal use: 35 feet
b. Garage: 20 feet
c. ECHO housing: 20 feet
d. Barn or silo: 50 feet
e. Other accessory buildings: 15 feet
6. Accessory buildings and uses. The following regulations shall apply to accessory
buildings and uses:
a. No accessory building or use shall be located in a front yard.
b. Accessory building property line setbacks:
(1) Lots one acre or larger: A distance > to the structure's
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §403
73
height, but not less than 15 feet
(2) Lots of 15,000 square feet to < one acre: 15 feet
(3) Lots < 15,000 square feet: 5 feet
c. Other accessory uses shall conform to the yard requirements for the
principal building, except as otherwise modified by this Ordinance.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §404
74
§ 404 Residential 2A (R-2A) District
A. Purpose. The Residential 2A district is intended primarily for single family
detached residential uses on lots of 22,500 square feet or larger, or in cluster
developments on smaller lots.
B. Permitted Uses. In the Residential 2A zone, no lot shall be used and no structure
shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Agriculture.
2. Farmstead.
3. Single family detached dwelling.
4. Residential cluster option.
5. Public parks and recreation.
6. Conservation.
7. Municipal use.
8. Cemetery.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted when used
in conjunction with a principal use and conforming to the applicable subsection in
§429:
1. Private residential swimming pool and cabana.
2. Private residential tool shed.
3. Recreational vehicle storage.
4. Outdoor recreational facilities, including tennis or other court sports.
5. Off-street parking and private garage.
6. Fences and walls.
7. Deck/patio. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
8. Signs.
9. Home occupation.
10. Accessory apartment pursuant to §429.A. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
11. ECHO housing.
12. Satellite dish and television antennae.
13. Farm stand and consumer crop picking operations when used in conjunction
with an agricultural use.
14. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted when authorized
as a conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with §430 and §705:
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §404
75
1. Public and private day school.
2. House of worship.
3. Child care center. [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19]
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the
following bulk standards shall apply to all buildings:
1. Single family detached residential uses:
a. Minimum lot area: 22,500 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 40 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 15 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 40 feet
f. Maximum impervious surface ratio per lot: .35
g. Minimum useable yard area: 20% of each yard
2. Residential cluster option:
a. Minimum tract area: 10 acres
b. Maximum gross density: 1.5 units
per acre
c. Minimum open space: 60% of total tract area
c. Minimum number of building lots: 6 lots
d. Minimum lot area: 9,000 sf.
e. Minimum lot frontage: 75 feet
f. Minimum front yard: 35 feet
g. Minimum side yard: 0 feet for common wall,
10 feet otherwise
h. Minimum rear yard: 35 feet
i. Maximum impervious surface ratio per lot: .50
j. At least 60% of all building lots shall adjoin common open space.
k. Criteria pursuant to §428.
3. Agricultural uses:
a. Minimum lot size: 5 acres
b. Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 75 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 30 feet
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §404
76
e. Minimum rear yard: 100 feet
f. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .25
4. Other Permitted Uses:
a. Minimum lot area: 2 acres
b. Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 75 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 50 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 100 feet
f. Minimum useable yard area: 20% of each yard
g. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .35
5. Maximum Building Height: [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
a. Principal use, excepting religious use: 35 feet
b. House of Worship:
(1) Principal building: 45 feet
(2) Structure above principal roof: 80 feet
c. Garage: 20 feet
d. ECHO housing: 20 feet
e. Barn or silo: 50 feet
f. Other accessory buildings: 15 feet
4. Accessory Buildings and Uses. The following regulations shall apply to
accessory buildings and uses:
a. No accessory building or use shall be located in a front yard.
b. Accessory building property line setbacks:
(1) Lots one acre or larger: A distance > to the structure's
height, but not less than 15 feet
(2) Lots of 15,000 square feet to < one acre: 15 feet
(3) Lots < 15,000 square feet: 5 feet
c. Other accessory uses shall conform to the yard requirements for the
principal building, except as otherwise modified by this Ordinance.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §405
77
§ 405 Residential 2B (R-2B) District.
A. Purpose. The Residential 2B district is intended primarily for single family detached
residential uses on lots of 15,000 square feet or larger, or in cluster developments on smaller
lots.
B. Permitted Uses. In the Residential 2B zone, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be
erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Single family detached dwelling.
2. Residential cluster option.
3. Public parks and recreation.
4. Conservation.
5. Swimming club for Ben Franklin.
6. Municipal use.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use and conforming to the applicable subsection in §429:
1. Private residential swimming pool and cabana.
2. Private residential tool shed.
3. Recreational vehicle storage.
4. Outdoor recreational facilities, including tennis or other court sports.
5. Off-street parking and private garage.
6. Fences and walls.
7. Deck/patio. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
8. Signs.
9. Home occupation.
10. Accessory apartment pursuant to §429.A. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
11. Satellite dish and television antennae.
12. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted when authorized as a
conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with §430 and §705:
1. Public and private day school.
2. House of worship.
3. Bed and breakfast accommodation.
4. Child care center. [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19]
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the following
bulk standards shall apply to all buildings:
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §405
78
1. Single family detached residential uses:
a. Minimum lot area: 15,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 40 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 15 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 40 feet
f. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .40
g. Minimum useable yard area: 20% of each yard
2. Residential cluster option:
a. Minimum tract area: 10 acres
b. Maximum gross density: 2.5 units per acre
c. Minimum open space: 30% of total tract area
d. Minimum number of building lots: 6 lots
e. Minimum lot area: 9,000 sf.
f. Minimum lot frontage: 75 feet
g. Minimum front yard: 35 feet
h. Minimum side yard: 0 feet for common wall,
10 feet otherwise
i. Minimum rear yard: 35 feet
j. Maximum impervious surface ratio per lot: .50
k. At least 60% of all building lots shall adjoin common open space.
l. Criteria pursuant to §428.
3. Other Permitted Uses:
a. Minimum lot area: 60,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 150 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 50 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 40 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet
f. Minimum useable yard area: 20% of each yard
g. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .50
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §405
79
4. Maximum Building Height:
a. Principal use, excepting religious use: 35 feet
b. House of Worship:
(1) Principal building: 45 feet
(2) Structure above principal roof: 80 feet
c. Garage: [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999] 20 feet
d. Other accessory buildings: 15 feet
5. Accessory Buildings and Uses. The following regulations shall apply to accessory
buildings and uses:
a. No accessory building or use shall be located in a front yard.
b. Accessory building property line setbacks:
(1) Lots one acre or larger: A distance > to the structure's
height, but not less than 15 feet
(2) Lots of 15,000 square feet to < one acre: 15 feet
(3) Lots < 15,000 square feet: 5 feet
c. Other accessory uses shall conform to the yard requirements for the
principal building, except as otherwise modified by this Ordinance.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §406
80
§ 406 Residential 3 (R-3) District.
A. Purpose. The Residential 3 district is intended primarily for singe family detached dwellings
on lots of 9,000 square feet or larger. [Ord. 1922-07]
B. Permitted Uses. In the Residential 3 zone, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be
erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Single family detached dwelling.
2. Semi-detached dwelling in existence or approved as of March 20, 2007. [Ord. 1922-
07]
3. Public parks and recreation.
4. Conservation.
5. Municipal use.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use and conforming to the applicable subsection in §429:
1. Private residential swimming pool and cabana.
2. Private residential tool shed.
3. Recreational vehicle storage.
4. Outdoor recreational facilities, including tennis or other court sports.
5. Off-street parking and private garage.
6. Fences and walls.
7. Deck/patio. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
8. Signs.
9. Home occupation.
10. Accessory apartment pursuant to §429.A. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
11. Satellite dish and television antennae.
12. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted when authorized as a
conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with §430 and §705:
1. Public and private day school.
2. House of worship.
3. Child care center. [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19]
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the following
bulk standards shall apply to all buildings [Ord.1920-07; 3/6/07]:
1. Single family detached residential uses:
a. Minimum lot area: 9,000 sf
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §406
81
b. Minimum lot frontage: 75 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 35 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 10 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 35 feet
f. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .50
g. Minimum useable yard area: 20% of each yard
h. Neighborhood context distance: 500 feet
i. Maximum square footage of living area (SFLA): 2.0 times the
average SFLA of
the Neighborhood
Context
j. Maximum ratio of SFLA to lot area: 2.0 times the average ratio of
SFLA to lot area for the
Neighborhood Context
k. The requirements of subparagraphs -(i) and -(j) above are not applicable to
renovation or rehabilitation of existing residential buildings provided that
the improvements do not create additional SFLA which exceeds the lesser
of 40% of the pre-existing SFLA of the property or 750 SFLA.
2. Semi-detached residential uses:
a. Minimum lot area: 15,000 sf total,
7,500 sf each unit
b. Minimum lot frontage: 50 feet, each unit
c. Minimum front yard: 35 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 15 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 35 feet
f. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .50
g. Minimum useable yard area: 20% of each yard
3. Other Permitted Uses:
a. Minimum lot area: 60,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 150 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 50 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 40 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet
f. Minimum useable yard area: 20% of each yard
g. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .50
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §406
82
4. Maximum Building Height: [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
a. Principal use, excepting religious use: 35 feet
b. House of Worship:
(1) Principal building 45 feet
(2) Structure above principal roof 80 feet
c. Garage: 20 feet
d. Other accessory buildings: 15 feet
5. Accessory Buildings and Uses. The following regulations shall apply to accessory
buildings and uses:
a. No accessory building or use shall be located in a front yard.
b. Accessory building property line setbacks:
(1) Lots one acre or larger: A distance > to the structure's
height, but not less than 15 feet
(2) Lots of 15,000 square feet to < one acre: 15 feet
(3) Lots < 15,000 square feet: 5 feet
c. Other accessory uses shall conform to the yard requirements for the
principal building, except as otherwise modified by this Ordinance.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §407
83
§ 407 Residential 4 (R-4) District.
A. Purpose. The Residential 4 district is intended primarily for single family detached dwellings
on lots of 7,500 square feet or larger. [Ord. 1922-07]
B. Permitted Uses. In the Residential 4 zone, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be
erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following :
1. Single family detached dwelling.
2. Semi-detached dwelling in existence or approved as of March 20, 2007. [Ord. 1922-
07,]
3. Public parks and recreation.
4. Conservation.
5. Municipal use.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use and conforming to the applicable subsection in §429:
1. Private residential swimming pool.
2. Private residential tool shed.
3. Recreational vehicle storage.
4. Off-street parking and private garage.
5. Fences and walls.
6. Deck/patio. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
7. Signs.
8. Home occupation.
9. Accessory apartment pursuant to §429.A. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
10. Satellite dish and television antennae.
11. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted when authorized as a
conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with §430 and §705:
1. Public and private day school.
2. House of worship.
3. Age-restricted townhouse, quadraplex or apartment dwellings provided the
following conditions are met:
a. Minimum tract size: 7 acres
b. Maximum gross density: 10 units per acre
c. Maximum number of units per building:
(1) Within 200 feet of existing apartment or townhouse use: 30 units
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §407
84
(2) 200 feet or greater distance from
apartment or townhouse use: 4 units
d. Minimum distance between buildings: 40 feet
e. Minimum distance from tract perimeter: 50 feet
f. Maximum height:
(1) Within 200 feet of existing
apartment or townhouse use: 32 feet or 2 stories
(2) 200 feet or greater distance from
apartment or townhouse use: 28 feet or 1½ stories
g. Age-restricted apartments shall be permitted a common activity room and a
common laundry within the confines of the building.
h. Quadraplexes and townhouses marketed on a fee simple basis shall conform
to the lot requirements of §410.G.3 and -.4, respectively.
i. Any other standard not modified herein shall apply.
4. Child care center. [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19]
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the following
bulk standards shall apply to all buildings:
1. Single family detached residential uses:
a. Minimum lot area: 7,500 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 60 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 30 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 10 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 35 feet
f. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .60
g. Minimum useable yard area: 20% of each yard
h. Neighborhood context distance: [Ord. 1920-07] 400 ft.
i. Maximum square footage of living area (SFLA) 2.0 times the average
[Ord. 1920-07, 3/6/07] SFLA of the Neighborhood
Context
j. Maximum ratio of SFLA to lot area: 2.0 times the average ratio of
[Ord. 1920-07, 3/6/07] SFLA to lot area for
the Neighborhood Context
k. The requirements of subparagraphs -(i) and -(j) above are not applicable to
renovation or rehabilitation of existing residential buildings provided that
the improvements do not create additional SFLA which exceeds the lesser
of 40% of the pre-existing SFLA of the property or 750 SFLA. [Ord. 1920-
07, 3/6/07]
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §407
85
2. Semi-detached residential uses:
a. Minimum lot area: 12,000 sf total, 6,000 sf each unit
b. Minimum lot frontage: 40 feet, each unit
c. Minimum front yard: 30 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 10 feet, 0 feet for common wall
e. Minimum rear yard: 35 feet
f. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .65
g. Minimum useable yard area: 20% of each yard
3. Other Permitted Uses:
a. Minimum lot area: 60,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 150 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 50 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 40 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet
f. Minimum useable yard area: 20% of each yard
g. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .50
4. Maximum Building Height: [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
a. Principal use, excepting religious use: 35 feet
b. House of Worship:
(1) Principal building: 45 feet
(2) Structure above principal roof: 80 feet
c. Garage: [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999] 20 feet
d. Other accessory buildings: 15 feet
5. Accessory Buildings and Uses. The following regulations shall apply to accessory
buildings and uses:
a. No accessory building or use shall be located in a front yard.
b. Accessory building property line setbacks:
(1) Lots one acre or larger: A distance > to the structure's
height, but not less than 15 feet
(2) Lots of 15,000 square feet to < one acre: 15 feet
(3) Lots < 15,000 square feet: 5 feet
c. Other accessory uses shall conform to the yard requirements for the
principal building, except as otherwise modified by this Ordinance.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §408
86
§ 408 Residential 5 (R-5) District.
A. Purpose. The Residential 5 district is intended primarily for single family detached
dwellings on lots of 4,000 square feet or larger. [Ord. 1922-07]
B. Permitted Uses. In the Residential 5 zone, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be
erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Single family detached dwelling.
2. Semi-detached dwelling in existence or approved as of March 20, 2007. [Ord. 1922-
07]
3. Public parks and recreation.
4. Conservation.
5. Municipal use.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use and conforming to the applicable subsection in §429:
1. Above ground private residential swimming pool.
2. Private residential tool shed.
3. Recreational vehicle storage.
4. Off-street parking and private garage.
5. Fences and walls.
6. Deck/patio. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
7. Signs.
8. Home occupation.
9. Satellite dish and television antennae.
10. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted when authorized as a
conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with §430 and §705:
1. Public and private day school.
2. House of worship.
3. Child care center. [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19]
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the following
bulk standards shall apply to all buildings: [Ord. 1920-07, 2/26/2007]
1. Single family detached residential uses:
a. Minimum lot area: 4,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 40 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 20 feet
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §408
87
d. Minimum side yard: 5 feet, 0 feet for common wall
e. Minimum rear yard: 25 feet
f. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .75
g. Neighborhood context distance: 300 feet
h. Maximum square footage of living area (SFLA) 2.0 times the average
SFLA of the
Neighborhood Context
i. Maximum ratio of SFLA to lot area: 2.0 times the average
ratio of SFLA to lot area for the
Neighborhood Context
j. The requirements of subparagraph -(h) and -(i) above are not applicable to
renovation or rehabilitation of existing residential buildings provided that
the improvements do not create additional SFLA which exceeds the lesser
of 40% of the pre-existing SFLA of the property or 750 SFLA.
2. Semi-detached residential use:
a. Minimum lot area: 6,000 sf total
3,000 sf each unit
b. Minimum lot frontage, two-family: 30 feet, each unit
c. Minimum front yard: 20 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 5 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 25 feet
f. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .80
3. Townhouse residential use:
a. Minimum lot area: 2,000 sf.
b. Minimum lot frontage 20 feet, each unit
c. Minimum front yard: 20 feet
d. Minimum rear yard: 25 feet
e. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .80
4. Other Permitted Uses:
a. Minimum lot area: 60,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 150 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 50 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 40 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet
f. Minimum useable yard area: 20% of each yard
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §408
88
g. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .65
5. Maximum Building Height:
a. Principal use, excepting religious use: 35 feet
b. House of Worship:
(1) Principal building: 45 feet
(2) Structure above principal roof: 80 feet
c. Garage: 20 feet
d. Other accessory buildings: 15 feet
6. Accessory Buildings and Uses. The following regulations shall apply to accessory
buildings and uses:
a. No accessory building or use shall be located in a front yard.
b. Accessory building property line setbacks:
(1) Lots one acre or larger: A distance > to the structure's
height, but not less than 15 feet
(2) Lots of 15,000 square feet to < one acre: 15 feet
(3) Lots < 15,000 square feet: 5 feet
c. Other accessory uses shall conform to the yard requirements for the
principal building, except as otherwise modified by this Ordinance.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §409
89
§ 409 Apartment and Townhouse (AT) Residential District.
[Ord. 2283-17, 12/19/17]
A. Purpose. The Apartment and Townhouse (AT) residential zone is intended to provide for
dwellings in a garden apartment, multi-story or townhouse configuration at moderate
multi-family densities. The AT district may be designated either as a base zoning district or
as an overlay district in selected areas on the Zoning Map. When used as an overlay
district, it is intended that the development adhere to the specific density and other
regulations for each type of overlay district as identified on the Zoning Map.
B. Permitted Uses. In the Apartment and Townhouse zone, no lot shall be used and no structure
shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Apartments.
2. Townhouses.
3. Common open space.
4. Age-restricted development pursuant to the SCR district regulations.
5. Conservation.
6. Municipal use.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use and conforming to the applicable subsection in §429:
1. Home occupation.
2. Community center for the common use of residents.
3. Community swimming pool for the common use of residents.
4. Private residential tool shed on fee simple lots, only, not exceeding 108 square feet.
5. Outdoor recreational facilities, including tennis or other court sports.
6. Off-street parking and private garages.
7. Decks and above ground private swimming pools for fee simple townhouses.
8. Fences, walls, gazebos, mail kiosks and other street furniture.
9. Signs.
10. Satellite dish and television antennae.
11. Maintenance building.
12. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. Conditional Use Permitted. The following use may be permitted when located on
Lawrenceville-Pennington Road and authorized as a conditional use by the Planning Board
in accordance with §430 and §705:
1. Uses permitted in the NC-1 district and the following conditions:
a. Minimum lot size: 30,000
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §409
90
sf.
b. Minimum lot frontage: 150 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 50 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 25 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet
f. Maximum floor area ratio:
(1) Non-residential use: .10
(2) Residential use: .20
(3) Mixed use: .20 provided no more than
.10 is a non-residential use
g. Maximum impervious surface ratio:
(4) Non-residential use: .65
(5) Residential use: .35
(6) Mixed use: .75
E. Required Use. A minimum of 20% of all units in an Apartment and Townhouse
development, excepting conditional uses, shall be affordable to households of low and
moderate income pursuant to Article X of this Ordinance.
F. General District Regulations. In the Apartment and Townhouse district, the following
general regulations shall apply:
1. Minimum gross acreage of tract: 10 acres
2. Minimum buildable land area of tract: 7 acres
3. Maximum gross density:
h. Not in an overlay district: 10 units per acre
i. In an AT-1 Overlay district: 8 units per acre
j. In an AT-2 Overlay district 10 units per acre
k. In an AT-3 Overlay district 15 units per acre
4. Minimum open space: 30% of total tract area
5. Minimum tract frontage: 300 feet
6. Building setback from tract perimeter: 50 feet from any tract boundary
7. Parking area or internal driveway or street setback (excluding entrances and exits)
from tract perimeter: 25 feet
8. Maximum number of dwelling units in one building:
a. Building with all townhouses: 8 units
l. Building with all apartments: 24 units
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §409
91
(1) On tracts of at least 35 acres: 80 units
(2) On tracts with a density greater than 12 units per acre: 48 units
m. Building with both dwelling types: 12 units
9. Minimum distance between buildings:
a. From the front or back of any building to any other building: 50 feet
n. From the side of any building to any other building: 30 feet
o. From any common parking area to a building: 15 feet
p. The Planning or Zoning Board, after due consideration of plans, testimony,
or other evidence, may waive strict compliance with this subsection to
further the architectural relationship of building groups.
10. Maximum building height: 38 feet or 3 stories, whichever is less,
except that on tracts more than 30 acres
in area or more than 12 units per acre,
the height may be increased to
55 feet or 4 stories, whichever is less
11. Maximum building length through the long axis: 240 feet
12. Any development incorporating both apartments and townhouses shall be limited to
a total of 80% of either type of unit.
13. Each townhouse or ground floor unit shall have a private rear yard of 200 square
feet minimum for the occupants' exclusive use or an active and/or passive recreation
area equal to 200 square feet per unit available to all tenants or owners.
14. Public water and sewer. All such development shall be served by public water and
public sanitary sewer.
G. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the following
bulk standards shall apply to all buildings:
1. Townhouses with fee simple lots:
q. Minimum lot area: 1,200 sf.
r. Minimum lot frontage: 20 feet (per unit)
s. Minimum lot width: 20 feet (per unit)
a. Minimum front yard:
(1) 30 feet for units with garages or driveways;
(2) 15 feet for units without garages or driveways
t. Minimum side yard: 0 feet if adjoining another unit,
15 feet if an outside wall
b. Minimum rear yard:
(1) 20 feet
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §409
92
(2) 5 feet for a rear entry garage from an alley.
2. Additional townhouse requirements:
a. Minimum unit width: 20 feet
b. A minimum of 300 square feet of storage shall be provided for each unit in
the basement, attic or other area attached to unit for storage of garbage,
recyclables in the front of the unit, bicycles, garden equipment, or other
common household items.
3. Apartments.
a. The minimum size for each apartment shall be 550 square feet.
b. Each unit above the ground floor shall have a balcony or terrace of at least
50 square feet in area unless common open space for all units is provided as
indicated in –F.13, hereinabove.
c. A minimum of 100 square feet of storage shall be provided for each unit,
including interior and/or exterior storage for garbage and recyclables in the
front of the unit, and bicycles, garden equipment, and other common
household items in an appropriate location. This minimum floor area for
storage may be reduced to no more than 75 square feet in the event that
each building has an internal garbage and recyclable collection area or
readily accessible exterior garbage and trash collection point.
4. Accessory Structures.
a. Accessory structures for individual units shall not be permitted in any front
yard area. Such structures shall not be located closer than 5 feet to a
property line.
b. Community centers and recreational buildings shall conform to the general
district requirements in this section.
c. Common garages or carports providing shelter for the motor vehicles of
residents shall conform to the setback requirements for parking areas in this
section, except that no such accessory building or structure is located in a
front yard.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §410
93
§ 410 Senior Citizen Residential (SCR) District.
A. Purpose. The Senior Citizen Residential (SCR) district is intended for age-restricted
development designed to meet the diverse housing and health care needs of the aging
population at densities of up to 14 units per acre. Certain small scale convenience retail and
office uses designed to serve senior citizens are also allowed where such uses or zones are
not adjacent to the district. This district requires a set aside to provide for housing for low
and moderate income senior citizens.
B. Permitted Uses. In the Senior Citizen Residential zone, no lot shall be used and no structure
shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Single family detached dwelling.
2. Semi-detached dwelling.
3. Townhouse dwelling.
4. Quadraplex dwelling.
5. Apartment dwellings.
6. Continuing care retirement community consisting at a minimum independent living
units and long term care.
7. Assisted living residence.
8. Congregate care apartment.
9. Long-term care facility.
10. Combinations of §410.B.7-9 uses.
11. Clubhouse and social center in conjunction with an age qualified development.
[Ord. 1728-02, 12/16/2002]
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use and conforming to the applicable subsection in §429:
1. Home occupation.
2. Community room(s) integrated into a residential building or center in a separate
building for the common use of residents.
3. Commercial swimming pool for the common use of residents.
4. Private residential tool shed on fee simple lots, only.
5. Outdoor recreational facilities, including tennis or other court sports for the common
use of residents.
6. Off-street parking, including automobile sheds and grouped private garages.
7. Fences, walls, gazebos, mail kiosks and other street furniture.
8. Signs.
9. Satellite dish and television antennae.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §410
94
10. Maintenance facility.
11. Facility management office.
12. Social service facility for the benefit primarily of residents.
13. Congregate dining facility.
14. Personal and medical services integrated into a residential building occupying no
more than 30% of the gross floor area.
15. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. Conditional Uses. The following uses may be permitted when authorized as a conditional
use by the Planning Board in accordance with §705:
1. Personal sales, personal services, and convenience retail sales in a separate building,
provided the following conditions are met:
a. The SCR district does not abut any NC-1, NC-2, or HC district.
b. Floor area ratio of all non-residential conditional uses shall not exceed .04
of total lot area or 25,000 square feet, whichever is less.
c. The retail uses shall be designed primarily for senior citizen use.
2. Medical offices in a separate building, provided the following conditions are met:
a. The SCR district does not abut any PO, NC-1, NC-2, or HC district.
b. Floor area ratio of all non-residential conditional uses shall not exceed .04
of total lot area or 25,000 square feet, whichever is less.
c. The medical uses shall be designed primarily for senior citizen use.
E. Required Use. A minimum percentage of all dwelling units as established by Article X shall
be affordable to households of low and moderate income.
F. General District Regulations. In the Senior Citizen Residential district, the following general
regulations shall apply:
1. All residential development within the SCR district shall be age-restricted.
2. Minimum gross acreage of tract.
a. Continuing care retirement community:
(1) With single family detached: 35 acres
(2) Without single family detached: 20 acres
b. Long-term care facility
Congregate care apartments or
Assisted living facility: 4 acres
c. Combinations of §410.F.2b uses: 7 acres
d. Apartment buildings: 7 acres
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §410
95
3. Maximum gross density: 14 units per acre or
28 beds per acre
4. Minimum open space: 30% of total tract area, excepting one and
two family dwelling developments
5. Minimum tract frontage: 200 feet
G. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the following
bulk standards shall apply to all buildings:
1. Single Family Detached Residential:
a. Minimum lot area: 5,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 40 feet
c. Minimum lot width: 40 feet
d. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet
e. Minimum front yard: 30 feet
f. Minimum side yard: 5 feet, 15 feet for both sides
g. Minimum rear yard: 25 feet
2. Semi-detached dwelling.
a. Minimum lot area: 3,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 30 feet
c. Minimum lot width: 30 feet
d. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet
e. Minimum front yard: 30 feet
f. Minimum side yard: 0 feet, one side 5 feet, other side
g. Minimum rear yard: 25 feet
h. Maximum lot coverage: 50%
3. Quadraplex dwelling. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
a. Minimum lot area: 1,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 30 feet per unit
c. Minimum lot width: 30 feet per unit
d. Minimum front yard or rear yard: 20 feet
e. Minimum side yard: 0 feet per common wall, 18 feet otherwise
f. Maximum lot coverage: 50%
g. Maximum number of dwelling units per building: 4
4. Townhouses. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §410
96
a. Minimum lot area: 2,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 20 feet per unit
c. Minimum lot width: 20 feet per unit
d. Minimum front yard: 30 feet for units with garages,
15 feet for units without garages
e. Minimum side yard: 0 feet for a common wall,
15 feet otherwise
f. Minimum rear yard: 20 feet
g. Maximum number of units per building: 8
5. Additional requirements. The following additional requirements shall apply to
quadraplex and townhouse developments:
a. Townhouse units attached on a single linear plane shall not exceed a length
of 192 feet.
b. Each quadraplex unit and townhouse shall have a private rear yard of 200
square feet minimum.
c. A minimum of 300 square feet of storage shall be provided for each unit in
the basement, attic or other area attached to unit. This area shall include
storage for garbage in the front of the unit, bicycles, garden equipment,
barbecue equipment and so forth.
6. Accessory building for the preceding uses.
a. Minimum side yard: 5 feet
b. Minimum distance to rear line: 5 feet
c. Minimum distance to other building: 10 feet
d. Maximum building height: [Ord. 1728-02, 12/16/2002]
(1) Clubhouse and/or social center: 28 feet or 1 ½ stories
(2) Garage: 20 feet
(3) Other accessory building: 15 feet
7. Long Term Care Facility, Congregate Care, and Assisted Living Facility.
a. Maximum number of units in one building: 120
b. Maximum number of beds in one building: 150
c. Principal building setback: [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
(1) From tract perimeter:
(a) Building setback shall be 50 feet for any portion of the
building with a height of 35 feet or less.
Building setback shall be increased to 100 feet when
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §410
97
directly abutting a residential district.
(b) Building setback shall be 100 feet for any portion of the
building with a height in excess of 35 feet.
Building setback shall be increased to 200 feet when
directly abutting a residential district.
(2) From internal common driveway or street: 25 feet
d. Minimum distance between buildings: 50 feet
e. Accessory building setback from tract perimeter: 25 feet
f. Parking area or internal driveway or street setback (excluding entrances and
exits):
(1) From existing streetline: 50 feet
(2) From tract perimeter: 25 feet
g. See §521.E for design standards.
8. Apartment Building.
a. Maximum number of units in one building: 60
b. Principal building setback [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]:
(1) From tract perimeter:
(a) Building setback shall be 50 feet for any portion of the
building with a height of 35 feet or less.
Building setback shall be increased to 100 feet when
directly abutting a residential district.
(b) Building setback shall be 100 feet for any portion of the
building with a height in excess of 35 feet.
Building setback shall be increased to 200 feet when
directly abutting a residential district.
(2) From internal common driveway or street: 25 feet
c. Minimum distance between buildings: 50 feet
d. Accessory building setback from tract perimeter: 25 feet
e. Parking area or internal driveway or street setback (excluding entrances and
exits):
(1) From existing streetline: 50 feet
(2) From tract perimeter: 25 feet
f. See §531.A for design standards.
9. Retail uses. The bulk standards of the NC-1 district shall apply to any such
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §410
98
development.
10. Medical uses. The bulk standards of the PO district shall apply to any such
development.
11. Maximum building height:
a. Single family detached, 35 feet or
Semi-detached, Townhouse 2 ½ stories or
Quadraplex:
b. Apartment building, 45 feet or
Long term care facility, 3 stories
Congregate care apartment, or Assisted living facility:
c. Accessory building, clubhouse and/or 28 feet or
social center [Ord. 1728-02, 12/16/2002]: 1 ½ stories
H. Additional District Regulations.
1. Recreational amenities. At least 20% of the site or 250 square feet per unit,
whichever is greater, shall be designated on the site plan for active and passive
recreational use of the residents of the project; except that where a project is located
within 500 feet of any existing municipal park, the Board may waive this
requirement at the time of site plan review.
2. Walking distance. SCR development shall provide convenient linkages between
existing mass transportation transfer points and pick-up points that are within 1,000
feet of the subject development or provisions shall be made for the transportation of
residents to such locations.
3. Roof. Any SCR district building shall have a gable or hip roof, unless waived by the
Board of Jurisdiction.
4. Individual dwelling units shall meet or exceed minimum design requirements
specified by the New Jersey Housing Mortgage Finance Agency or the New Jersey
Department of Health and Senior Services, as applicable.
5. Dwelling units within the SCR District shall be 100 percent age restricted. [Ord.
1782-04,3/16/2004]
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §411
99
§ 411 Planned Village Development 1 (PVD-1) Zone.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Village Development 1 district is to further the
integrated development of:
1. A variety of housing types and designs;
2. Commercial, recreational, and other community services conveniently located to
serve the residents of the planned development;
3. The planning and building of new communities, incorporating the best features of
modern design;
4. The conservation and more efficient use of open space;
5. A plan integrating a street and highway system to minimize the burden of traffic;
6. A more flexible development of land that shall conserve and enhance natural
resources such as streams, lakes, flood plains, groundwater, wooded areas, steeply
sloped areas, and areas of unusual importance to the natural ecosystem.
7. Attractive and safe residential neighborhoods.
8. The preservation of the residential integrity of adjacent areas without commercial
encroachment.
B. Permitted Uses. In the PVD-1 zone, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected,
altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Single family detached dwelling.
2. Semi-detached dwelling.
3. Duplex dwelling.
4. Quadraplex dwelling.
5. Townhouse.
6. Apartment.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use:
1. Common playgrounds.
2. Conservation areas.
3. Parks and public purpose uses.
4. Common tennis courts and other usual recreational facilities.
5. Commercial swimming pools for the use of residents.
6. Off street parking, including automobile sheds and grouped private parking.
7. Fences, walls, gazebos, mail kiosks and other street furniture.
8. Maintenance building.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §411
100
9. Signs.
10. Home occupation.
11. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. General District Standards. The following general standards shall apply to all PVD-1
districts:
1. General development plan required. All development in the PVD-1 district shall be
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.1.
2. Minimum tract size: 100 contiguous acres
3. Minimum frontage on any County or State road shall be 300 feet.
4. Maximum gross density: 6 dwelling units per acre
5. Minimum recreation and civic plaza area: 25% of total tract area.
6. Maximum building (including parking structures) coverage: 30% of total tract area.
7. Maximum impervious surface coverage: 65% of total tract area.
8. Minimum tract perimeter setbacks for buildings and above-ground structures:
a. Tract boundary line: 50 feet
b. Existing street, excepting arterial and higher order streets: 75 feet
c. Arterial and higher order streets: 100 feet, unless a greater distance
is required pursuant to §400.C.3.
9. Minimum parking area setback from tract perimeter: 25 feet
10. Any PVD-1 development shall be served by public sewer and water.
11. An attached group of buildings may be considered as one building in applying any
standards contained in this section.
12. Any PVD-1 development shall be located on land environmentally suitable for
development, or suitably prepared for development, and shall meet the requirements
of the Master Plan.
13. PVD-1 development shall provide convenient linkages between existing mass
transportation transfer points and pick-up points that are within a five-minute
walking distance from all residential units, or 1,500 feet. Bus stops and bus lanes, as
appropriate, shall be incorporated into PVD-1 developments to connect residential
units directly to local and regional job and shopping locations.
E. Area, Yard, and Building Coverage Requirements. Except as otherwise modified, the
following bulk standards shall apply to all lots:
1. Single Family Detached Residential:
a. Minimum lot area: 9,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 75 feet
c. Minimum lot width: 75 feet
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §411
101
d. Minimum lot depth: 90 feet
e. Minimum front yard: 30 feet
f. Minimum side yard: 10 feet
g. Minimum rear yard: 35 feet
h. Minimum useable yard area: 20% of each yard
i. Maximum building height: 35 feet, or 2½ stories
2. Semi-Detached Dwelling.
a. Minimum lot area: 3,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 30 feet
c. Minimum lot width: 30 feet
d. Minimum front yard: 20 feet
e. Minimum side yard: 0 feet, one side
12 feet, other side
f. Minimum rear yard: 30 feet
g. Maximum lot coverage: 50%
h. Maximum building height: 35 feet, or 2½ stories
3. Duplex Dwelling.
a. Minimum lot area: 4,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 30 feet
c. Minimum lot width: 30 feet
d. Minimum front yard: 20 feet
e. Minimum side yard: 5 feet, one side,
12 feet other side
f. Minimum rear yard: 30 feet
g. Maximum lot coverage: 60%
h. Maximum building height: 35 feet,
or 2½ stories
4. Quadraplex Dwelling. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
a. Minimum lot area: 1,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 30 feet per unit
c. Minimum lot width: 30 feet per unit
d. Minimum front yard or rear yard: 20 feet
e. Minimum side yard: 18 feet, 0 feet common wall
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §411
102
f. Maximum lot coverage: 50%
g. Maximum building height: 35 feet or 2½ stories
h. Maximum number of dwelling units per building: 4
5. Townhouses.
a. Minimum lot area: 2,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 20 feet per unit
c. Minimum lot width: 20 feet per unit
d. Minimum front yard: 30 feet for units with garages,
15 feet for units without garages
e. Minimum side yard: 0 feet for a common wall,
5 feet otherwise
f. Minimum rear yard: 20 feet
g. Maximum building height: 38 feet or 3 stories
h. Maximum number of units per building: 8
i. The following additional requirements shall apply to quadraplex and
townhouse developments:
(1) Townhouse units attached on a single linear plane shall not exceed
a length of 192 feet.
(2) Each quadraplex unit and townhouse shall have a private rear yard
of 200 square feet minimum.
(3) A minimum of 300 square feet of storage shall be provided for each
unit in the basement, attic or other area attached to unit. This area
shall include storage for garbage in the front of the unit, bicycles,
garden equipment, barbecue equipment and so forth.
6. See §531.A for apartment design standards.
7. Accessory Building to Residential Use.
a. Minimum side yard: 5 feet
b. Minimum distance to rear line: 8 feet
c. Minimum distance to other building: 10 feet
d. Maximum height: 12 feet
8. Other Accessory Building or Structure.
a. Minimum distance to other building: 50 feet
b. Maximum height: 25 feet
F. Refuse and Recyclables. Refuse collection stations, including provisions for the collection
of recyclable materials, shall be provided. Such stations shall be located for the residents'
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §411
103
convenience. All such structures shall be compatibly designed with the architecture of the
adjacent buildings. A landscaping bed of at least 4 feet wide shall surround three sides of
this structure planted at a height of at least 6 feet, with a maximum growth of at least 8 feet
in height.
G. Facilities for Pedestrians, Bicyclists and Vehicles.
1. Pedestrian sidewalks shall be provided throughout the district, interconnecting all
units with community facilities and active open space and in such locations,
including entrances and exits, where normal pedestrian traffic will occur. Where
appropriate, bikeways may be provided instead of sidewalks. Provision of bikeways
along streets shall be made upon determination and requirement by the Planning
Board and the Master Plan.
2. Access to off-street parking areas shall not be through entrances directly abutting
streets, but shall be connected to streets by means of access driveways situated
between the parking areas and adjacent streets, not less than 20 feet long.
3. Bike racks shall be provided where there are 24 or more units in a cluster or group.
H. Circulation.
1. All delineated roads on the PVD-1 master plan shall be paved and curbed to meet
engineering specifications as required by Article V.
2. A continuous sidewalk system, constructed in accordance with Article V, shall be
designed to link all residential units to commercial, cultural, transportation,
recreation, open space and school uses.
I. Energy Use Considerations. The types of energy to be used to heat, cool, supply power, and
generally service the development shall be considered. The applicant shall identify measures
to reduce energy demand by considering alternatives, such as active and passive solar
systems, construction and building orientation.
J. Phasing. The Board shall provide for phasing of development in this zone. The phasing
schedule shall ensure that development in this zone shall be consistent with the development
of infrastructure and supporting services.
K. Planned Development. Prior to any approval, the Board shall make findings and conclusions
in accordance with §703.C.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §412
104
§ 412 Planned Village Development 2 (PVD-2) District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Village Development 2 district is to further the
integrated development of:
1. A variety of housing types and designs;
2. Commercial, recreational, and other community services conveniently located to
serve the residents of the planned development;
3. The planning and building of new communities, incorporating the best features of
modern design;
4. The conservation and more efficient use of open space;
5. A plan integrating a street and highway system to minimize the burden of traffic;
6. A more flexible development of land that shall conserve and enhance natural
resources such as streams, lakes, flood plains, groundwater, wooded areas, steeply
sloped areas, and areas of unusual importance to the natural ecosystem.
7. Attractive and safe residential neighborhoods.
8. The preservation of the residential integrity of adjacent areas without commercial
encroachment.
B. Permitted Uses. In the PVD-2 zone, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected,
altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Single family detached dwellings.
2. Semi-detached dwellings.
3. Duplexes.
4. Quadraplexes.
5. Townhouses.
6. Apartments.
7. Retail sales of goods and services.
8. Banks, including drive-in facilities.
9. Offices and office buildings.
10. Restaurants.
11. Taverns and bars.
12. Indoor recreational facilities.
13. Professional offices.
14. Post offices.
15. Convenience stores.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §412
105
16. Beauty parlors/barber shops.
17. Child care center. [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19].
18. Funeral home.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use:
1. Playgrounds.
2. Conservation areas.
3. Parks and public purpose uses.
4. Tennis courts and other usual recreational facilities.
5. Commercial swimming pools for the use of residents.
6. Off street parking, including automobile sheds and grouped private parking.
7. Fences, walls, gazebos, mail kiosks and other street furniture.
8. Maintenance building.
9. Signs.
10. Home occupation.
11. Yorkshire Village. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
a. Private residential swimming pool.
b. Private residential tool shed.
c. Fences and walls.
d. Deck/patio.
12. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. General Tract Requirements.
1. General development plan required. All development in the PVD-2 district shall be
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.1.
2. Minimum tract size: 75 contiguous acres
3. Minimum frontage on any County or State street shall be 300 feet.
4. Maximum gross density: 8 dwelling units per acre
5. Minimum recreation and civic plaza area: 25% of total tract area
6. Maximum building (including parking structures) coverage: 30% of total tract area.
7. Maximum impervious surface coverage: 65% of total tract area.
8. Minimum tract perimeter setbacks for buildings and above-ground structures:
a. Tract boundary line: 50 feet
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §412
106
b. Existing street, excepting arterial and higher order streets: 75 feet
c. Arterial and higher order streets: 100 feet, unless a greater distance
is required pursuant to §400.C.3
9. Minimum parking area setback from tract perimeter: 25 feet
10. Any PVD-2 development shall be served by public sewer and water.
11. An attached group of buildings may be considered as one building in applying any
standards contained in this section.
12. Any PVD-2 development shall be located on land environmentally suitable for
development, or suitably prepared for development, and shall meet the requirements
of the Master Plan.
13. PVD-2 development must provide convenient linkages between existing mass
transportation transfer points and pick-up points that are within a five-minute
walking distance from all residential units, or 1,500 feet. Bus stops and bus lanes, as
appropriate, shall be incorporated into PVD-2 developments to connect residential
units directly to local and regional job and shopping locations.
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the following
bulk standards shall apply to all lots:
1. Single Family Detached Residential:
a. Minimum lot area: 9,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 75 feet
c. Minimum lot width: 75 feet
d. Minimum lot depth: 90 feet
e. Minimum front yard: 30 feet
f. Minimum side yard: 10 feet
g. Minimum rear yard: 35 feet
h. Minimum useable yard area: 20% of each yard
i. Maximum building height: 35 feet, or 2½ stories
2. Semi-Detached Dwelling.
a. Minimum lot area: 3,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 30 feet
c. Minimum lot width: 30 feet
d. Minimum front yard: 20 feet
e. Minimum side yard: 0 feet, one side 12 feet, other side
f. Minimum rear yard: 30 feet
g. Maximum lot coverage: 50%
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §412
107
h. Maximum building height: 35 feet, or 2½ stories
3. Duplex Dwelling.
a. Minimum lot area: 4,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 30 feet
c. Minimum lot width: 30 feet
d. Minimum front yard: 20 feet
e. Minimum side yard: 5 feet, one side, 12 feet other side
f. Minimum rear yard: 30 feet
g. Maximum lot coverage: 60%
h. Maximum building height: 35 feet, or 2½ stories
4. Quadraplex Dwelling. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
a. Minimum lot area: 1,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 30 feet per unit
c. Minimum lot width: 30 feet per unit
d. Minimum front yard or rear yard: 20 feet
e. Minimum side yard: 18 feet, 0 feet common wall
f. Maximum lot coverage: 50%
g. Maximum building height: 35 feet or 2½ stories
h. Maximum number of dwelling units per building: 4
5. Townhouses.
a. Minimum lot area: 2,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 20 feet per unit
c. Minimum lot width: 20 feet per unit
d. Minimum front yard: 30 feet for units with garages,
15 feet for units without garages
e. Minimum side yard: 0 feet for a common wall,
15 feet otherwise
f. Minimum rear yard: 20 feet
g. Maximum building height: 38 feet or 3 stories
h. Maximum number of units per building: 8
i. The following additional requirements shall apply to quadraplex and
townhouse developments:
(1) Townhouse units attached on a single linear plane shall not exceed
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §412
108
a length of 192 feet.
(2) Each quadraplex unit and townhouse shall have a private rear yard
of 200 square feet minimum.
(3) A minimum of 300 square feet of storage shall be provided for each
unit in the basement, attic or other area attached to unit. This area
shall include storage for garbage in the front of the unit, bicycles,
garden equipment, barbecue equipment and so forth.
6. Apartments.
a. The minimum size for each apartment shall be 550 square feet.
b. Each unit above the ground floor shall have a balcony or terrace of at least
60 square feet in area.
c. A minimum of 150 square feet of storage shall be provided for each unit,
including interior and exterior storage for garbage and recyclables in the
front of the unit, and bicycles, garden equipment, and other common
household items in an appropriate location.
7. Accessory Building to Residential Use.
a. Minimum side yard: 5 feet
b. Minimum distance to rear line: 8 feet
c. Minimum distance to other building: 10 feet
d. Maximum height: 12 feet
8. Other Accessory Building or Structure.
a. Minimum distance to other building: 50 feet
b. Maximum height: 25 feet
9. Yorkshire Village Accessory Uses. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
a. Private residential tool shed [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19]: 10' from dwelling,
5' from property line.
b. Fences: No fences in front yards.
c. No structures are permitted in any easements.
F. Non-Residential Uses. Non-residential uses permitted within the PVD-2 district shall
comply with the bulk regulations of the NC-2 district.
G. Refuse and Recyclables. Refuse collection stations, including provisions for the collection
of recyclable materials, shall be provided. Such stations shall be located for the residents'
convenience. All such structures shall be compatibly designed with the architecture of the
adjacent buildings. A landscaping bed at least 4 feet wide shall surround three sides of this
structure planted at a height of at least 6 feet, with a maximum growth of at least 8 feet in
height.
H. Facilities for Pedestrians, Bicyclists and Vehicles.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §412
109
1. Pedestrian sidewalks shall be provided throughout the district, interconnecting all
units with community facilities and active open space and in such locations,
including entrances and exits, where normal pedestrian traffic will occur. Where
appropriate, bikeways may be provided instead of sidewalks. Provision of bikeways
along streets shall be made upon determination and requirement by the planning
board and the master plan.
2. Access to off-street parking areas shall not be through entrances directly abutting
streets, but shall be connected to streets by means of access driveways situated
between the parking areas and adjacent streets, not less than 20 feet long.
3. Bike racks shall be provided where there are 24 or more units in a cluster or group.
I. Circulation.
1. All delineated roads on the PVD-2 master plan shall be paved and curbed to meet
engineering specifications as required by Article V.
2. A continuous sidewalk system, constructed in accordance with Article V, shall be
designed to link all residential units to commercial, cultural, transportation,
recreation, open space and school uses.
J. Energy Use Considerations. The types of energy to be used to heat, cool, supply power, and
generally service the development shall be considered. The applicant shall identify measures
to reduce energy demand by considering alternatives, such as active and passive solar
systems, construction and building orientation.
K. Phasing. The Board shall provide for phasing of development in this zone. The phasing
schedule shall ensure that development in this zone shall be consistent with the development
of infrastructure and supporting services.
L. Planned Development. Prior to any approval, the Board shall make findings and conclusions
in accordance with §703.C.
Editor’s Note: The Planned Village Development 3 (PVD-3) District instituted through Ordinance
1857-05 on July 19, 2005 was repealed by Ordinance 2158-13 on May 21, 2013.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §413
110
§ 413 Neighborhood Center 1 (NC-1) District.
A. Purpose. The NC-1 district is established to foster redevelopment of older neighborhood
commercial areas into mixed uses combining small scale commercial and residential
buildings that create a more urban character. Buildings are intended to be closely oriented to
the street with storefronts designed for pedestrian viewing and to be of two or two-and-a-half
story construction. Parking is intended to be placed to the rear of the buildings but well
screened from more purely residential areas. The NC-1 district is intended for more limited
personal service uses than the NC-2 and allows development on smaller lots. Residential
uses are encouraged, particularly as apartments on higher floors.
B. Permitted Uses. In the NC-1 district, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected,
altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Retail sales of goods and services.
2. Banks, including drive-in facilities.
3. Offices and office buildings.
4. Restaurants, excluding fast food restaurants.
5. Indoor recreational facilities.
6. Professional offices.
7. Post offices.
8. Convenience stores.
9. Beauty parlors and barber shops.
10. Single family detached dwelling.
11. Semi-detached and duplex dwellings.
12. Apartments on second or higher floors.
13. Child care center. [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19].
14. House of worship on lots of at least one acre.
15. Funeral home.
16. Combinations of the above, excepting single family detached, semi-detached, and
duplex dwellings.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use:
1. Off-street parking and private garages.
2. Fences and walls.
3. Signs.
4. Home occupation.
5. Storage buildings.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §413
111
6. Satellite dish and television antennae.
7. Outdoor Seating. [Ord. 1763-03, 10/6/2003]
a. Seating must comply with the handicapped accessibility requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
b. Except in an Historic District, no seating shall be permitted within the right
of way.
c. No seating shall be located within five feet (5’) of any public or private
parking and shall be adequately protected from vehicular traffic.
d. No glare from lighting for outdoor seating shall be created.
e. A plan conforming to the aforesaid conditions shall be submitted to the
Zoning Officer for approval.
8. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted when authorized as a
conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with §705:
1. Taverns and bars subject to the following conditions:
a. No such use shall be located within 500 feet of another such use, a house of
worship, or public or private school.
b. No outdoor seating shall be permitted.
c. No sale of alcohol for consumption off-premises shall be permitted.
2. Bed and breakfast accommodation, subject to the criteria of §430.A, except that
such facilities may have up to 10 guest rooms or suites.
3. Adult day care and adult medical day care, subject to the criteria of §430.G. [Ord.
2350-19, 12/17/19]
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the following
bulk standards shall apply to all lots [Ord. 1875-06, 2/7/2006; Ord.1888-06, 4/4/2006]:
1. Principal Building.
a. Minimum lot area: 5,000 sf.
b. Minimum lot frontage: 50 feet
c. Minimum lot width: 50 feet
d. Minimum lot depth: 90 feet
e. Minimum front yard: 0 feet
f. Minimum side yard excepting religious use: 0 feet for common wall;
10 feet otherwise
g. Minimum side yard, House of worship: 5 feet
h. Minimum rear yard: 25 feet
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §413
112
2. Accessory Building. No accessory building shall be located closer than 5 feet to a
property line or in a front yard.
3. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .80
4. Maximum floor area ratio (excluding single family detached and semi-detached
dwellings)
a. One-story building: .20
b. Two-story or higher building: .30
c. In a Redevelopment Zone, exclusively non-residential
use with on-site surface parking only: .20
Note: Additional non-residential floor area up to a maximum of 0.60 may
be authorized by the Board for applications involving on-site structural
parking or supplemental off-site parking.
d. In a Redevelopment Zone, residential uses above non-residential uses are
permitted and are not subject to a floor area ratio limitation per se; rather,
the extent of residential floor areas shall be limited by the bulk and yard
standards for the District in combination with the parking requirements for
both residential and non-residential uses. The extent to which parking
provided for a mixed-use building may be shared among the uses will be
determined by the Board based upon consideration of the nature of the uses,
the site plan design, the availability of off-site parking and other relevant
factors.
5. Maximum height.
a. Principal use, excepting religious use: 35 feet
b. Principal use in Redevelopment Zone 42 feet
c. House of Worship:
(1) Principal building: 35 feet
(2) Structure above principal roof: 60 feet
d. Accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
6. Maximum building size.
a. Maximum building size: 10,000 sf
b. Maximum building size in Redevelopment Zone: 85,000 sf
7. Maximum gross floor area.
a. Maximum gross floor area per use: 5,000 sf
b. Maximum gross floor area in Redevelopment Zone: N/A
8. Minimum gross floor area per use [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]:
750 sf for new construction,
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §413
113
400 sf for rehabilitation
F. Additional Requirements.
1. In order to encourage an end product which provides parking, access and
architectural continuity even where development occurs piecemeal and with diverse
ownership, buildings may be attached and may be built to the interior side line(s)
and shall be designed to permit the attachment of common walls or continued
facades. Where buildings are built to both side lot lines, the application for site plan
approval shall be accompanied by appropriate legal documentation and plans
showing properly located loading spaces and trash receptacles with permitted access
across adjacent properties. If structures are not designed to be attached or if the
property abuts a residential zone or existing residential use, the side yard(s) shall be
at least 10 feet in width.
2. Any principal building may contain more than one use provided that the total
building coverage of the combined activities does not exceed the maximum floor
area ratio specified for the district.
3. No merchandise, products or similar materials or objects shall be displayed, sold or
stored outside.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §414
114
§ 414 Neighborhood Center 2 (NC-2) District.
A. Purpose. The NC-2 district, like the NC-1 district, is intended to create through
redevelopment a more urban character that combines residential and commercial uses in an
integrated fashion even though the development occurs over an extended time. The NC-2
district differs from the NC-1 district by requiring a larger lot size that would provide
sufficient area to allow adequate parking and buffers to residential areas. Because of the
larger lot size, limited commercial uses oriented to automobiles are permitted. The NC-2
district is particularly established for the west side Alternate Route 1, south of Whitehead
Road where the goal is to eventually create a commercial boulevard with a unified
architecture and landscaped median strip.
B. Permitted Uses. In the NC-2 district, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected,
altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Retail sales of goods and services.
2. Banks, including drive-in facilities.
3. Offices and office buildings.
4. Restaurants.
5. Taverns and bars.
6. Professional offices.
7. Indoor recreational facilities.
8. Post offices.
9. Convenience stores.
10. Beauty parlors and barber shops.
11. Single family detached dwelling.
12. Semi-detached and duplex dwellings.
13. Apartments on second or higher floors.
14. Child care center. [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19].
15. House of worship on lots of at least 1.5 acres
16. Funeral home.
17. Combinations of the above, excepting single family detached, semi-detached, and
duplex dwellings.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use:
1. Off-street parking and private garages.
2. Fences and walls.
3. Signs.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §414
115
4. Home occupation.
5. Storage buildings.
6. Satellite dish and television antennae.
7. Outdoor seating. [Ord. 1764-03, 10/6/2003]
8. Seating must comply with the handicapped accessibility requirements of N.J.A.C.
5:23-7.
9. Except in an Historic District, no seating shall be permitted within the right of way.
10. No seating shall be located within five feet (5’) of any public or private parking and
shall be adequately protected from vehicular traffic.
11. No glare from lighting for outdoor seating shall be created.
12. A plan conforming to the aforesaid conditions shall be submitted to the Zoning
Officer for approval.
13. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. Conditional Use Permitted. The following use may be permitted when authorized as a
conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with §705:
1. Repair garage, provided the following conditions are met:
a. Maximum lot size: 22,500 sf
b. No auto body or vehicle painting shall be permitted.
c. No more than 8 parking spaces for outside storage of vehicles shall be
permitted.
d. All lubrication, repair, or similar activities shall be performed in a fully
enclosed building. No exterior display or storage of parts shall be
permitted.
e. No junked motor vehicle or part thereof, or such vehicles incapable of
normal operation upon the highway, shall be permitted on the premises of
the repair garage, except as noted herein. No more than 8 vehicles awaiting
repair or disposition at the repair garage shall be permitted on the premises
for a period not exceeding seven days, except that up to 3 inoperable
vehicles in an enclosed building may be permitted. It shall be deemed
prima facie evidence of violation of this Ordinance if more than 3 motor
vehicles incapable of operation are located at any one time upon the
premises not within an enclosed building.
f. In addition to landscaping that is otherwise required pursuant to the
provisions of this Ordinance, a minimum of 25% of the front yard shall
consist of landscape screening of the building and front yard parking.
g. No exterior display of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats, other
forms of transportation, or equipment for sale shall be permitted.
h. All other parts of this Ordinance not modified herein shall apply.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §414
116
2. Adult day care and adult medical day care, subject to the criteria of §430.G. [2350-
19, 12/17/19]
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the following
bulk standards shall apply to all lots:
1. Principal Building.
a. Minimum lot area: 10,000 sf.
b. Minimum lot frontage: 80 feet
c. Minimum lot width: 80 feet
d. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet
e. Minimum front yard:
(1) On roads with speed limit less than 40 mph: 0 feet
(2) On roads with speed limit 40 mph or greater: 25 feet
f. Minimum side yard excepting religious use: 0 feet for common wall;
10 feet otherwise
g. Minimum side yard,
House of worship: 25 feet
h. Minimum rear yard: 25 feet
2. Accessory Building. No accessory building shall be located closer than 5 feet to a
property line.
3. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .80
4. Maximum floor area ratio (excluding single Family detached and Semi-detached
dwellings) [Ord. 1875-06, 2/7/2006]
a. One-story building: .20
b. Two-story or higher building: .30
5. Maximum height:
a. Principal use, excepting religious use: 35 feet
b. House of Worship:
(1) Principal building: 35 feet
(2) Structure above principal roof: 60 feet
c. Accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
6. Minimum gross floor area per use: 750 sf
F. Additional Requirements.
1. In order to encourage an end product which provides parking, access and
architectural continuity even where development occurs piecemeal and with diverse
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §414
117
ownership, buildings may be attached and may be built to the interior side line(s)
and shall be designed to permit the attachment of common walls or continued
facades. Where buildings are built to both side lot lines, the application for site plan
approval shall be accompanied by appropriate legal documentation and plans
showing properly located loading spaces and trash receptacles with permitted access
across adjacent properties. If structures are not designed to be attached or if the
property abuts a residential zone or existing residential use, the side yard(s) shall be
at least 10 feet in width.
2. Any principal building may contain more than one use provided that the total
building coverage of the combined activities does not exceed the maximum floor
area ratio specified for the district.
3. No merchandise, products or similar materials or objects shall be displayed, sold or
stored outside.
4. All buildings shall be compatibly designed whether constructed all at one time or in
stages over a period of time. All building walls facing any street or residential
district line shall be suitably finished for aesthetic purposes
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §415
118
§ 415 Mixed Use 1 (MX-1) District.
A. Purpose. The Mixed Use 1 (MX-1) district is intended to encourage development that
combines commercial and residential uses to a greater degree than any other zone.
Development in the MX-1 district is intended to be in the context of a planned unit
development that sets forth the combinations in use and density in an overall design of the
area. The MX-1 district is intended to complement the Regional Commercial zone, the most
intensive non-residential district in the municipality. The MX-1 district is intended to be
more urban in character by permitting buildings to be located close to internal streets and to
encourage pedestrian movements with a high degree of common amenities. [Ord. 2174-14,
3/18/14]
B. Permitted Uses. In the MX-1 district, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected,
altered or occupied for any purpose except the following: [Ord. 2174-14, 3/18/14]
1. Single family detached dwelling.
2. Atrium and patio home dwelling.
3. Semi-detached and duplex dwelling.
4. Triplex dwelling.
5. Quadraplex dwelling.
6. Townhouse.
7. Apartment.
8. Retail goods and services.
9. Restaurant.
10. Bar and tavern.
11. Banks, including drive-in facilities.
12. Offices.
13. Theatres.
14. Indoor recreational facilities.
15. Hotels.
16. Professional offices.
17. Convenience stores.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use:
1. Playgrounds.
2. Conservation areas.
3. Parks and public purpose uses.
4. Tennis courts and other usual recreational facilities.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §415
119
5. Off-street parking, including automobile sheds, grouped private parking and
garages.
6. Parking structures, provided no such structure is located in a front yard.
7. Fences, walls, gazebos, mail kiosks and other street furniture.
8. Commercial swimming pools for the use of residents.
9. Garages to house delivery trucks or other commercial vehicles in conjunction with
non-residential uses.
10. Signs.
11. Home occupation.
12. Maintenance building.
13. Liberty Green. [Ord. 1599-00, 3/27/2000]
a. Private residential swimming pool.
b. Private residential tool shed.
c. Fences and walls (not permitted in front yards).
d. Deck/patio.
14. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. Conditional Use Permitted. The following use may be permitted when authorized as a
conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with §705:
1. Age-restricted residential uses pursuant to the standards of §410. [Ord. 1585-99,
9/7/1999]
E. Required Use. A minimum of 20% of all units shall be affordable to households of low and
moderate income pursuant to Article X.
F. General Tract Requirements. In the MX-1 district, the following general regulations shall
apply: [Ord. 2174-14, 3/18/14]
1. General development plan required. All development in the MX-1 district shall be
in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.1.
2. Minimum gross acreage of tract: 75 acres
3. Minimum buildable area: 40 acres
4. Maximum gross residential density: 6 units per acre
5. Maximum non-residential floor area ratio: .25
6. Minimum required open space: 40% of total tract area
7. Use mix requirements:
a. Minimum residential land use: 40% of total tract area
b. Maximum non-residential land use: 40% of total tract area
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §415
120
8. Minimum active recreation and civic plaza area: 15% of total tract area
9. Maximum building coverage: 30% of total tract area
10. Maximum impervious surface coverage: 60% of total tract area
11. Minimum tract perimeter setbacks for buildings and structured parking:
a. Tract boundary line: 50 feet
b. Existing street, excepting arterial and higher order streets: 75 feet
c. Arterial and higher order streets: 100 feet, unless a greater distance is
required pursuant to §400.C.3.
12. Minimum distance between buildings:
a. Residential buildings,
excepting apartment buildings: 50% of average building height
b. Non-residential and
Apartment buildings: 100% of average building height
13. Minimum building and structured parking setback from internal street:
a. Residential buildings, excepting apartment buildings: 25 feet
b. Non-residential and apartment buildings: 10 feet
14. Minimum surface parking area setbacks:
a. From tract perimeter: 50 feet
b. From internal street: 25 feet
c. From building: 10 feet, excepting
individual residential driveways
15. Parking structures shall be included in the calculation of building coverage, but
excluded from the calculation of non-residential floor area.
16. Public water and sewer. All development in the MX-1 district shall be served by
public water and sanitary sewer.
G. Height Limitations. The following maximum height limits shall apply to the following
buildings and structures:
1. Residential buildings, excepting apartment buildings: 35 feet or 2½ stories
2. Non-residential and Apartment buildings: 48 feet or 4 stories
3. Structured parking: 30 feet or 3 levels
of parking, including the rooftop level
H. Standards for Development. [Ord. 2174-14, 3/18/14]
1. An attached group of buildings may be considered as one building in applying any
standards contained in this section.
2. Any MX-1 development shall be located on land environmentally suitable for
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §415
121
development, or suitably prepared for development, and shall meet the requirements
of the Master Plan.
3. MX-1 district development shall provide convenient linkages between existing mass
transportation transfer points and pick-up points that are within a five minute
walking distance from all residential units, or 1,500 feet. Bus stops and bus lanes, as
appropriate, shall be incorporated into MX-1 developments to connect residential
units directly to local and regional job locations
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §416
122
§ 416 Professional Office (PO) District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Professional Office (PO) district is to provide for office and
accessory uses on small lots on arterial roads to provide a transitional zone between
residential uses and the impacts of high volumes of traffic. The PO district may be
designated either as a base zoning district or as an overlay district in selected areas on the
Zoning Map. When used as an overlay district, it is intended that professional office
development mimic the size and scale of residential buildings and in its design use
architectural elements common to adjacent and nearby residences.
B. Permitted Uses. In the PO district, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected,
altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Offices of a recognized profession, including, but not limited to, medicine, social
services, finance, accounting, real estate, insurance, law, engineering, architecture
and planning.
2. Funeral home.
3. Child care center.
4. Governmental use.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use.
1. Off-street parking.
2. Fences and walls.
3. Signs.
4. Garages, storage buildings and tool sheds.
5. Satellite dish and television antennae.
6. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the following
bulk standards shall apply to all lots:
1. Minimum lot size: [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999] 40,000 sf.
20,000 sf in R-2B w/ PO overlay
2. Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet
3. Minimum lot width: 100 feet
4. Maximum floor area ratio: .25
5. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .70
6. Maximum height: 35 feet or 2½ stories
7. Minimum front yard: 40 feet
8. Minimum side yard: 25 feet
9. Minimum rear yard: 40 feet
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §416
123
10. Parking area setback:
a. From any streetline: 30 feet
b. From any other property line: 15 feet
c. From any building: 10 feet
d. From a residential use: 25 feet
11. Maximum building size when exercised as
an option in the R-2B district: 2,500 sf or the
size of the existing building,
whichever is larger
12. Accessory buildings and uses. The following regulations shall apply to accessory
buildings and uses:
a. No accessory building or use shall be located in a front yard.
b. Minimum side and rear yard: 15 feet
c. Minimum distance to other building: 20 feet
d. Maximum height: 1½ stories or 20 feet
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §417
124
§ 417 Office (O) District
A. Purpose. The Office (O) zone is intended primarily for a variety of office uses in locations
with good access to the regional highway network with an emphasis on the development of
integrated office parks.
B. Permitted Uses. In the O district, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected,
altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Office.
2. Medical clinic.
3. Professional office.
4. Bank, including a drive-in facility.
5. Office parks on tracts at least 15 acres in area.
6. Public parks and recreation.
7. Conservation.
8. Governmental use.
9. Nursing homes [Ord. 1780, 3/2/2004]
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use:
1. Off-street and structured parking.
2. Fences and walls.
3. Signs.
4. Maintenance office and garage.
5. Satellite dish and television antennae.
6. Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the principal use.
D. Conditional Use Permitted. The following use may be permitted when authorized as a
conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with §705:
1. Service station or repair garage conforming to the following conditions:
a. Notwithstanding any other provision, the minimum lot size for service
stations shall be 20,000 square feet and the minimum lot frontage shall be
150 feet.
b. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, service stations shall
be permitted two entrances and exits on one street frontage and three per lot.
c. No service station shall be located within 500 feet of any fire house, school,
playground, church, hospital, public building or institution.
d. All appliances, pits, storage areas and trash facilities other than gasoline
filling pumps or air pumps shall be within a building or roofed structure.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §417
125
e. Gasoline filling pumps and air pumps shall be permitted within the required
front yard area of service stations but shall be no closer than 20 feet to any
future street line.
f. All lubrication, repair or similar activities shall be performed in a fully
enclosed building and no dismantled parts shall be displayed outside of an
enclosed building.
g. No junked motor vehicle or part thereof, or such vehicles incapable of
normal operation upon the highway, shall be permitted on the premises of
the repair garage, except as noted herein. No more than 8 vehicles awaiting
repair or disposition at the repair garage shall be permitted on the premises
for a period not exceeding seven days, except that up to 3 inoperable
vehicles in an enclosed building may be permitted. It shall be deemed
prima facie evidence of violation of this Ordinance if more than 3 motor
vehicles incapable of operation are located at any one time upon the
premises not within an enclosed building.
h. In addition to landscaping that is otherwise required pursuant to the
provisions of this Ordinance, a minimum of 25% of the front yard shall
consist of landscape screening of the building and front yard parking.
i. No exterior display of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats, other
forms of transportation, or equipment for sale shall be permitted.
j. All other parts of this Ordinance not modified herein shall apply.
2. Adult day care and adult medical day care, subject to the criteria of §430.G. [Ord.
2350-19, 12/17/19]
E. General District Regulations. In the Office district, the following general regulations shall
apply:
1. Number of establishments. Any principal building may contain not more than ten
establishments, provided that the total building coverage of the combined activities
does not exceed the maximum building coverage specified for the district, and,
further, that each activity occupies a minimum gross floor area of 750 square feet.
2. Perimeter setback. No building shall be located closer than 50 feet to the perimeter
of the tract. No parking area shall be located closer than 35 feet to the perimeter of
the tract.
3. Exterior storage. No merchandise, products, waste, equipment or similar material or
objects shall be displayed, sold or stored outside.
4. Commercial garage. Commercial garages parking provided under buildings or in
structured (deck) parking is encouraged. For every 20 spaces provided, the floor
area ratio may be increased by .01, not to exceed a total of .25 for individual uses
and .30 for office or business parks.
F. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the following
bulk standards shall apply to all lots:
1. Individual Principal Use.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §417
126
a. Minimum lot area: 3 acres
b. Minimum lot frontage: 300 feet
c. Minimum lot width 200 feet
d. Minimum lot depth: 350 feet
e. Minimum front yard: 100 feet
f. Minimum side yard: 50 feet adjacent
to residential district,
25 feet otherwise
g. Minimum rear yard: 75 feet adjacent
to residential district,
50 feet otherwise
h. Maximum building height: 38 feet or 3 stories,
whichever is less
i. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .75
j. Maximum floor area ratio: .20 unless modified
by E.4, above
2. Office Park Use.
a. Minimum tract size: 20 acres
b. Minimum tract frontage on arterial
or collector road: 500 feet
c. Minimum tract perimeter building setbacks.
(1) Adjacent residential district: 75 feet
(2) Adjacent non-residential district: 50 feet
(3) Streetline: 100 feet
d. Maximum building height: 50 feet or 4 stories,
whichever is less
e. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .75
f. Maximum floor area ratio: .25 unless modified
by E.4 above
g. Individual lots within an office park.
(1) Minimum lot area: 2 acres
(2) Minimum lot frontage on internal street: 150 feet
(3) Minimum lot width: 200 feet
(4) Minimum front yard: 50 feet
(5) Minimum side yard: 50 feet
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §417
127
(6) Minimum rear yard: 50 feet
3. Accessory Buildings and Uses. The following regulations shall apply to accessory
buildings and uses:
a. No accessory building or use shall be located in a front yard.
b. Minimum side yard: 35 feet
c. Minimum rear yard: 35 feet
d. Minimum distance to other building: 50 feet
e. Maximum height: Half the height of the principal
use to which it relates
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §418
128
§ 418 Research and Development 1 (RD-1) District.
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Research and Development 1 district is to provide for very low
density office and research centers owned by single entities on large tracts of land in areas
characterized by environmentally sensitive lands. Such low densities are intended to allow
the placement of buildings within the tract on land exhibiting the least environmental
sensitivity and to permit substantial setbacks from public streets to minimize their visual
effect on the essentially rural character of the area. The capacity of the road network and
distance from services are additional limiting factors in the allowable intensity of
development.
B. Permitted Uses. In the RD-1 district, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected,
altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Educational or research institution.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following uses may be permitted when used in
conjunction with a principal use:
1. Security office.
2. Maintenance office and garage.
3. Power supply for sole use by the facility and in an enclosed building.
4. Restaurant or employee cafeteria as part of a principal building or as the entire use
of an accessory building, provided the cafeteria is limited in service to the
employees and visitors thereto of the principal use.
5. Off-street parking.
6. Fences and walls.
7. Signs.
8. Garages, storage buildings and tool sheds.
9. Satellite dish and television antennae.
10. Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the principal use.
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted when authorized as a
conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with §705:
1. Conference center meeting the following conditions: [Ord. 1779-04, 3/2/2004]
a. The center is located on tracts in excess of 300 acres.
b. Eating and sleeping accommodations, where provided, are included as a
part of the center.
c. The operator issues an annual report, in a form approved by the Zoning
Officer, within thirty days after December 31, summarizing the activities of
the center for the preceding 12 months.
E. General District Regulations. The following general district regulations shall apply in all
RD-1 zones:
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §418
129
1. Minimum tract size: 200 contiguous acres
2. Minimum tract frontage on a major or minor
arterial road pursuant to the Circulation Element: 1,000 continuous feet
3. Maximum floor area ratio: [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19]
a. On tracts 200 to 300 acres in size: .15
b. On tracts in excess of 300 acres: .10
c. Parking provided under buildings or in structured (deck) parking is
encouraged. For every 100 such parking spaces provided, the floor area
ratio may be increased by .01, not to exceed a total of .20 for tracts up to
and including 300 acres and .15 for tracts in excess of 300 acres.
4. Maximum building coverage: 8%
5. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .30
6. Principal building required setback.
a. From tract perimeter: 300 feet
b. From internal roadway: 35 feet
c. Distance from another principal building: 50 feet
7. Accessory building required setback.
a. Conference center or power supply building: Same as principal building
b. Entrance lodges, guardhouses,
walls, and gates: 75 feet from tract perimeter
c. No accessory building in excess of 20 feet in height shall be located closer
than 300 feet from the tract perimeter.
d. Distance from principal building: 50 feet
8. Maximum height.
a. Principal building: 50 feet or 3 stories, whichever is less
b. Accessory building.
(1) Conference center: 50 feet or 3 stories,
whichever is less
(2) Building within 300 feet of tract perimeter: 20 feet
(3) Power supply: 50 feet, except that
chimneys or ventilation
may extend to 65 feet
F. Additional Requirements.
1. Location of entrances. Internal or entrance roadways, streets or driveways shall not
be located closer than 100 feet to any side or rear property line.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §418
130
2. [RESERVED] [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19]
G. Site Elements and Buffering. In addition to the requirements of Article V, each property
shall be appropriately landscaped, particularly along its perimeter. Existing woodlands,
windbreaks and stream corridors shall be retained and used as landscape elements in the
planning of the site. Where natural features do not comprise an effective screen along side or
rear property lines that are adjacent to existing residences, a buffer area shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements specified in §525.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §419
131
§ 419 Research and Development 2 (RD-2) District.
A. Purpose. The RD-2 areas are proposed for the location of research uses as well as office
activity. The designated areas provide excellent road access with convenient proximity to
the Princeton Pike/I-295 interchange. However, the areas are also adjacent to existing and
proposed low and medium density residential development. It is intended that any RD-2
development be compatible with the residential surroundings.
B. Permitted Uses. In the RD-2 district, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected,
altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Office.
2. Office parks.
3. Research and engineering offices and laboratories.
4. Business parks.
5. Public parks and recreation.
6. Conservation.
7. Governmental use.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted when
used in conjunction with a principal use:
1. Security office.
2. Maintenance office and garage.
3. Restaurant or employee cafeteria as part of a principal building or as the entire use
of an accessory building, provided the cafeteria is limited in service to the
employees of the principal use.
4. Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, provided that all such accessory uses shall
be planned as an integral part of the principal use.
5. Off-street and structured parking; commercial garages.
6. Fences and walls.
7. Signs.
8. Maintenance buildings.
9. Satellite dish and television antennae.
10. Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the principal use.
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted when authorized as a
conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with §705:
1. Bank or other financial institution conforming to the following conditions:
a. The use is not freestanding on the property but integrated into an office
building.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §419
132
b. Drive-in facilities shall be permitted but limited to two transaction lanes.
2. Hotel, including a conference center, conforming to the following conditions:
a. Trip generation shall not exceed the peak hour rates of other permitted uses
of the zone.
b. Maximum floor area ratio: .25
c. The floor area ratio may be increased to .30 if structured parking is used to
accommodate at least 50% of the parking demand for the center.
d. Restaurants and nightclubs shall be permitted as an accessory use within the
hotel.
e. Barber shops and hair salons, gift shops, newspaper stands, smoking shops
and similar personal service uses shall be permitted as accessory uses.
3. Training/conference center meeting the following conditions:
a. The center is located in an office park on a minimum lot area of 100 acres.
b. The use of the center is accessory to the principal use of the office park.
c. The center is only for personnel or purposes related to the principal use.
d. Eating and sleeping accommodations are for persons attending the
training/conference center only.
e. The operator issues an annual report to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Officer within 30 days after December 31 detailing the activities of the
training/conference for the preceding 12 months.
4. A tower or spire conforming to the following conditions: [Ord. 1597-00, 2/15/2000]
a. The tower or spire is located in an office park on a minimum lot area of 100
acres.
b. Only one tower or spire per office park is permitted.
c. The tower or spire is limited to lot coverage of 900 square feet and height of
120 feet.
d. The tower or spire has a minimum set back of 500 feet from all property
lines.
e. The design including exterior materials must be compatible with the
architectural design of the office park.
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the following
bulk standards shall apply to all lots:
1. Individual Principal Use.
a. Minimum lot area: 10 acres
b. Minimum lot frontage: 600 feet
c. Minimum lot width 600 feet
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §419
133
d. Minimum lot depth: 400 feet
e. Minimum front yard: 150 feet
f. Minimum side yard: 100 feet
g. Minimum rear yard: 100 feet
h. Maximum building height: 50 feet or 4 stories,
whichever is less
i. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .65
j. Maximum floor area ratio: .20 unless otherwise modified
2. Office or Business Park Use.
a. Minimum lot area: 5 acres
b. Minimum lot frontage: 400 feet
c. Minimum lot width 400 feet
d. Minimum lot depth: 400 feet
e. Minimum front yard: 125 feet
f. Minimum side yard: 75 feet
g. Minimum rear yard: 75 feet
h. Maximum building height: 50 feet or 4 stories,
whichever is less, except for office parks with a minimum lot area of 100
acres, maximum building height shall be 4 stories or 60 feet, plus an
allowance of up to an additional 20 feet for roof structures for the housing
of heating, ventilating, air conditioning equipment, elevator and stairway
penthouses and other customary rooftop appurtenances, provided that any
building which exceeds 50 feet in height exclusive of roof structure or 55
feet in height including roof structure shall be set back a minimum of 250
feet from all property lines.
i. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .75
j. Maximum floor area ratio: .25 unless
otherwise modified
3. Accessory buildings and uses. The following regulations shall apply to accessory
buildings and uses:
a. No accessory building or use shall be located in a front yard.
b. Minimum side yard: 35 feet
c. Minimum rear yard: 35 feet
d. Minimum distance to other building: 50 feet
e. Maximum height: Half the height of the
principal use to which it relates
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §419
134
4. Parking area setback.
a. From street line: 100 feet
b. From any other lot line: 50 feet
5. Parking provided under buildings or in structured (deck) parking is encouraged. For
every 20 such parking spaces provided, the floor area ratio may be increased by .01,
not to exceed a total of .25 for individual uses and .30 for office or business parks.
F. Additional Regulations. The following additional regulations shall apply to all uses in an
RD-2 district:
1. No merchandise, products, waste, equipment or similar material or objects shall be
displayed, sold or stored outside.
2. Product development and similar activities not involving the manufacturing, sale,
processing, warehousing, distribution or fabrication of material, products or goods
except as incidental to the principal permitted uses are permitted as a part of
research and engineering offices and labs.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §420
135
§ 420 Highway Commercial (HC) District.
[Ord. 2159-13, 5/21/13]
A. Purpose. The Highway Commercial (HC) district is intended to serve both the residents of
the municipality and the general public with uses typically oriented towards motorized
travel. The HC district is the primary retail zone for localized sales and services that are not
regionally based. It differs from the NC-1 and NC-2 districts by including automobile
business uses and excluding residential uses, with the exception of certain senior citizen
housing. The Highway Commercial district is also intended to support the retail uses in the
Regional Commercial district.
B. Permitted Uses. In the HC district, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected,
altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Automobile sales through franchised new car dealers.
2. Automobile accessories and car washes.
3. Banks, including drive-in facilities.
4. Bars and taverns.
5. Convenience stores.
6. Department and discount stores.
7. Governmental uses.
8. Indoor recreational facilities.
9. Membership club bulk retail outlets.
10. Offices.
11. Retail sales of goods and services.
12. Restaurants, including fast food restaurants.
13. Shopping centers.
14. Theaters and entertainment.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted when
used in conjunction with a principal use:
1. Canopy for motor fuel equipment protection or passenger drop off.
2. Fences and walls.
3. Garages, storage buildings and tool sheds.
4. Off-street and structured parking.
5. Outdoor display of new and used motor vehicles only in association with a
franchised new car dealer.
6. Outdoor seating associated with a restaurant, complying with the following
standards:
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §420
136
a. Seating shall comply with the handicapped accessibility requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
b. No seating shall be located within 5 feet of any public or private parking
and shall be adequately protected from vehicular traffic.
c. No glare from lighting for outdoor seating shall be created.
d. No impediment to the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic shall be
created by the outdoor seating.
e. Off-street parking for outdoor seating shall be provided in accordance with
§530.C.2 and Table 5.16.
f. The Zoning Officer may approve a plan conforming to these conditions
without the necessity of site plan review pursuant to §801.
7. Satellite dish and television antennae.
8. Service station attendant booth, not to exceed 40 sf. in floor area when placed on a
motor fuel pump island or 150 sf. when placed elsewhere on the site. Such booths
may incorporate rest rooms.
9. Signs.
10. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following uses may be permitted when authorized as a
conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with §705:
1. Service station or repair garage conforming to the following conditions:
a. The minimum lot size for service stations or repair garages shall be 20,000
square feet and the minimum lot frontage shall be 150 feet.
b. Such use may be combined with a convenience store or membership club
bulk retail outlet on the same lot, provided that the minimum lot size, or
minimum lease area in the event the service station is not within an
individual lot, shall be a minimum of 1.5 acres. Notwithstanding any other
provision to the contrary, service stations on their own lot shall be permitted
two entrances and exits on one street frontage and three per lot.
c. All appliances, pits, storage areas and trash facilities other than motor fuel
filling pumps or air pumps shall be within a building or roofed structure.
d. Motor fuel filling pumps, service station attendant booths, canopies and air
pumps shall be permitted within the required front yard area of service
stations but shall be no closer than 20 feet to any street line.
e. All lubrication, repair or similar activities shall be performed in a fully
enclosed building and no dismantled parts shall be displayed outside of an
enclosed building.
f. No junked motor vehicle or part thereof, or such vehicles incapable of
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §420
137
normal operation upon the highway, shall be permitted on the premises of
the repair garage, except as noted herein. No more than 8 vehicles awaiting
repair or disposition at the repair garage shall be permitted on the premises
for a period not exceeding seven days, except that up to 3 inoperable
vehicles in an enclosed building may be permitted. It shall be deemed
prima facie evidence of violation of this Ordinance if more than 3 motor
vehicles incapable of operation are located at any one time upon the
premises not within an enclosed building.
g. In addition to landscaping that is otherwise required pursuant to the
provisions of this Ordinance; a minimum of 25% of the front yard shall
consist of landscape screening of the building and front yard parking.
h. No exterior display of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats, other
forms of transportation, or equipment for sale shall be permitted.
2. Motels conforming to the following conditions:
a. Any motel shall contain a minimum of at least 20 units of accommodation,
exclusive of, but in addition to, a permanent, on-site superintendent's living
quarters. The minimum number of units of accommodation in any single
building shall be 10.
b. Each unit of accommodation shall contain a minimum floor area of 250
square feet. Ceilings shall be a minimum of 8 feet in height.
c. No more than 20% of the units may include cooking facilities.
d. There shall be a maximum residency limitation on all guests of 30 days.
The residency limitation shall not apply to an employee living on the
premises or to occupants of the allowed units with cooking facilities.
e. Minimum lot frontage shall be 300 feet.
3. Hotels conforming to the following conditions:
a. Trip generation shall not exceed the peak hour rates of permitted uses of the
zone.
b. Each unit of accommodation shall contain a minimum floor area of 250
square feet. Ceilings shall be a minimum of 8 feet in height.
c. No more than 20% of the units may include cooking facilities.
d. There shall be a residency limitation on all guests of a maximum of 30 days.
The residency limitation shall not apply to an employee living on the
premises or to occupants of the allowed units with cooking facilities.
e. Minimum lot frontage shall be 300 feet.
f. Restaurants and nightclubs shall be permitted as an accessory use within the
hotel.
g. Barber shops and hair salons, gift shops, newspaper stands, smoking shops
and similar uses shall be permitted as accessory uses provided there is no
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §420
138
direct access to the outside for customers and no exterior signage.
4. Continuing Care Retirement Center pursuant to the regulations of §410 conforming
to the following condition:
a. Any such use shall be located east of U.S. Route 1 and south of its
intersection with I-95/295.
5. Used automobile sales excluding auctions conforming to the following conditions:
[Ord. 2166-13, 12/3/13]
a. Minimum lot size: 5 acres
b. Minimum frontage on U.S. Route 1: 500 feet
c. The use shall require a building with a minimum gross floor area of 15,000
sf.
d. The building shall contain a showroom with a minimum display area for
four passenger vehicles.
e. No service bay door shall face a zoning district that is predominantly used
and occupied for residential purposes unless sound attenuation measures are
installed to ensure that no sound greater than 50 decibels (dBA
measurement) occurs at a point 150 feet distant or the property line,
whichever is closer.
6. Extended Stay Lodging Facilities conforming to the following conditions: [Ord.
1567-99, 3/2/1999]
a. Accessory uses shall be permitted as follows:
(1) Exercise facilities.
(2) Business services, such as access to fax, copier, personalized voice
mail, meeting rooms and computers and Internet access, etc.
(3) Limited recreation facilities, such as a swimming pool, jogging
trails and child play areas.
b. Trip generation shall not exceed the peak hour rates of permitted uses of the
zone.
c. Each unit of accommodation shall contain a minimum floor area of 325
square feet. Ceilings shall be a minimum of 8 feet in height.
d. All access to individual units shall be from interior hallways.
e. Bulk requirements:
(1) Minimum lot size: 2 acres
(2) Minimum lot width/frontage: 200 feet
(3) Maximum FAR: .30
(4) Maximum building height: 3 stories
and 45 feet
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §420
139
(5) Maximum impervious coverage: .60
f. Off street parking shall be provided based on a minimum of 1 parking space
for each guest unit, inclusive of units occupied by resident employees.
7. Adult day care and adult medical day care, subject to the criteria of §430.G. [Ord.
2350-19, 12/17/19]
8. All of other requirements not modified herein shall apply to all conditional uses.
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the following
bulk standards shall apply to all lots:
1. Principal building.
a. Minimum lot area: 40,000 sf
b. Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet
c. Minimum lot width: 200 feet
d. Minimum lot depth: 175 feet
e. Minimum front yard: 25 feet
f. Minimum side yard: 25 feet
g. Minimum rear yard: 60 feet
h. Maximum floor area ratio.
i. For lots less than 5 acres: .25
ii. For lots 5 acres or larger: .30
i. Maximum impervious surface ratio:
i. For lots less than 5 acres: .70
ii. For lots 5 acres or larger: .75
j. Maximum building height: 35 feet
2. Accessory building. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/99]
a. No accessory building shall be permitted in the front yard.
b. Minimum distance to side line: 20 feet
c. Minimum distance to rear line: 20 feet
d. Minimum distance to other building,
separation area not used for parking
or vehicular circulation [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]: 25 feet
e. Minimum distance to other building,
separation area used for parking or vehicular circulation: 50 feet
f. Maximum height: 20 feet
F. Additional Regulations. The following additional regulations shall apply to the HC district:
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §420
140
1. No pad site shall be built and occupied in advance of the construction and
occupancy of the larger retail building to which it is related.
2. All buildings shall be separated by a minimum of 25 feet provided such separation is
to be used solely for pedestrian circulation. All buildings shall be separated by a
minimum of 50 feet when any part of such separation is to be used for parking or
vehicular circulation. However, the separation requirements should not be construed
to prohibit covered pedestrian walkways when the roof or covering of such walkway
extends between the buildings.
3. Any principal building may contain no more than five establishments unless it is a
shopping center, provided that the total building coverage of the combined activities
does not exceed the maximum floor area ratio specified for the district and, further,
that each activity occupies a minimum gross floor area of 750 square feet.
4. No merchandise, products, motor vehicles, equipment or similar material or objects
shall be displayed, sold or stored outside except as approved by the Board of
Jurisdiction and made a part of a site plan approval. The area of any outdoor sales
or storage except for motor vehicle display shall be enclosed entirely by fences,
walls, landscaping material or a combination thereof in order to provide a visual
barrier between the outdoor sales and storage areas and any street, residential zoning
district or parking area.
5. All buildings shall be compatibly designed whether constructed all at one time or in
stages over a period of time. All building walls facing any street or residential
district line shall be suitably finished for aesthetic purposes. See also §521.
6. Where appropriate, agreements providing for cross access for pedestrians and
vehicles between adjacent lots or tracts shall be provided to reduce the amount of
traffic on adjacent roads.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §421
141
§ 421 Regional Commercial (RC) District.
A. Purpose. The Regional Commercial (RC) zone is intended for concentrated large scale retail
uses that attract a regional population, is a shopping destination rather than a way stop to
another destination, planned and executed as unified development, in a location with
excellent transportation facilities suitable for more intensive uses. [Ord. 1941-07, 9/4/07]
B. Permitted Uses. In the RC district, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected,
altered or occupied for any purpose except the following [Ord. 1941-07, 9/4/07]:
1. Regional shopping mall
2. Retail sales of goods and services.
3. Restaurants, with the exception of restaurants with drive-through facilities.
4. Bars and taverns.
5. Department stores.
6. Banks, including drive-in facilities, financial institutions.
7. Offices, including professional and general business uses.
8. Theaters and entertainment.
9. Indoor recreational facilities, health clubs, spas.
10. Automobile accessories, automobile service center
11. Governmental use.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted when
used in conjunction with any principal use [Ord. 1941-07, 9/4/07]:
1. Off-street and structured parking.
2. Fences and walls.
3. Signs.
4. Maintenance office and garage.
5. Satellite dish and television antennae, other communication devices.
6. Security offices and structures.
7. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. Conditional Use Permitted. The following use may be permitted when authorized as a
conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with §705 [Ord. 1941-07, 9/4/07]:
1. Hotels conforming to the following conditions:
a. Each unit of accommodation shall contain a minimum floor area of 250
square feet. Ceilings shall be a minimum of 8 feet in height.
b. There shall be a residency limitation on all guests of 30 days maximum.
The residency limitation shall not apply to an employee living on the
premises.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §421
142
c. Restaurants and nightclubs shall be permitted as an accessory use within the
hotel.
d. Barber shops and hair salons, gift shops, newspaper stands, smoking shops,
spa, health club and similar uses shall be permitted as accessory uses.
2. Extended Stay Lodging Facilities conforming to the following conditions: [Ord.
1567-99, 3/2/1999] [Ord. 1941-07, 9/4/07]
a. Accessory uses shall be permitted as follows:
(1) Exercise facilities, spa, and health club.
(2) Business services, such as access to fax, copier, personalized voice
mail, meeting rooms and computers and Internet access, etc.
(3) Limited recreation facilities, such as a swimming pool, jogging
trails and child play areas.
b. Each unit of accommodation shall contain a minimum floor area of 325
square feet. Ceilings shall be a minimum of 8 feet in height.
c. All access to individual units shall be from interior hallways.
d. Off street parking shall be provided based on a minimum of one parking
space for each guest unit, inclusive of units occupied by resident employees.
3. Apartment dwellings conforming to the following conditions [Ord. 2284-17,
12/19/17]:
a. Affordable housing conforming to Article X shall be required.
b. The use shall be located on one or more parcels that comprise the Quaker
Bridge Mall.
c. The use shall be on a lot of at least 10 acres but no more than 20 acres of
land.
d. The total number of dwelling units shall not exceed 350 units.
E. General District Regulations. The following general district requirements shall apply [Ord.
1941-07, 9/4/07] [Ord. 2284-17, 12/19/17]:
1. Minimum tract requirements: 40 acres
2. Minimum tract frontage: 600 feet on U.S. Route 1
3. Minimum tract width: 1,000 feet
4. Minimum tract depth 1,000 feet
5. Minimum building setback from tract perimeter: 75 feet for regional
shopping mall structure, including
multi-level parking structure; 25 feet for
single story, free-standing buildings; 50
feet for any predominantly residential building.
6. Maximum floor area ratio: .50
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §421
143
7. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .85
F. Area, Yard, and Height. Except as otherwise modified, the following bulk standards shall
apply to all lots [Ord. 1941-07, 9/4/07] [Ord. 2284-17, 12/19/17]:
1. Principal building.
a. Minimum lot area: 10 acres
b. Minimum lot width: 400 feet
c. Minimum lot depth: 400 feet
d. Maximum building height, non-residential building: 60 feet or 4 stories,
whichever is less
e. Maximum building height, predominantly residential building:
(1) With residential floors over non-residential use: 80 feet and
4 residential stories,
whichever is less
(2) With residential floors over parking: 75 feet and
4 residential stories,
whichever is less
2. Accessory building.
a. Minimum distance to other building: 25 feet except for
structured parking facilities
where no setback is required.
b. Maximum height: 30 feet, except for
structured parking facilities
where no setback is required.
c. Minimum Setback from a streetline: 50 feet from a public street;
15 feet from a private street
3. Surface parking area setback.
a. From a street line: 50 feet from a public street
(also subject to-G7 below);
10 feet from a private street
where no sidewalk is specified;
15 feet from a private street
where a sidewalk is specified
b. From a building: 25 feet from a regional shopping mall;
15 feet from a free-standing building
G. Additional Regulations. The following additional regulations shall apply to the RC district:
[Ord. 1941-07, 9/4/07]
1. All buildings shall be separated by a minimum of 25 feet when such separation is to
be used solely for pedestrian circulation. All principal buildings shall be separated
by a minimum of 50 feet when any part of such separation is to be used for parking
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §421
144
or vehicular circulation. However, the separation requirements should not be
construed to prohibit covered pedestrian walkways when the roof or covering of
such walkway extends between the buildings.
2. No merchandise, products, equipment or similar material or objects shall be
displayed, sold or stored outside except as approved by the Board. The area of any
outdoor sales or storage shall be enclosed entirely by fences, walls, plant material or
a combination thereof in order to provide a visual barrier between the storage areas
and any street, residential use or parking area.
3. All buildings shall be compatibly designed whether constructed all at one time or in
stages over a period of time. All building walls facing any street or residential
district line shall be suitably finished for aesthetic purposes.
4. Where appropriate, agreements providing cross access for pedestrians and vehicles
between adjacent lots or tracts shall be provided to reduce the amount of traffic on
adjacent roads.
5. More than one principal structure or use on a lot shall be permitted in a regional
shopping mall development subject to an approved site plan. Parking structures and
storm water management facilities need not be located on the same lot as a principal
structure or use.
6. Lots within a regional shopping mall development may be further subdivided
without limitation arising from lot size, maximum floor area ratio or maximum
impervious coverage, building front, side and rear yard setback, building separation
distances or other similar requirements, provided that:
a. Reciprocal cross lot agreements and necessary easements are provided to
assure adequate parking, access, drainage and utility services and the like;
b. The site plan containing the building configuration subject to a subdivision
has been approved by the Planning Board as part of an overall site plan for
the tract.
7. Access ways services parking areas or parking structures may be located in required
building or parking setback areas abutting public streets provided that a minimum
planting strip of 25 feet in width is maintained except for necessary crossings.
8. In a regional shopping mall development, walls of elevators and stair enclosures
may be designed as an architectural extension of a structure’s façade. Such
penetrations of the building’s parapet line for stair and elevator penthouses,
skylights and atriums including rooftop structures for mechanical equipment may
exceed the maximum building height set forth in this Section by not more than 15
feet for both principal and accessory structures.
9. For lots of less than 10 acres in size and not part of a regional shopping mall the
Highway Commercial (HC) zoning district bulk standards shall apply. Lots in the
HC zone which are used exclusively to provide access to a regional shopping mall
shall have their permitted FAR and MIS under the HC standards added to those of
the regional shopping mall and its property.
10. In the event of a proposed redevelopment and/or expansion of a Regional Shopping
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §421
145
Mall by 100,000 sf or more of GLA the applicant shall cooperate with the NJ
Department of Transportation and NJ Transit in accommodating the State’s plan for
a Bus Rapid Transit (hereinafter “BRT”) system to serve the U.S. Route One
corridor in Mercer and Middlesex Counties. If required in order to conform to the
BRT plans, in conjunction with any site plan application for such redevelopment or
expansion the developer shall make reasonable adjustments in its site plan to provide
for BRT travel lane(s) (either exclusively or shared with mall traffic), to provide for
a bus shelter along the BRT route and a covered pedestrian walkway from the
shelter location to the mall entrance, to provide for a BRT connection from the
regional shopping mall property in Lawrence Township to the vacant property
across Quakerbridge Road to the north in West Windsor Township and to provide
for other reasonable related plan adjustments and/or improvements in order to
facilitate the eventual operation of the BRT. The authority to allocate the cost of
constructing the improvements related to the BRT is not within Lawrence
Township’s jurisdiction; however, in conjunction with any site plan application of
the magnitude contemplated under this section the Township shall require that the
site plan for the regional mall be reasonably consistent with the BRT plans as
envisioned by the State agencies cited above.
11. In the event of a proposed redevelopment and/or expansion of a Regional Shopping
Mall by 100,000 square feet or more of GLA the Applicant shall, as a condition of
Preliminary and Final Site Plan approval, be obligated to construct the portion of the
greenway as depicted on the Conservation Plan Element Map of the Master Plan
which is located on site. In this context “on-site” refers to all of the property under
affiliated ownership with that of the Regional Shopping Mall and which is utilized
for the benefit of the Mall, including lots in the HC zoning district and specifically
providing for a grade-separated east-west connection across Route One at the mall
overpass or other approved location. Design and construction of the greenway shall
be consistent with §529.F.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §422
146
§ 422 Mixed Use 2 (MX-2) District.
[Ord. 2174-14, 3/18/14]
B. Purpose. The Mixed Use 2 (MX-2) district is intended for low intensity uses in areas
characterized by environmentally sensitive lands. The district is intended to provide
locations for offices, limited residential, limited specialty medical office uses, light
industrial, recreational, open space, landscape nursery and contracting uses.
C. Permitted Uses. In the MX-2 district, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected,
altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Offices and medical offices.
2. Research and development offices.
3. Laboratories.
4. Light manufacturing.
5. Wholesale distribution and warehouses.
6. Agriculture.
7. Garden centers.
8. Animal hospital and veterinarian clinic.
9. Animal kennel, provided that any such use is located a minimum of 200 feet from a
residential use.
10. Outdoor commercial recreation, including, but not limited to, golf driving range,
canoe and bicycle rental, batting cages, and miniature golf, but not to include
amusement and go-cart rides, water parks, and arcade games or similar theme park
uses.
11. Detached single-family dwellings.
12. House of worship.
13. Long term care facility; hospice.
14. Governmental use.
15. General and landscape contractors; design-build establishments.
D. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted when
used in conjunction with a principal use:
1. Off-street parking.
2. Fences and walls.
3. Signs.
4. Garages, storage buildings and tool sheds.
5. Restaurant or employee cafeterias as part of a principal building or as the entire use
of an accessory building, provided the cafeteria is limited in service to the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §422
147
employees of the principal use designated on the site plan as approved by the Board.
6. Rectory, parish house, priest house or similar house for a religious leader(s) in
conjunction with a house of worship.
7. Satellite dish and television antennae.
8. Accessory uses for residential uses shall be as permitted by §401.C. only.
9. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
E. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following use may be permitted when authorized as a
conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with §705:
1. Public self-storage facility limited to a maximum FAR of .20 conforming to the
following conditions:
a. No storage of hazardous or combustible materials shall be permitted.
b. No sale of material shall be permitted from the premises, except for the
purpose of satisfying unpaid rent pursuant to law.
c. No animals or livestock shall be permitted on the premises.
d. No outside storage shall be permitted except that boats and recreational
vehicles may be stored in the rear yard provided that they are properly
screened from the traveling public in accordance with §525.H.
e. Buildings shall be separated by a minimum of 30 feet except where the
buildings’ long axes parallel each other, in which case the minimum
separation shall be 25 feet.
f. Every self-storage facility shall be fully enclosed with fencing or walls, or
a combination thereof a minimum of six feet in height. Fencing and walls
facing a public right-of-way shall be decorative, including but not limited
to, wrought and cast iron, painted aluminum picket, split face and polished
concrete masonry units, and brick acceptable to the Board of Jurisdiction.
Any other enclosing material may be used in other locations, except that
any chain link or similar wire fencing shall be coated with vinyl or other
suitable material in a subdued color.
g. The facility shall be landscaped in accordance with §525.
h. A single residential unit for the use of a caretaker and immediate family
shall be permitted.
i. Each gate controlling entry to the self-storage facility shall have a
minimum of two vehicle stacking spaces in front of the gate without
blocking access to drive aisles, parking aisles or parking spaces.
j. Any other provisions not herein modified shall apply.
2. Behavioral health care facility and residential medical detoxification center,
conforming to the following conditions:
a. Such use shall be located east of Rt. 1 and south or west of I-295.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §422
148
b. The minimum lot area shall be 3 acres.
c. The maximum number of patients served at the location of the facility shall
not exceed 50 persons.
d. The use shall not be combined with a single family detached, manufacturing
or industrial use.
3. Adult day care and adult medical day care, subject to the criteria of §430.G. [Ord.
2350-19, 12/17/19]
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the following
bulk standards shall apply to all lots:
1. Behavioral health care facility and residential medical detoxification center.
a. Lot size shall be as indicated in –D.2.b hereinabove.
b. Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet
c. Minimum lot width: 200 feet
d. Minimum lot depth: 300 feet
e. Minimum front yard: 50 feet
f. Minimum side yard: 50 feet
g. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet
h. Maximum floor area ratio:
(1) Individual principal use in single building .10
(2) Combined principal uses in single or separate buildings .15
i. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .30
j. Maximum height: 35 feet
2. Non-residential uses.
a. Minimum lot area: 5 acres
b. Minimum lot frontage: 300 feet
c. Minimum lot width: 300 feet
d. Minimum lot depth: 300 feet
e. Minimum front yard: 125 feet
f. Minimum side yard: 75 feet
g. Minimum rear yard: 75 feet
h. Maximum floor area ratio:
(1) Light manufacturing: .20
(2) Wholesale distribution and warehouses: .20
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §422
149
(3) All other non-residential uses: .10
i. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .30
j. Maximum height: 35 feet
k. Accessory uses.
(1) No accessory building or use shall be located in a front yard.
(2) Minimum side yard: 50 feet
(3) Minimum rear yard: 50 feet
(4) Minimum distance to other building: 50 feet
3. Residential uses.
a. Minimum lot area: 3 acres
b. Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 50 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 50 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet
f. Minimum buildable area: 1 acre
g. Minimum useable yard area: 20% of each yard
h. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .12
i. Maximum height: 35 feet
j. Accessory uses.
(1) No accessory building or use shall be located in a front yard.
(2) Maximum height: 35 feet
(3) Distance from property line: A distance >
than the structure's height
4. Parking area setback.
a. From street line: 50 feet
b. From any other lot line: 25 feet
F. Additional Regulations for Non-residential Uses. The following additional regulations shall
apply to a non-residential use in the MX-2 district:
1. No merchandise, products, waste, equipment or similar material or objects shall be
displayed or stored outside unless specifically approved as part of a site plan
submission.
2. All buildings shall be compatibly designed whether constructed all at one time or in
stages over a period of time. All building walls facing any street or residential
district line shall be suitably finished for aesthetic purposes.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §423
150
§ 423 Mixed Use 3 (MX-3) District.
[Ord. 2250-16, 12/6/16]
A. Purpose. The Mixed Use 3 (MX-3) district is intended for a wide variety of uses that
include, light manufacturing and assembly with associated distribution of products, flex
space, offices including medical offices, recreational and leisure uses, and similar uses.
B. Permitted Uses. In the MX-3 district, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected,
altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Offices, including medical offices.
2. Call center.
3. Light manufacturing, including beverage manufacturing.
4. Wholesale sales, distribution center and warehouses.
5. Printing establishments.
6. Combined office and manufacturing or distribution uses in a single building or
tenant space.
7. Indoor and outdoor recreation and leisure activities.
8. Research and engineering offices and labs.
9. Construction supply houses.
10. Governmental use.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted when
used in conjunction with a principal use:
1. Incidental sale of goods manufactured or assembled on the premises provided such
selling area shall not exceed 5% of the total floor area of the building.
2. Display showrooms not exceeding fifteen percent (15%) of the total floor area of
the building.
3. Tasting rooms, ancillary food sales and product sales for breweries, wineries and
distilleries as permitted by State of New Jersey licensing laws and regulations.
4. Off-street parking.
5. Fences and walls.
6. Signs.
7. Garages, storage buildings and tool sheds.
8. Restaurant or employee cafeteria as part of a principal building or as the entire use
of an accessory building, provided the cafeteria is limited in service to the
employees and visitors of the principal use designated on the site plan as approved
by the board of jurisdiction.
9. Satellite dish and television antennae.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §423
151
10. Walk-up automatic banking tellers.
11. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. Conditional Uses Permitted. The following accessory use may be permitted when authorized
as a conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with §705:
1. Outdoor Storage. Materials used in the manufacture or assembly of
products, finished product and equipment may be stored outside behind
the front building line provided that such storage shall meet the following
requirements:
a. The location of the outdoor storage shall be approved by the board
of jurisdiction and delineated on a site plan;
b. Outdoor storage shall be located in a side or rear yard behind the
front building line;
c. Outdoor storage shall not occupy more than fifty percent (50%) of
the total area of the side and rear yards;
d. The height of outdoor storage shall not exceed twelve (12) feet;
and
e. The outdoor storage shall be located on the interior side of a fully
opaque fence.
f. No waste products shall be stored outside except in a fully
enclosed container approved by the board of jurisdiction and
delineated on a site plan.
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the following
bulk standards shall apply to all lots:
1. Principal Use.
a. Minimum lot area: 5 acres
b. Minimum lot frontage: 400 feet
c. Minimum lot width 400 feet
d. Minimum lot depth: 400 feet
e. Minimum front yard: 75 feet
f. Minimum side yard: 50 feet
g. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet
h. Maximum building height: 45 feet or 3 stories,
whichever is less
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §423
152
i. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .75
j. Maximum floor area ratio: .30
k. Minimum parking and loading area setbacks.
(1) No loading shall be permitted in a front yard except such yard as
abuts a limited access highway.
(2) Front yard setback: 35 feet
(3) Side and rear yard setback: 25 feet
2. Accessory Buildings and Uses. The following regulations shall apply to accessory
buildings and uses:
a. No accessory building or use shall be located in a front yard except such
yard as abuts a limited access highway.
b. Minimum side yard: 35 feet
c. Minimum rear yard: 35 feet
d. Minimum separation distance to other building: 25 feet
e. Maximum height: Half the height of the principal use to which it relates.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §424
153
§ 424 Limited Industrial (LI) District.
A. Purpose. The Limited Industrial (LI) district is intended for light industrial and related uses
including warehouses and wholesale distribution centers. Incentives for the development of
industrial parks are provided.
B. Permitted Uses. In the LI district, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be erected,
altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Office.
2. Light industrial uses.
3. Wholesale distribution center and warehouses.
4. Industrial parks on tracts of land at least twenty-five (25) acres in area.
5. Research and engineering offices and labs.
6. Governmental use.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. Any of the following accessory uses may be permitted when
used in conjunction with a principal use:
1. Incidental sale of goods manufactured or assembled on the premises provided such
selling area shall not exceed 5% of the total floor area of the building.
2. Off-street parking.
3. Fences and walls.
4. Signs.
5. Garages, storage buildings and tool sheds.
6. Restaurant or employee cafeterias as part of a principal building or as the entire use
of an accessory building, provided the cafeteria is limited in service to the
employees of the principal use designated on the site plan as approved by the Board.
7. Satellite dish and television antennae.
8. Walk-up automatic banking tellers.
9. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use.
D. General District Regulations. In the LI district, the following general regulations shall apply:
1. Perimeter setback. No building shall be located closer than 50 feet to the perimeter
of the tract. No parking area shall be located closer than 35 feet to any lot line.
2. Exterior storage. No merchandise, products, waste, equipment or similar material or
objects shall be displayed, sold or stored outside.
3. Structured parking. Parking provided under buildings or in structured (deck)
parking is encouraged. For every 20 spaces provided of such parking, the floor area
ratio may be increased by .01, not to exceed a total of .30.
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the following
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §424
154
bulk standards shall apply to all lots:
1. Individual Principal Use.
a. Minimum lot area: 5 acres
b. Minimum lot frontage: 400 feet
c. Minimum lot width 400 feet
d. Minimum lot depth: 400 feet
e. Minimum front yard: 125 feet
f. Minimum side yard: 75 feet
g. Minimum rear yard: 75 feet
h. Maximum building height: 38 feet or 3 stories,
whichever is less
i. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .75
j. Maximum floor area ratio: .20 unless
otherwise modified
2. Industrial Park Use.
a. Minimum lot area: 3 acres
b. Minimum lot frontage: 300 feet
c. Minimum lot width 300 feet
d. Minimum lot depth: 300 feet
e. Minimum front yard: 100 feet
f. Minimum side yard: 50 feet
g. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet
h. Maximum building height: 50 feet or 4 stories,
whichever is less
i. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .75
j. Maximum floor area ratio: .25 unless
otherwise modified
3. Accessory Buildings and Uses. The following regulations shall apply to accessory
buildings and uses:
a. No accessory building or use shall be located in a front yard.
b. Minimum side yard: 35 feet
c. Minimum rear yard: 35 feet
d. Minimum distance to other building: 50 feet
e. Maximum height: Half the height of the principal use to which it relates
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §425
155
§ 425 Open Space (OS) District.
A. Purpose. The Open Space zone is established to delineate land dedicated or otherwise
restricted to active recreation, passive recreation, conservation, and agricultural uses owned
by a public entity, land trust, conservation foundation or other organization for open space
purposes.
B. Permitted Uses. In the Open Space zone, no lot shall be used and no structure shall be
erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Public parks and recreation.
2. Conservation.
3. Agriculture.
4. Municipal use.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in conjunction
with a principal use:
1. Public recreation facility.
2. Environmental center.
3. Historical interpretation center.
4. Farmstead.
5. Accessory uses on the same lot and customarily incidental to the principal use.
D. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the following
bulk standards shall apply to all lots:
1. Farmstead.
a. Minimum lot area: 4 acres
b. Minimum lot frontage: 200 feet
c. Minimum front yard: 100 feet
d. Minimum side yard: 50 feet
e. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet
f. Minimum buildable area: 1 acre
g. Minimum useable yard area: 20% of each yard
h. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .10
2. Agricultural uses:
a. Minimum lot size: 5 acres
b. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .05
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §425
156
3. Other uses.
a. Minimum front yard: 75 feet
b. Minimum side yard: 35feet
c. Minimum rear yard: 50 feet
d. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .15
e. Maximum height: 50 feet
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §426
157
§ 426 Education, Government & Institutions (EGI) District.
A. Purpose. The Education, Government and Institutions (EGI) district is intended for
governmental, educational, charitable, health care and religious uses presently existing
within the municipality. Buildings within the EGI district are often in a complex or campus
form integrating residential, office, recreational, health care, houses of worship, and other
ancillary uses with its primary function.
B. Permitted Uses. In the Education, Government and Institutions zone, no lot shall be used
and no structure shall be erected, altered or occupied for any purpose except the following:
1. Public or private day or boarding school.
2. Institution of higher learning.
3. House of worship. [Ord.1934-07]
4. Municipal use.
5. Health care uses, including, but not limited to, rehabilitation hospital, outpatient
facilities, ancillary hospital functions, residential health care facilities, long term
care, and assisted living facilities on tracts of at least 25 acres, but not to include a
regional hospital facility.
6. Convent, monastery, or abbey.
7. Seminary.
8. Charitable institution.
9. Administrative offices for the use of the institution or governmental agency.
10. Theater for performing arts.
11. Museum.
12. Library.
C. Accessory Uses Permitted. The following accessory uses shall be permitted in conjunction
with a principal use:
1. Book, clothing and retail sales related to the institution.
2. Maintenance facilities, including garages and storage yards.
3. Gymnasiums, natatoriums and field houses; athletic fields.
4. Power supply for sole use by the facility and in an enclosed building.
5. Off-street parking.
6. Fences and walls.
7. Signs.
8. Restaurant or cafeterias as part of a principal building or as the entire use of an
accessory building, provided the cafeteria is limited in service to the employees and
visitors thereto of the principal use as designated on the site plan and as approved by
the Board.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §426
158
9. Satellite dish and television antennae.
10. Single-family detached, semi-detached dwelling and townhouses for faculty and
administrative housing only, conforming to the requirements of the PVD-1 district,
§412.E.
11. Congregate housing for religious orders.
12. Accessory uses customarily incidental to a principal use
D. Conditional Use Permitted. The following use may be permitted when authorized as a
conditional use by the Planning Board in accordance with §705:
1. Medical offices pursuant to the bulk regulations of the Professional Office district
and the following conditions:
a. The offices are located on the tract of the primary health care use.
b. The offices are used primarily by medical practitioners associated with the
primary health care facility.
c. The total gross floor area ratio of the office use(s) shall not exceed .03 but
shall be in addition to any other floor area permitted.
E. Area, Yard, Height and Building Coverage. Except as otherwise modified, the following
bulk standards shall apply to all lots:
1. Minimum lot size: 5 acres
2. Minimum lot frontage: 300 feet
3. Minimum lot width: 300 feet
4. Minimum lot depth: 600 feet
5. Minimum front, side and rear yards: 100 feet
6. Minimum setback for accessory uses: 75 feet
7. Maximum impervious surface ratio: .60
8. Maximum floor area ratio: .20 except as may
modified by §426.D
9. Maximum height.
a. Buildings within 500 feet of tract perimeter: 50 feet
b. Buildings in excess of 500 feet from tract perimeter: 80 feet
c. Accessory Use 30 feet
10. Administrative and faculty housing shall not exceed .25 dwelling unit per gross acre
for the overall tract. Congregate housing for religious orders shall not exceed .50
dwelling units per gross acre for the overall site.
11. For the purpose of determining conformance with the bulk standards in this
subsection lot size shall include the area of any lot(s) in common ownership,
whether contiguous or separated by land provided that: [Ord. 1781-04, 3/2/2004]
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §426
159
a. The land is not a public street
b. The width of the land is not greater than 50 feet, and
c. The lots are connected by an access (either by easement or prescription).
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §427
160
§ 427 Flood Prevention.
[Ord. 2236-16, 5/17/16]
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific
areas by provisions designed to:
1. Protect human life and health;
2. Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
3. Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and
generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
4. Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
5. Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains,
electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, bridges located in areas of special
flood hazard;
6. Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development
of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
7. Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special
flood hazard; and
8. Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
B. Limitations on Development. No storage of materials, structure, building, alteration of
the natural contours of the ground, or alteration of any watercourse shall be undertaken in
the Township of Lawrence without first complying with the rules and regulations of
Chapter 8A of the Code of the Township of Lawrence, as applicable.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §428
161
§ 428 Residential Cluster Optional Development.
Residential cluster optional development, when permitted by the applicable zoning district, shall
conform to the following provisions:
A. Permitted Uses. Single family detached, semi-detached, or townhouse dwellings shall be
permitted.
B. Open Space. Open space, recreation, land or land for conservation purposes (not including
land for stormwater management) shall be a minimum of one acre in area and shall front on a
publicly dedicated street or publicly accessible private street. Land intended for agricultural
use shall be a minimum of 5 acres.
C. Minimum Required Open Space. No residential cluster development shall include less than
40% of the total tract area for common open space. Common open space shall be set aside
for conservation, passive recreation and active recreation. Such land shall be optimally
related to the overall plan and design of the development and improved to best suit the
purpose(s) for which it is intended. For the purposes of this section, land utilized for street
rights-of-way shall not be considered common open space.
D. Use of Open Space Land. Land to be devoted to public purposes may be offered to and may
be accepted by the Township, a non-profit land trust, or may be owned and maintained by an
open space organization. Any lands intended to be offered to the Township or non-profit
land trust for public purposes shall be so declared prior to preliminary approval. All lands
not offered to and/or not accepted by the municipality or non-profit land trust shall be owned
and maintained by an open space organization pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43.
E. Lands for Public Dedication. Any lands offered to the Township for public dedication shall
meet the following requirements:
1. Lands offered for recreational purposes shall be improved in accordance with a plan
proposed by the developer and accepted by the approving authority after
consultation with the Planning Board, Township Council and Department of
Recreation. Such improvements shall include, but not be limited to, recreational
equipment, walkways and landscaping.
2. Any land offered to the municipality shall be subject to review by both the Planning
Board and the governing body. The Planning Board shall review and evaluate the
suitability of such land considering the recommendations of the municipal master
plan, the ability to assemble and relate such lands to an overall plan and the
accessibility and potential utility of such land. The Planning Board shall forward its
recommendations to the governing body specifying whether, in its opinion, the land
offered to the municipality shall be accepted by the municipality or, instead, be
governed by an open space organization as specified herein below. The governing
body shall review the recommendations of the Planning Board and shall render a
decision within 30 days of receipt.
3. Every parcel of land offered to and accepted by the municipality shall be conveyed
to the municipality by deed prior to the release of any performance guarantee for the
municipality. The deed shall contain such restrictions as may reasonably be
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §428
162
required by the approving authority to effectuate the provisions of this section.
4. In addition to the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43, all open space organizations
shall conform to the provisions of §529H.
F. Public or Community Utility Systems Required. Residential cluster developments shall be
required to be connected to public sewer and water or community well and septic. Individual
lot septic system and well shall not be permitted.
G. Planned Development. Any approval of an application for a residential cluster development
shall include findings of fact pursuant to §703.C.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §429
163
§ 429 Additional Requirements for Residential Uses.
A. Accessory Apartments. Accessory apartments shall be subject to the following regulations
[Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19]:
1. There shall be no more than one accessory apartment per lot and per primary
residence.
2. An accessory apartment may be created within an existing single family detached
dwelling, as an addition to the same or within an existing accessory building on the
lot containing the principal dwelling. If an accessory apartment is to be created
within an accessory building on the premises, it shall meet the following
requirements:
a. The minimum lot size for the creation of an accessory apartment shall be 3
acres.
b. The lot and the building shall have been in existence on January 1, 2015.
3. Accessory apartments shall be permitted only on those lots and in those primary
dwellings that have no rental space; however, the accessory apartment itself may be
rented or leased.
4. Each accessory apartment shall be used only for residential purposes for one
household.
5. Each occupant of the accessory apartment; or, of the primary residence if the owner
is to occupy the accessory apartment, shall be a member of the family of the owner
of the property; or, a caretaker of an owner or member of the family of the owner.
6. An accessory apartment shall not contain an external entrance which faces the same
street which the external entrance to the primary residence faces, except that this
restriction shall not apply to dwellings with two or more such external entrances in
existence on December 1, 1982; and,
7. Each accessory apartment shall be provided with one on-site parking space for sole
use by its occupants(s).
8. An accessory apartment shall contain no more than a bathroom, kitchen and two
habitable rooms.
B. Community Shelters Community Residences and Other Entities Set Forth in N.J.S.A.
40:55D-66.1 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2 [Ord. 1724-02, 12/16/2002]:
1. Community residences for the developmentally disabled, community shelters for
victims of domestic violence, community residences for the terminally ill,
community residences for persons with head injuries, and adult family care homes
for elderly persons and physically disable adults as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.1
and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-66.2, are permitted uses in all residential districts of the town.
The requirements for said uses shall be the same as for single-family dwelling units
located within such districts provided that:
2. The facility is duly licensed.
3. No more than 15 persons, excluding resident staff, shall occupy the premises.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §429
164
4. All other applicable regulations of this Ordinance shall apply.
C. Decks/Patios. Decks shall not be attached to any floor higher than the first floor of a
dwelling. No deck or patio is permitted in the front yard. For single family dwellings, any
deck or patio shall be at least 15' from any property line or the allowable principal setback,
whichever is the lesser. Decks or patios associated with a fee simple townhouse may be
located on a side property line provided the townhouse is attached to another townhouse
along such property line. Fee simple townhouse decks or patios closer than 5 feet to the side
property line shall have a decorative screen at least 60% visually opaque attached to its side
edge and 6 feet tall measured from the deck or patio surface.
D. ECHO Housing. ECHO housing shall comply with the following regulations:
1. The ECHO housing unit must be in conjunction with a primary single family
residence existing on the lot.
2. The occupants shall be restricted to one or two persons who are family members of
the owner/occupant of the primary dwelling on the lot and at least one shall be either
a senior citizen or a disabled person.
3. The ECHO housing unit shall be positioned in such a way as to minimize its
visibility from adjacent lots or public rights-of-way. To minimize this visibility, the
Administrative Officer may require landscape buffering.
4. The ECHO housing unit shall comply with the required setbacks for an accessory
structure.
5. Each ECHO housing unit shall comply with the minimum unit size requirements for
Neighborhood Preservation Balanced Housing Program (N.J.A.C. 5.14-1 et seq.) as
follows:
a. Efficiency - 500 sq. ft.
b. 1 bedroom - 600 sq. ft.
c. 2 bedroom - 750 sq. ft.
6. No ECHO housing unit shall exceed 900 square feet in area.
7. The exterior of ECHO housing units shall be covered with a material and color that
compliments the facade of the primary residence on the property.
8. The unit shall be removed from the premises at the end of the term of occupancy of
the approved applicant and the lot restored to its status prior to the installation of the
unit.
E. Family Day Care. Family day care shall be allowed as a home occupation when permitted in
any residential district, as regulated in §429.I, Home Occupations, provided that no operator
shall provide child care for more than 5 children at any one time exclusive of children legally
related to the care provider and children being cared for under a cooperative agreement with
their parents for which no payment is received. Covenants in age-restricted developments
may prohibit family day care as provided for by statute. Providing child care for the number
of children that exceeds the limitation herein shall be considered a Child Care Center
pursuant to §430.C. [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19]
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §429
165
F. Farm Stands and Consumer Crop Picking Operations. The following requirements shall
apply to any farm stand and consumer crop picking (U-Pick) operation:
1. The farm stand shall be limited to 250 square feet or less in area and 15 feet in
height.
2. The farm stand shall be located no closer than 35 feet to the streetline and 100 feet
from any other lot line.
3. Safe ingress and egress to the farm stand shall be maintained and adequate sight
distance established.
4. Parking shall be limited to a maximum of 5 customer spaces for farm stands and 10
spaces for U-pick operations. Parking areas may be stoned but not paved with any
other impermeable surface.
5. The Administrative Officer may require a landscape buffer or fence for adequate
visual separation from adjacent dwellings.
6. No more than one farm stand and U-pick operation per farm shall be permitted.
G. Fences and Walls. The following regulations shall apply to fences and walls in residential
districts: [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
1. Fences and walls may be placed with the outer face located on the property line.
2. All permitted fences shall be situated on a lot in such a manner that the finished side
shall face adjacent properties.
3. No fence shall be erected of barbed wire, topped with metal spikes, broken bottles
and glass, nor constructed of any material or in any manner which may be dangerous
to persons or animals, except that these provisions shall not apply to farms.
4. On any lot in any district, no wall or fence shall be erected or altered so that said
wall or fence shall be over four (4) feet in height in front yard areas and six (6) feet
in height in side and rear yard areas except:
a. A dog run or privacy area may have fencing a maximum of 7 feet in height
provided such area is located in rear yard areas only and is set back from
any lot line at least 15 feet.
b. A deer protection fence consisting of wooden poles with horizontal
stretched wire a maximum height of 8 feet in EP-1 and EP-2 districts shall
be permitted.
c. A tennis court area, located in rear yard areas only, may be surrounded by
a fence a maximum of 15 feet in height; said fence to be set back from any
lot line the distances required for accessory buildings in the zoning district
as stipulated in this Article.
d. Six foot high fences are permitted in the rear yard of a reverse frontage lot
and the side yard of a corner lot.
5. A private residential swimming pool area shall be surrounded by a fence at least 4
feet, but no more than 6 feet, in height (see §429.N for additional standards).
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §429
166
6. Buffer areas shall meet the requirements specified in §525.H.
Deviations from this subsection shall be considered as variances from the ordinance
standards.
H. Home Agriculture [Ord. 2251-16, 12/6/16]. In any residential district or on any residentially
used parcel where an agricultural use is otherwise not permitted, home agriculture shall be
permitted as an accessory use in accordance with the provisions in this subsection. In the
event the occupant or occupants hold only a leasehold right to the use of the property, the
lessee shall obtain written permission of the lessor prior to commencing home agriculture.
1. Home agriculture activities shall be confined to side or rear yards, except that
chicken raising and keeping shall be confined to the rear yard, only.
2. Home agriculture activities shall not interfere with lot drainage swales and septic
fields.
3. The following requirements shall pertain to the raising and keeping of chickens:
a. Prior to the raising and keeping of chickens, the occupant shall obtain a
zoning permit. The Zoning Officer shall have the right of periodic entry
upon the premises for determining compliance with these regulations.
b. The number of chickens permitted on the premises shall be limited by the
size of the residential lot as indicated in the following table:
No. of Chickens Minimum Lot Size
2 5,000 sf.
3 10,000 sf.
4 15,000 sf.
5 30,000 sf.
6 40,000 sf.
No chickens shall be permitted on a lot of less than 5,000 sf.
c. All chickens kept on residential lots shall be hens. In the event that unsexed
hatchings or fertilized eggs are male, such chicken shall be removed
from the premises before they turn 3 months of age of first begin crowing,
whichever occurs first. Failure to remove such chicken shall be grounds
for the revocation of the zoning permit and removal of all chickens from
the premises.
d. All chickens shall be housed and maintained in a humane manner and in
accordance with good agricultural practice. The premises shall be kept in
a clean and sanitary manner at all times. Each chicken raising and keeping
area shall be free from vermin and rodent infestation. The Animal Control
Officer and Health Officer shall have the right of entry to determine
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §429
167
compliance with these regulations.
e. Chickens shall be sheltered in a chicken coop that has a minimum square
footage of 6 sf. and 2 sf. per chicken, whichever is greater in size. No
chicken coop shall exceed the floor area size limitation for tool sheds in
§428.P. The chicken coop shall be fully enclosed. The chicken coop shall
not be taller than 6 feet above the ground surface. Chicken coops shall
comply with the accessory structure setbacks from the zoning district, but
in no event shall the setback be less than 10 feet from any property line or
habitable structure on the same lot or 30 feet from a habitable structure on
an adjacent lot. Chicken coops shall be kept in good repair, have
waterproof roofs and walls, be adequately lighted by natural or artificial
means, and be ventilated.
f. A fenced chicken run of up to 6 feet in height that meets the same setback
standards for the chicken coop shall be permitted. Chicken runs shall be a
minimum size of 100 sf. and a maximum size of 400 sf.
I. Home Occupations. Home occupations shall be subject to the following regulations:
1. No home occupation shall employ more than one non-resident.
2. No more than 450 square feet of floor area shall be used in the residence for the
home occupation.
3. No display of products shall be visible from the street.
4. The residential character of the lot and building shall not be changed.
5. No sounds emanating from the home occupation use shall be audible outside the
residence.
6. No equipment shall be used which will cause interference with radio and television
reception in neighboring dwellings.
7. The home occupation shall not reduce the parking or yard requirements of the
detached dwelling.
8. Not more than 5 parking spaces per property, including required residential parking,
shall be allowed. All parking associated with the home occupation shall be screened
from view of any public street behind a combination of hedging, landscaping or
fencing.
9. No more than two clients, customers, patients, or patrons shall be permitted at any
given time on the premises for business or commercial purposes.
J. Off-Street Parking and Private Garages. Off-street parking and private garages for
residential districts shall conform to the following requirements:
1. Garages shall conform to the setback requirements as otherwise established in this
Ordinance.
2. No driveway shall be located closer than 5 feet to a side or rear property line.
3. That portion of a driveway from the street to a parking apron located directly in
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §429
168
front of the dwelling shall not exceed 20 feet in width.
4. No curb cut to a single family or two-family dwelling shall exceed 22 feet in width.
5. Deviations from subsections -J.2 through –J.4 shall be considered as exceptions
from the ordinance standards.
K. Outdoor Recreational Facilities. Outdoor recreational facilities, excepting private residential
swimming pools, shall comply with the following regulations:
1. Such facilities shall be located no closer to a property line than the required setback
for accessory uses or structures, unless a larger setback is otherwise required.
2. The lighting of any outdoor recreational use shall be so directed as to avoid the
casting of glare across property lines. No lighting of such facilities shall be
permitted between the hours of 11:00 pm and 6:00 am.
L. Parking of Trucks and Buses in Residential Zones. No trucks or buses shall be regularly
parked in any residential zone or on a residential property, except that one truck or bus of a
rated capacity not exceeding 5 tons (10,000 lb.) gross vehicle weight (manufacturer's rating),
owned or used by a person resident on the premises, shall be permitted to be regularly
parked or garaged on a residential lot which also contains the primary residence of the
owner, or on a residential lot which is contiguous to and also owned by the owner of the
primary residence. If not garaged, such truck or bus must be parked on a surface which has
been improved for parking. This provision shall not be deemed to limit the number of
vehicles used in the operation of a farm, or construction equipment in active use during the
time of construction on a lot approved for development. [Ord. 1832-05, 3/22/2005]
M. Recreational Vehicle Storage. The following requirements apply to recreational vehicle
storage:
1. Trailers, boats or boat trailers which are twenty-one (21) feet or more in length as
measured from outside dimensions, shall be parked or stored inside the confines of a
building only.
2. All trailers, boats or boat trailers shall be stored in side or rear yard areas only; no
trailer, boat, or boat trailer shall be parked or stored in the front yard area of a lot.
3. Each occupied single-family residential property may have outside parking or
storage upon it for two recreational vehicles or trailers, in safe and effective
operating condition. All recreational vehicles and trailers shall display thereon a
current State license and/or registration. No self-propelled recreational vehicle
stored on the property shall exceed 40 feet in length unless within the confines of a
building.
4. Any trailer, boat or boat trailer parked in the side or rear yard area of any lot shall
meet the applicable zoning district regulations governing setbacks of accessory
buildings from property lines and buildings.
5. To obscure from public view to the maximum extent possible, any trailer, boat or
boat trailer parked or stored in a side or rear yard area and not in an enclosed
building shall be screened by evergreen plantings at least 6 feet in height, spaced 3
feet apart, or as necessary to form a 100% visually impervious buffer after two
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §429
169
years.
6. At no time shall any recreational vehicle parked or stored on any lot be used for
living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes.
N. Reserved. [Ord. 2072-10, 12/21/10]
O. Residential Swimming Pools and Cabanas. The following requirements apply to private
residential swimming pools and pool cabanas: [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
1. No private residential swimming pool shall be constructed or installed on any lot
unless the lot contains a residential building. Pools shall be considered impervious
surface, which shall not exceed the impervious surface ratio of the zone (when
included with other impervious surfaces). Pools shall be located in rear or side yard
areas only. No swimming pool shall be closer than 15 feet to any lot line measured
from the edge of the pool’s surface and no pool apron or deck shall be located closer
than 10 feet to any lot line, except in the R-4 district, R-5 district and AT district
(when permitted), in-ground and above-ground swimming pools may be located to
within 10 feet of a rear or side property line measured from the edge of the pool’s
surface. No deck shall be located closer than 10 feet to any lot line. No pool apron
shall be located closer than 6 feet to any lot line.
2. A private residential swimming pool area must be surrounded by a suitable fence
with a self-latching gate at least 4 feet, but no more than 6 feet, in height. No
opening in the fence shall exceed 3 inches in any direction, with the exception of
fences with vertical elements only, such as picket fences; and gates. Vertical element
fences shall not contain horizontal openings in excess of 2 inches, excepting gates,
and the horizontal structural members shall face the pool. All gates shall be
constructed of the same material as the fencing.
3. Above ground swimming pools shall be considered to meet the requirements for the
enclosure of swimming pools if the following conditions are met:
a. The sidewall of the pool is no less than 3 feet high along any point of its
perimeter.
b. A fence with no horizontal opening in excess of 5 inches is attached to the
sidewall and/or attached deck around the pool such that the combined
height of sidewall and fencing is no less than 6 feet.
c. The steps and ladder to the pool is fenced in accordance with the
regulations as otherwise described in this subsection.
4. Cabanas shall not exceed 150 square feet in area and 15 feet in height. Any cabana
shall be located no closer than 10 feet to any lot line unless a greater setback for an
accessory structure is otherwise required.
5. Pool effluent which is the result of draining, cleaning, filter, flushing or other pool
maintenance operation shall not be permitted to flow overland across adjacent
property lines and must be discharged to a street or storm sewer inlet.
P. Residential Tool Shed. Private residential tool sheds shall comply with the following
regulations [2350-19, 12/17/19]:
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §429
170
1. Residential tool sheds shall be permitted in the EP-1, EP-2, R-1, R-2A, R-2B, R-3,
R-4, R-5 zones and fee simple lots in the AT, SCR, PVD-1, PVD-2 and MX-1
zones, subject to the following limitations on the shed building coverage and
distance to a side or rear property line:
a. Sheds accessory to a single family detached dwelling:
Lot Size Maximum Shed
Building Coverage
Minimum Distance to
Side/Rear Property Line
22,500 sf. or greater 200 sf. 10 ft.
9,000 sf. to 22,499 sf. 120 sf. 5 ft.
7,500 sf. to 8,999 sf. 96 sf. 5 ft.
7,499 sf. or less 80 sf. 5 ft.
b. Sheds accessory to a townhouse dwelling or a semi-detached dwelling shall
have a maximum building coverage of 80 sf., and shall be located no closer
than 5 feet from a side or rear property line.
c. No shed shall exceed 12 feet in height.
d. No shed shall be located in a front yard.
e. No more than one tool shed per lot shall be permitted.
Q. Satellite Dish and Television Antennae. Satellite dish and television antennae in single and
two-family districts shall conform to the following requirements:
1. To the greatest extent feasible, consistent with the unimpeded reception of
broadcasts, antennae are to be located in a rear yard or the rear slope of a roof.
2. An antenna that is in excess of one meter (39.37 inches) but no larger than two
meters (78.74 inches) in diameter shall conform to the setback requirements for
accessory uses and structures in the zoning district in which it is located.
3. An antenna that is in excess of two meters (78.74 inches) shall conform to the rear
yard setback requirements for accessory uses and structures in the zoning district in
which it is located.
4. The Administrative Officer shall have the power to waive the enforcement of this
subsection upon certification from a qualified installer that conformance with these
requirements will materially limit the reception of broadcasts from communications
satellites.
R. Yard and Garage Sales. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999] Yard and garage sales shall be permitted in
any residential district for a period not to exceed three days. Such sales shall not exceed two
in any one calendar year. See §429.M.3 for regulations governing signs for yard and garage
sales.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §430
171
§ 430 Conditional Use Criteria.
[2350-19, 12/17/19]
This section applies to conditional uses that occur in various zoning districts where the specific
criteria are not listed in the individual district. Any requirement in the applicable zoning district that
is not modified by the criteria herein shall remain in full force and effect. The following criteria, in
conjunction with meeting the general standards in §705, shall be met for the specific conditional uses
listed below:
A. Adult Day Care and Adult Medical Day Care. The following conditions shall be met by
any facility providing adult day care or adult medical day care as defined in this
Ordinance:
1. The minimum lot size shall be 2 acres.
2. The minimum lot frontage shall be 200 feet.
3. No building shall be located within 50 feet of a lot line.
4. No adult day care or adult medical day care facility shall have access from a
residential access street.
5. Parking lots shall be properly screened and shall meet the following requirements:
a. No parking lot shall be permitted in a front yard; however, this shall not
exclude drop off and pick up lanes.
b. Parking lots shall be setback from any side property line 50 feet and any
rear property line 35 feet.
B. Bed and Breakfast Accommodation. Bed and breakfast accommodation shall be permitted
only in the EP-1, EP-2, R-2B and NC-1 districts that conform to the conditions herein. The
following conditions shall be met for any bed and breakfast accommodation:
1. The use shall be located in the Lawrenceville Historic District.
2. No more than five guest rooms or suites shall be permitted, except the NC-1 district.
3. Off-street parking equal to one for each guest room or suite shall be required. Offstreet
parking may be accommodated off-site provided that the location is within
600 feet of the subject site and an adequate guaranty that establishes a right to the
use of the off-tract parking is secured.
4. No parking shall be permitted in the front yard.
5. Only guests of the facility and their invitees shall be served food and drink on the
premises.
6. No cooking facilities shall be permitted in guest rooms or suites.
7. There shall be a maximum residency limitation on all guests of 30 days.
C. Child Care Centers. Child care centers shall be permitted in any non-residential district. In
those districts combining residential and non-residential areas under a unified plan for
development, the child care center shall be permitted only in the non-residential area. Any
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §430
172
child care center shall be duly licensed pursuant to N.J.S.A. 30:5B-1 et seq. A child care
center functionally integrated within a non-residential development owned or operated for
the benefit of their employees, their tenant's employees, or employees within an office or
business park or research and development complex shall not be required to provide
additional off-street parking for the use. In the calculation of any floor area ratio applicable
to an office or business park or research and development complex, the area occupied by a
child care center shall not be included. The following criteria shall be met by any Child Care
Center:
1. The minimum lot size shall be 2 acres.
2. The minimum lot frontage shall be 200 feet.
3. No building shall be located within 50 feet of a lot line.
4. No day care center shall have access from a residential access street.
5. Parking lots shall be properly screened and shall be a minimum of 50 feet from
surrounding properties and public roads.
D. Farm Market. The following conditions shall be met for any farm market:
1. No farm market shall exceed 3,000 square feet in gross floor area.
2. Access to a farm market shall be from a collector or arterial road.
3. No farm market shall exceed one story in height.
4. A farm market shall be set back from the right-of-way line a minimum of 100 feet
and 150 feet from a side or rear property line.
5. At least 50% of the number of products sold on an annual basis shall be fresh food
or perishables.
6. A farm market shall be designed to be visually integrated with the farmstead and in
close proximity thereto.
7. Farm markets shall be permitted to have U-pick operations in accordance with
§429.F.
8. Parking lots shall be properly screened and shall be a minimum of 100 feet from
abutting properties and public roads.
E. Golf Course. The following conditions shall be met by any golf course:
1. Minimum tract area.
a. 9-hole golf course: 60 acres
-with driving range: 65 acres
b. 18-hole golf course: 110 acres
-with social and dining amenities: 125 acres
2. The total floor area ratio of buildings on the golf course shall not exceed .02.
3. The golf course shall be designed with due consideration for safety of the public on
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §430
173
adjacent lots, adjacent roadways and other golfers.
4. Sufficient horizontal separation shall be maintained between the golf course and
accessory structures, buildings and uses and adjacent off-site uses as follows:
a. Minimum separation from any property line, road right-of-way or accessory
structures, buildings and uses associated with the golf course (except
shelters), unless duly waived by the Board, is as follows:
(1) From golf tee: 75 feet, excepting tees
in -4.a(2) below
(2) Golf tees where the centerline
of the hole is parallel or less
than a 60º angle to a road or tract boundary: 150 feet
(3) From centerline of fairway or green and
edge of driving range: 150 feet
b. All accessory structures and buildings associated with the golf course
including fencing for a driving range (but not including cart paths, parking,
shelters or the course itself), shall be a minimum of 200 feet from any
adjacent property line or road right-of-way. Parking lots shall be properly
screened and shall be a minimum of 200 feet from surrounding properties
and public roads.
F. Houses of Worship. The following conditions shall be met by any house of worship:
1. Any house of worship with a parochial school on the same premises shall meet the
conditional use standards for public and private day schools as stated herein.
2. Parking lots shall be properly screened and shall meet the following requirements:
a. No parking lot shall be permitted in a front yard; however, this shall not
exclude drop off and pick up lanes.
b. Parking lots shall be setback from any side property line 50 feet and any
rear property line 35 feet.
3. The principal building shall be set back from any residential property line a
minimum of 1½ times the height of the main roofline, or the zoning district
requirement, whichever is greater.
4. Accessory residential buildings shall comply with the yard requirements for such
uses in the respective zone.
G. Public and Private Day Schools. The following conditions shall be met by any public or
private day school:
1. The minimum lot size shall be 4 acres.
2. The minimum lot frontage shall be 200 feet.
3. No building shall be located within 50 feet of a lot line.
4. No school shall be located on a residential access street.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §430
174
5. Parking lots shall be properly screened and shall be a minimum of 50 feet from
surrounding properties and public roads.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §431
175
§ 431 Provisions Applying to All Districts.
A. [RESERVED] [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19]
B. Christmas Tree Sales. The annual sale of Christmas trees is permitted in any non-residential
zone between the Friday after Thanksgiving and December 25, inclusive.
C. Communications Towers. Communication towers, including, but not limited to, broadcast
facilities, fleet dispatch, emergency service, aircraft communication, and cellular
communications shall be permitted as a conditional use in any non-residential district. For
the purposes of this section, the PVD-1, PVD-2, MX-1, NC-1 and NC-2 zones shall not be
considered non-residential districts.
1. The following conditions shall be met for any communications tower pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70,d,3: [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
a. The applicant shall first demonstrate that no other existing tower or
structure may be used for the subject application. Such demonstration may
include but not be limited to expert reports and responses to bona fide
inquiries to existing tower owners concerning the availability of space.
b. The height of the tower shall be the lowest feasible for the intended
purpose.
c. The tower shall be set back from any property line a minimum of 110% of
the tower's height.
d. Towers shall be of monopole construction if less than 250 feet in height.
e. Any communications tower shall comply with the promulgated radiation
emissions standards of the Federal Communications Commission.
f. A landscape buffer visually impervious after five years of maturity shall be
installed to screen the base of the tower, equipment building and parking.
g. At least two and no more than five parking spaces for maintenance use shall
be provided.
h. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, no communications
tower shall be located in an historic district or on an historic site not in a
district.
2. Accessory buildings for equipment not exceeding 2,000 square feet in area shall be
permitted.
3. Any approval shall be so conditioned as to allow additional communications
operators to lease space on the subject tower.
4. To the extent feasible, communications towers shall be painted or disguised to
minimize contrast with the natural environment.
5. All other applicable regulations of this Ordinance shall apply.
D. Delaware and Raritan Canal State Park. The "Regulations for the Review Zone of the
Delaware and Raritan Canal State Park" adopted by the Delaware and Raritan Canal
Commission on February 1994, as they may be amended and superseded, are hereby adopted
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §431
176
by reference by the Township of Lawrence and the appropriate municipal agency, as the case
may be, is hereby empowered to enforce the provisions of said regulations as provided by
law.
E. Emergency Housing. Trailers for emergency housing for households displaced by fire,
storm, flooding, or other natural disaster may be located on individual lots in zoning districts
where single family detached and two-family residential uses are permitted for the period of
reconstruction. The installation of such trailers shall conform to the following requirements:
1. The trailer shall be placed on the lot where the residence made uninhabitable by
such disaster is located.
2. No more than one unit of emergency housing shall be permitted per lot.
3. All such trailers shall be removed from the reconstruction site upon the issuance of a
temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy permitting the occupancy of the
permanent residence.
4. No such trailer shall be placed in the front yard setback required for the respective
zoning district.
5. Such temporary housing shall not exceed 900 square feet in floor area.
F. Groundwater Remediation. Temporary structures and equipment required for the
remediation of groundwater contamination pursuant to N.J.S.A. 58-10A-1 et seq. shall be
permitted in any district provided that:
1. Existing on-site buildings shall be used to the extent feasible to house equipment
and offices;
2. Structures and equipment shall be set back from any property line a minimum of 25
feet.
3. Equipment shall be enclosed by opaque fencing.
4. All temporary structures and equipment shall be removed within 90 days following
the expiration of the discharge permit or completion of the remedial action,
whichever shall be sooner.
5. Disturbed areas shall be graded and seeded with an appropriate ground cover in
accordance with the soil erosion control regulations of the municipality.
6. Groundwater remediation action shall be exempt from site plan review as otherwise
required in this Ordinance.
G. Public Election Voting Places. The provisions of this Ordinance shall not be construed as to
interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a
municipal or other public election.
H. Public and Local Utilities and Cable Television and Interstate Natural Gas Pipeline
Facilities. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999] Distribution facilities for public and local utilities and
cable television companies and interstate natural gas pipeline companies shall be permitted
in any district, but shall not include utility yards for the storage of vehicles, equipment and
supplies, nor for maintaining and extending distribution networks, power generation, or
facilities requiring a New Jersey Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit (NJPDES),
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §431
177
or regulated by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) and the United States
Department of Transportation, provided that:
1. The proposed installation in a specific location must be reasonably necessary for the
satisfactory provision of service by the utility to the neighborhood or area in which
the particular use is to be located.
2. The design of any building in connection with such facilities must conform to the
general character of the area and not adversely affect the safe, comfortable
enjoyment of property rights in the zone in which it is located.
3. Adequate fences and other safety devices must be provided as may be required.
Fences, when used to enclose public utility facilities such as electrical power
substations, shall be built in accordance with the applicable requirements of the New
Jersey Board of Public Utility Commissioners, the United States Department of
Transportation, if any and the National Electrical Code in effect at the time of
construction.
4. Landscaping, including shrubs, trees and lawns, shall be provided and maintained as
required by §525.
5. Off-street parking shall be provided as determined by the Board of Jurisdiction
during site plan review.
6. All of the other area, yard, height and building coverage requirements of the
respective zone and any other applicable requirements of this Ordinance shall be
met.
I. Sales Offices. Temporary sales offices for the marketing of residential development shall be
permitted only upon the lot or tract to which such sales relate. Temporary sales offices shall
conform to the following requirements:
1. No such office shall be installed prior to the issuance of stamped final subdivision
plats or site plans, as the case may be.
2. Sales offices shall provide for no less than 5 and no more than 10 temporary offstreet
parking spaces located in a safe and convenient manner.
3. No sales office shall be located within 25 feet of a lot line or streetline. Such offices
shall be temporarily landscaped along the foundation of the structure.
4. Sales offices shall be removed from the site under any of the following
circumstances:
a. The issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a model dwelling unit.
b. The sale or lease of 75% of the total number of housing units in the
development.
J. Stream Buffers. There shall be no disturbance, including but not limited to, grading and the
placement of buildings, within 100 feet of the 100-year flood plain of a stream along all
stream corridors or from the upper bank for which a flood plain line has not been established,
with the following exceptions:
1. For necessary storm water outfall structures and piping or the installation of plant
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §431
178
material.
2. Up to 500 sf. of encroachment per residential lot or tract under single and separate
ownership shall be permitted.
3. Riparian zones adjacent to all waters as described below shall be protected from
avoidable disturbances: [Ord. 2032-09, 10/6/09]
a. The riparian zone is 300 feet wide along both sides of any Category One
water, and all upstream tributaries situated within the same HUC 14
watershed;
b. The riparian zone is 150 feet wide along both sides of the following waters
not identified in –a above:
(1) Any trout production water and all upstream waters (including
tributaries);
(2) Any trout maintenance water and upstream waters (including
tributaries) within one linear mile as measured along the length of
the regulated water;
(3) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that contains
documented habitat for a threatened or endangered species of plant
or animal, which is critically dependent on the regulated water for
survival, and all upstream waters (including tributaries) within one
linear mile as measured along the length of the regulated water; and
(4) Any segment of a water flowing through an area that contains acid
producing soils.
c. A riparian zone 50 feet wide shall be maintained along both sides of all
waters not subject to –a or –b above.
d. The following exceptions apply to riparian zones:
(1) Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious surfaces;
and
(2) New disturbances in the riparian zone necessary to protect public
health, safety or welfare; to provide an environmental benefit; to
prevent extraordinary hardship on the property owner peculiar to
the property; or to prevent extraordinary hardship, provided the
hardship was not created by the property owner, that would not
permit a minimum economically viable use of the property based
upon reasonable investment.
(3) Adjustments to the riparian zones established by this subsection are
allowed to the extent they comply with the Stormwater
Management rules, N.J.A.C. 7:13; the Highlands Water Protection
and Planning Act Rules, N.J.A.C. 7:38; and the Coastal Zone
Management rules, N.J.A.C. 7:7E.
4. Steep slopes shall be protected from avoidable disturbance. The following
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §431
179
exceptions apply to steep slope areas: [Ord. 2032-09, 10/6/09]
a. Redevelopment within the limits of existing impervious surfaces; and
b. New disturbances necessary to protect public health, safety or welfare; to
provide an environmental benefit; to prevent extraordinary hardship on the
property owner peculiar to the property; or to prevent extraordinary
hardship, provided the hardship was not created by the property owner, that
would not permit a minimum economically viable use of the property based
upon reasonable investment.
K. Temporary Construction Trailers. Temporary construction trailers at work sites shall be
permitted in all zoning districts for office use and the storage of equipment and supplies
during active construction activities. The installation of such trailers shall conform to the
following requirements:
1. No trailer shall be installed at a work site prior to the issuance of a construction
permit.
2. All such trailers shall be removed from the work site upon the issuance of a
temporary or permanent certificate of occupancy to which the use of the trailer
relates.
3. No trailer shall remain at a work site where active construction activity has ceased
for a period of more than 30 days.
4. No trailer shall be located within 25 feet of a lot line or streetline. Such trailers shall
be temporarily screened from public view by a combination of opaque fencing
and/or landscaping.
5. No more than 6 temporary construction trailers shall be permitted per work site.
6. Shipping containers may be used in lieu of a construction trailer for the temporary
storage of tools and supplies at a work site only during active construction. [Ord.
2350-19, 12/17/19]
L. Temporary Uses. Application may be made to the Township Council for a permit for a
temporary use inconsistent with the provisions of this Article for special events lasting for a
period not to exceed two weeks in any one year. Such events may include, but not be limited
to, circuses, bazaars, fairs, golf tournaments, and athletic contests. In the granting or denial
of such temporary use permit the Township Council may consider the following:
1. The adequacy of provisions for public safety, including, but not limited to, fire
prevention, crowd control, and emergency medical services.
2. The adequacy of provisions for vehicular and pedestrian traffic control, including
ingress and egress, parking, attendants and temporary traffic signage.
3. The adequacy of provisions for food handling, solid waste, and sanitary sewerage.
4. The sufficiency of insurance for the event.
5. Any other measures necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
The Township Council may impose reasonable conditions on the issuance of any temporary
use permit including, but not limited to, the posting of adequate surety and the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §431
180
reimbursement of expenses incurred by the municipality.
M. Antennas. Antennas and structures accessory to the antennas are considered to be a
permitted use on existing electric or water towers in any zone and on the roof of structures in
a non-residential zone. The accessory structure shall conform to the following requirements:
[Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
1. Maximum size of the accessory structure shall be 300 square feet, and the height
shall not exceed ten (10) feet.
2. Where the antenna is installed on an existing tower, the accessory structure may not
extend more than 15 feet from the tower.
3. Where the antenna is installed on the roof of an existing building, the accessory
structure shall meet the setbacks of the zone.
4. Adequate parking shall be available.
5. An eight-foot fence shall surround the accessory structure.
6. A visual screening may be required to buffer the fencing.
7. Adequate site lighting is required.
8. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, no antennas or their accessory
structures shall be located in an historic district or on a historic site not in the
district.
9. The antennas and accessory structures are considered as a principal use. The parcel
may have this use as a second principal use.
N. Wind and Solar Energy Systems. [Ord. 2351-19, 12/17/19]
1. Wind Energy Systems.
a. Purpose. The municipality, recognizing the increasing desire by its
residents and business owners within the Township for the production of
electricity other than by means of centrally distributed public utilities, and
further recognizing the objectives of the New Jersey Energy Master Plan in
broadening the number of providers and methods for producing energy,
promulgate this section of the Ordinance to encourage and create reasonable
standards for wind energy use for small wind energy systems providing
electricity primarily for use in their domicile, farm or place of business in
accordance with the net metering rules of the NJ Board of Public Utilities.
b. Accessory use. Wind energy systems with a manufacturer’s rated capacity
of 20 kilowatts peak efficiency or less shall be permitted accessory uses and
structures to any principal use or building in the municipality, provided they
are installed and operated in accordance with the provisions of this section
and applicable state and federal laws and rules. Wind energy systems
greater than 20 kilowatts and less than or equal to 100 kilowatts peak
efficiency shall be a permitted accessory use for agricultural, public and
private schools, municipal governmental use and industrial uses.
c. Standards for roof-mounted systems.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §431
181
(1) No wind energy system shall be placed upon that portion of a roof
that slopes downwards toward the front of the building facing a
public street.
(2) No portion of a wind energy system attached to a roof shall rise
above the existing roof greater than 14 feet, measured from the
ridgeline of the roof to the center of the hub to which the blades or
vanes are attached or to the nacelle, whichever is less distance.
(3) In a historic district or a historic site not in a district, no portion of a
roof-mounted wind energy system shall be visible from a public
right-of-way.
d. Standards for ground-mounted systems.
(1) Ground-mounted systems shall not be located in a front yard.
(2) Ground-mounted systems shall meet the side and rear yard
restrictions for principal structures in the zone that the energy
production facility is located and in no case shall be located closer
to a property line than 1.1 times the turbine height.
(3) No ground-mounted wind energy system with a manufacturer’s
rated capacity of 20 kilowatts peak efficiency or less shall be
mounted on a tower, mast or pole taller than 40 feet. Wind energy
systems greater than 20 kilowatts and less than or equal to 100
kilowatts shall not be placed on a tower, mast, or pole that exceeds
80 feet in height.
(4) The minimum height from finished grade at the base of the support
structure to the lowest arc of a wind turbine blade or vane shall be
30 feet.
2. Solar Heating and Electricity Generation.
a. Purpose. The municipality, recognizing the increasing desire by its
residents and business owners with the Township for the production of
electricity, heating, and hot water other than by means of centrally
distributed public utilities, and further recognizing the objectives of the
New Jersey Energy Master Plan in broadening the number of providers and
methods for producing energy, promulgate this section of the Ordinance to
encourage and create reasonable standards for solar energy use for to
provide electricity, heating and hot water primarily for use in their domicile,
farm or place of business, in accordance with the net metering rules of the
NJ Board of Public Utilities.
b. Accessory use. Solar heating and net metering electricity generation shall
be permitted accessory uses and structures to any principal building in the
municipality provided they are installed and operated in accordance with the
provisions in this section and applicable state and federal law.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §431
182
c. Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall be required unless the owner is
able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that such
mounting is impractical, infeasible or lacks the means to meet 80% of the
average yearly demands for electricity or hot water for the facility to which
it is associated. Standards for roof-mounted systems are as follows:
(1) For sloped roofs, no panel or other appurtenance of the solar energy
system shall be affixed to a height greater than 18 inches from the
roof surface.
(2) For flat roofs (which shall include roofs with a slope of up to ½
inch rise in 12 inches of run), no portion of the solar energy system
shall rise above the height of the roof parapet.
(3) In a historic district or a historic site not in a district, no portion of a
solar panel or its appurtenances shall be visible from a public rightof-
way unless the system is composed of photovoltaic roof shingles
on a sloped roof.
(4) No portion of a panel shall extend beyond the outside edge of the
roof.
(5) Roof mounted systems shall be mounted parallel to the roof angle
when visible from a public right-of-way.
(6) Roof mounted systems shall not exceed the maximum building
height in the zoning district.
d. Standards for ground-mounted systems including solar parking canopies.
(1) Demonstration that a roof-mounted system is impractical,
infeasible or lacks the means to meet 80% of the average yearly
demands for electricity or hot water for the facility to which it is
associated.
(2) Ground-mounted systems shall not be located in a front yard.
(3) Ground-mounted systems shall meet the side and rear yard setback
standards for accessory structures in the zone that the energy
production facility is located.
(4) Ground-mounted facilities greater than 1,000 square feet of panel
area shall meet the following additional requirements:
[a] One or more of the following shall be provided beneath the
structures: meadow grass, lawn grass, cultivated
agriculture land or parking spaces.
[b] Mounting of the solar structures shall minimize impervious
surfaces.
[c] Ground-mounted systems shall have a solid screen of
evergreen plantings and/or a fence along property lines
abutting a residential use or a right-of-way (in the event of
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §431
183
a reverse frontage lot).
[d] The minimum height of the screening shall be 6 feet when
planted or installed, unless otherwise prohibited by this
Ordinance.
[e] Existing vegetation shall be retained to the extent practical.
e. Solar facilities shall not be included in the calculation of maximum lot
coverage or impervious cover, unless the area under the system consists of
an impervious material.
f. All electrical control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent
unauthorized access and to warn emergency personnel of the presence of a
facility that generates electricity independently of the provision of public
electrical power.
3. Zoning Permit. Whenever site plan or subdivision approval is not required, a zoning
permit shall be obtained for a wind or solar energy system as precedent to the
issuance of any permit required pursuant to the New Jersey Uniform Construction
Code.
4. Abandonment and Removal.
a. Any wind or solar energy system shall be considered abandoned if the
system or facility is out of service or otherwise unused for a continuous 18-
month period.
b. The Zoning Officer may issue a Notice of Abandonment to the owner of a
wind or solar energy system that is deemed to have been abandoned. The
notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last
known address of the owner.
c. The owner shall have the right to respond to the Notice of Abandonment
within 45 days from the mailing of the notice and provide such evidence as
deemed appropriate to counter the abandonment claim.
d. If the owner provides information demonstrating to the Zoning Officer that
the wind or solar energy system facility has not been abandoned, no further
action shall be taken.
e. If the Zoning Officer determines that the wind energy system has been
abandoned, the owner shall remove any and all blades, vanes, turbines,
towers, masts, poles, guying, cabling and foundations to a depth of three
feet below grade and all other structures and equipment related to the wind
energy system and the owner shall remove any and all photovoltaic panels,
photovoltaic shingles, inverters, interconnection hardware, racking and
mounting structures at the owner’s sole expense within 3 months after the
owner receives the Notice of Abandonment. Purpose. The municipality,
recognizing the increasing desire by its residents and business owners
within the Township for the production of electricity other than by means of
centrally distributed public utilities, and further recognizing the objectives
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §431
184
of the New Jersey Energy Master Plan in broadening the number of
providers and methods for producing energy, promulgate this section of the
Ordinance to encourage and create reasonable standards for wind energy
use for small wind energy systems providing electricity primarily for use in
their domicile, farm or place of business in accordance with the net
metering rules of the NJ Board of Public Utilities.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §500
185
ARTICLE V
PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN STANDARDS
PART I: RESIDENTIAL SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS
(N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq.)
§ 500 Relationship of Article V to the Residential Site
Improvement Standards.
A. Part I of this Article provides references to the applicable section of the Residential Site
Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1 et seq.) for the convenience of the user. Certain
parts of the Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS) have been reproduced in this
Article where their inclusion assists the user in determining the applicability of the RSIS to
the remainder of the Lawrence Township Performance and Design Standards.
B. Part II of this Article establishes performance and design standards for residential
development that have not been preempted by the RSIS and for non-residential development.
The extent of the preemption is noted in §501.A.
C. Construction of all residential improvements not regulated by the Residential Site
Improvement Standards shall conform to the technical requirements of the Township of
Lawrence Engineering Department Standards, dated January 31, 1996, as it may be amended
or superseded, and this Article.
D. In this Article, the word "shall" is understood to be mandatory unless granted an exception
by the Board of Jurisdiction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-51 and the word "should" mean the
standard is encouraged but not mandatory.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §501
186
§ 501 RSIS General Provisions
A. Scope and Applicability (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.5).
1. The Residential Site Improvement Standards shall govern any site improvements
carried out or intended to be carried out or required to be carried out in connection
with any application for residential subdivision, site plan approval, or variance
before any Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment created pursuant to the
Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq.); or in connection with any
other residential development approval required or issued by any municipality or
agency or instrumentality thereof.
2. Except as is otherwise specifically provided, these rules shall control all matters
concerning the construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition,
maintenance, and use of any site improvements constructed by a developer in
connection with residential development. The rules are to be interpreted as the
minimum required to ensure the public health and safety, and the maximum that
may be required in connection with residential development.
3. These rules shall apply to all site improvement work and appurtenant construction
including streets, roads, parking facilities, sidewalks, drainage structures, grading,
and utilities which are undertaken by a developer in connection with residential
development or use.
a. Where both residential and commercial development are planned in a
mixed-use development, these rules shall apply to the residential part or
parts of such development where such residential part or parts are discrete
and separate from planned commercial parts as evidenced by, for example,
separate building(s), separate parking, and separate access features.
b. These rules shall apply to all utilities created by or deriving their authority
from municipal ordinance to operate within a given jurisdiction.
c. Choice among options contained in these rules shall be the applicant’s
unless otherwise specified in these rules.
4. Nothing contained in these rules shall be construed to limit the powers of any
municipality to establish and enforce any requirement concerning:
a. Layout, arrangement, and location of improvements, shade trees,
landscaping, or reservation of areas for public use, pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-38;
b. Preservation of existing natural resources; arrangement of physical elements
for safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation, by, for example,
traffic calming measures as described in “Residential Street Design and
Traffic Control”, by W. S. Homburger et al. (Institute of Transportation
Engineers, 1989), parking, and loading; screening, landscaping, and
location of structures; or conservation of energy and use of renewable
resources; pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-41; or
c. Use, bulk, height, number of stories, orientation, and size of buildings and
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §501
187
other structures; the percentage of lot or development area that may be
occupied by structures, lot sizes and dimensions, floor area ratios, or other
measures to control development intensity; or the provision of adequate
light and air pursuant to N.J.S.A.40:55-65.
5. The provisions of these rules shall not preempt or in any way affect the exercise of
any authority by the State or any county government with respect to site
improvements conferred by any State law or any regulation promulgated there
under. Nor shall these rules be in any way interpreted to modify or otherwise affect
rules promulgated pursuant to the Pinelands Commission Act, N.J.S.A. 13:18A-1 et
seq. (N.J.A.C. 7:50). It is the intent of these rules to be consistent with all other
applicable laws, rules and regulations. Where these rules and any other State or
county laws, rules or regulations establish differing requirements, then the
requirements of these rules shall govern, except where any such differing
requirement is more restrictive.
6. These rules shall not apply to driveways on private property held in fee-simple as
individual residential lots outside of the public right-of-way, including common
driveways established by easements shared by more than one dwelling unit on
private property.
7. These rules are intended to ensure the public health, safety, and welfare insofar as
they are affected by site improvement work, and shall be so construed.
B. Definitions and Abbreviations. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.4.
C. Administration and Enforcement. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.7.
D. RSIS Approval. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.8
E. RSIS Violations. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.9
F. Operative Date (N.J.A.C. 5:21-1.10). The RSIS shall be operative on June 3, 1997. The
requirements of any municipal ordinances or rules adopted by any instrumentality deriving
authority therefrom in effect on that date which establish rules or requirements for any matter
within the scope of the RSIS shall be deemed to have been repealed and of no further force
or effect.
1. Any project for which preliminary subdivision or site plan approval has been given
prior to June 3, 1997 shall continue to be subject to the municipal development
ordinance under which it was approved.
2. Any project for which application is made after June 3, 1997 shall be governed by
the RSIS.
3. The RSIS shall not be construed as requiring the revision or amendment of any
application for site plan or subdivision approval which is pending on June 3, 1997.
Such pending applications may, however, be amended provided that any such
amendments shall meet the requirements of the RSIS.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §502-504
188
§ 502 RSIS Application and Review Procedures
A. RSIS Application and Review Procedures. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-2.1.
B. RSIS Application Form and Checklist. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-2.2.
§ 503 RSIS Exceptions, Waivers, and Special Area Standards
The exception, waiver, and special area standards pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:21-3 are reproduced in §711.
§ 504 RSIS Streets and Parking.
A. Street Hierarchy. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.1.
B. Cartway Width. Cartway widths for residential streets shall be as required in N.J.A.C. 5:21-
4.2 and Table 5.1 on the following page.
C. Curbs or Curbs and Gutters. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.3.
D. Shoulders. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.4.
E. Sidewalks and Graded Areas. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.5.
F. Bikeways. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.6.
G. Utility Areas. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.7.
H. Right-of-way and Cartway. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.8.
I. Street Grade and Intersections. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.9.
J. Pavement. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.10.
K. Street and Site Lighting. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.11.
L. Underground Wiring. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.12.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §502-§504
189
Table 5.1 Residential Street Cartway and Right-of-Way Widths.
Street Type (1)
Total
Average
Daily
Traffic
Traveled
Way
No. of
Parking
Lanes(2)
Parking
Lane
Width
Cartway
Width
Curb (3)
or
Shoulder
Sidewalk
or Graded
Area (4)
Right-of-
Way
Width(5)
RESIDENTIAL ACCESS
Low Intensity
1,500 (loop
-750 each
half)
20’ 1 8’ 28’ none 1SW
1GA 50’
Medium Intensity
1,500 (loop
-750 each
half)
20' 1 8' 28' curb 2 SW 50’
High Intensity
(on-street parking)
1,500 (loop
-750 each
half)
20' 1 8' 28' curb 2 SW 50'
High Intensity
(off-street parking)
1,500 (loop
-750 each
half)
20' 0 0' 20' none 2 SW 50'
NEIGHBORHOOD
(all intensities) 1,500 14' 2 16' 30' (6) curb 2 SW 50'
MINOR COLLECTOR
Low Intensity (7)
(with no parking) 3,500 20' 0 0' 20' none 1 SW
1 GA 50'
Low Intensity
(w/one parking lane) 3,500 20' 1 8' 28' curb 1 SW
1 GA 50'
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §502-§504
190
Street Type (1)
Total
Average
Daily
Traffic
Traveled
Way
No. of
Parking
Lanes(2)
Parking
Lane
Width
Cartway
Width
Curb (3)
or
Shoulder
Sidewalk
or Graded
Area (4)
Right-of-
Way
Width(5)
Medium Intensity 3,500 20' 1 8' 28' curb 2 SW 50'
High Intensity
(w/one parking lane) 3,500 20' 1 8' 28' curb 2 SW 50'
High Intensity
(w/ two parking lanes) 3,500 20' 2 16' 36' curb 2 SW 60'
High Intensity
(w/off-street parking) 3,500 22' 0 0' 24' curb or
shoulder 2 SW 50'
MAJOR COLLECTOR
Low Intensity 7,500 24' 0 0' 24' none 2 SW 50'
Medium and High
Intensity 7,500 24' 0 0' 24' curb or
shoulder 2 SW
50' if
curb, 54'
if
shoulder
SPECIAL PURPOSE STREETS
Rural Street (8) 500 20' 0 0' 20' none 2 GA 40'
Rural Lane (8) 200 18' 0 0' 18' none 2 GA 40'
Alley (one way) - - - - 9' - - 11'
Alley (two way) - 18' 0 0' 18' none 2 GA 22'
Cul-de-Sac (stem) (9) 250 - - - - - - -
Marginal Access
Street(10) - - - - - - - -
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §502-§504
191
Street Type (1)
Total
Average
Daily
Traffic
Traveled
Way
No. of
Parking
Lanes(2)
Parking
Lane
Width
Cartway
Width
Curb (3)
or
Shoulder
Sidewalk
or Graded
Area (4)
Right-of-
Way
Width(5)
Divided Street(11) - - - - - - - -
Parking Loop
(one-side parking)
- 24' 1 18' - curb - 42'
Parking Loop
(two-side parking)
24' 2 36' - curb - 50'
Notes:
(1) See RSIS Table 4.2 for definitions of street hierarchy and N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.2 for definitions of low, medium, and high intensity of development.
(2) Parking lane refers to parallel parking; except in the case of parking loop, which is perpendicular parking.
(3) See N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.3(c) for additional requirements.
(4) See N.J.A.C. 5:21 - 4.5(b) for additional requirements.
(5) Right-of-way width applies only to streets proposed for dedication.
(6) The 30' cartway would accommodate two 8' parking lanes and one 14' moving lane.
(7) 20' minor collector cartways are permitted only when there is no direct building lot access to or from the street in question.
(8) Rural streets and rural lanes are permitted only within developments which do not exceed an average daily traffic count of 500 and 200 respectively.
(9) Cartway and right-of-way widths of cul-de-sac stems and right-of-way requirements should conform to standards of residential access or residential neighborhood streets.
Cul-de-sac turnarounds shall have a minimum cartway radius of 40' and a minimum right-of-way radius of 48'.
(10) Cartway and right-of-way widths of marginal access streets and right-of-way requirements should conform to standards of either residential access or minor collector streets,
as dictated by average daily traffic. If the classification is a minor collector requiring a 36' cartway, cartway width may be reduced to 28' since frontage is restricted to one
side of the street.
(11) Cartway widths of divided streets should conform to standards of street classification, as dictated by anticipated average daily traffic, and be applied to aggregate dimensions
of two street segments.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §505 - 519
192
M. Street and Traffic Signs. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.13.
N. Residential Parking: Number of Spaces (N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.14). An adequate number of onstreet
and off-street parking spaces shall be required in all developments to accommodate
residents and visitors. For projects containing dwelling units required by the New Jersey
Uniform Construction Code’s Barrier Free Subcode (N.J.A.C. 5:23-7) to be accessible,
accessible parking spaces for people with disabilities shall be provided in accordance with
the requirements of the Barrier Free Subcode and shall be considered part of the total number
of required spaces.
1. For residential developments, parking shall be provided, as set forth in Table 5.2
below. If applicant does not specify the number of bedrooms per unit, Note 3 for
each category in Table 5.2 shall apply for the parking requirement.
2. Alternative parking standards to those shown in Table 5.2 shall be accepted if the
applicant demonstrates these standards better reflect local conditions. Factors
affecting minimum number of parking spaces include household characteristics,
availability of mass transit, urban versus suburban location, and available off-site
parking resources.
3. A one-car garage and driveway combination shall count as 2.0 off-street parking
spaces, provided the driveway measures a minimum of 18 feet in length between the
face of the garage door and the right-of-way. A two-car garage and driveway
combination shall count as 3.5 off-street parking spaces, provided a minimum
parking area width of 20 feet is provided for a minimum length of 18 feet as
specified for a one-car garage and driveway combination.
Table 5.2 Parking Requirements for Residential Land Uses (1)
Housing Unit
Type/size(2)
Parking
Requirement
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED
2 Bedroom
3 Bedroom
4 Bedroom
5 Bedroom
1.5
2.0
2.5 (3)
3.0
GARDEN APARTMENT
1 Bedroom
2 Bedroom
3 Bedroom
1.8
2.0 (3)
2.1
TOWNHOUSE
1 Bedroom
2 Bedroom
3 Bedroom
1.8
2.3 (3)
2.4
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §505 - 519
193
Housing Unit
Type/size(2)
Parking
Requirement
HIGH RISE
1 Bedroom
2 Bedroom
3 Bedroom
0.8
1.3 (3)
1.9
MOBILE HOME
1 Bedroom
2 Bedroom
1.8
2.0 (3)
RETIREMENT COMMUNITY
Values shall be commensurate with
the most appropriate housing unit
type and size noted above that the
retirement community resembles.
RECREATIONAL HOMES (owner
occupied)
Values shall be commensurate with
the most appropriate housing unit
type and size noted above that the
recreational homes (owner
occupied) resembles.
MID-RISE APARTMENT “GARDEN APARTMENT”
values shall apply.
Notes:
(1) When determination of the required number of parking spaces results in a fractional space for the entire
development, any fraction of one-half or less may be disregarded, while a fraction in excess of one-half
shall be counted as one parking space.
(2) Requirements for attached units (apartment/condominium/townhouse) include provisions for guest
parking.
(3) If applicant does not specify the number of bedrooms per unit, this off-street parking requirement shall
apply.
SOURCE: Modified and adapted from U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, Public Use File-
-New Jersey (cross-tabulation of vehicles by housing unit for units constructed 1975 to 1980).
4. When housing is included in mixed-use development, a shared parking approach to
the provision of parking shall be permitted.
5. When, in the judgment of the local approving authority, on-street parking is
available, then only that proportion of the parking requirement which is not
available on the street shall be provided in off-street parking facilities. A length of
23 feet per on-street parking space shall be used in calculating the number of
available on-street parking spaces.
O. Residential Parking Space Size (N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.15). Each off-street parking space shall
measure nine (9) feet in width by eighteen (18) feet in length. Parking spaces for people
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §505 - 519
194
with disabilities shall be in accordance with the New Jersey Uniform Construction Code
(N.J.A.C. 5:23-7) or the Americans with Disabilities Act, as applicable.
P. Parking Areas. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.16.
Q. Curb Construction Standards. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.17.
R. Sidewalks and Bikeways Construction Standards. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.18.
S. Street Grade, Intersections, Pavement, and Lighting Construction Standards. See N.J.A.C.
5:21-4.19.
T. Curves. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-4.20.
§ 505 RSIS Water Supply.
A. Water Supply System. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-5.1.
B. Capacity. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-5.2.
C. System Design and Placement. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-5.3.
D. Fire Hydrants. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-5.4.
§ 506 RSIS Sanitary Sewers.
A. Sanitary Sewer Systems. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-6.1.
B. System Planning, Design and Placement. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-6.2.
§ 507 RSIS Stormwater Management.
A. Stormwater Management: General System Strategy. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.1.
B. Runoff Estimation Techniques. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.2.
C. Runoff Collection System Design. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.3.
D. Stormwater Management: System Design. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.4.
E. Stormwater Management: System Design -- Detention Facilities. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.5.
F. Stormwater Management: Water Quality. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-7.6).
G. Corrugated Metal Pipe Specifications. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-7 Appendix.
§ 508 Referenced Standards. See N.J.A.C. 5:21-8.1 et seq.
§509-519 Reserved.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §520
195
ARTICLE V
PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN STANDARDS
PART II - LAWRENCE TOWNSHIP STANDARDS
§ 520 Performance Standards for All Uses.
An applicant for a zoning or construction permit shall provide documentation that the intended use
will comply with the performance standards enumerated below. In the case of a structure being
built where the future use is not known, a construction permit may be issued with the condition that
no certificate of occupancy will be issued until such time as this documentation is submitted with
respect to the particular occupant. A change in the occupancy or use of a building or portion of a
building or premises for a non-residential use shall cause the zoning permit to expire, requiring the
application and issuance of a new zoning permit for such new or changed use and occupancy and
consequently require the application for and issuance of a certificate of occupancy or certificate of
continuing occupancy, as the case may be, from the Construction Code Official. See Article XII.
[Ord. 2250-16, 12/6/16]
A. Electrical and/or Electronic Devices. All electrical or electronic devices shall be subject to
the provisions of Public Law 90-602, 90th Congress, HR 10790, dated October 1968,
entitled “An Act for the Protection of Electronic Product Radiation.” Radiation products, as
defined in DHEW Publication No. (FDA) 76-8003, shall be so limited and controlled so that
no measurable energy can be recorded at any point beyond the property boundaries. The
applicant, upon request, shall certified data wherein measurements made in accordance with
the procedure and standards set forth in the DHEW Publication No. (FDA) 75-8003
adequately demonstrate compliance with the minimum standards established by the Act. All
other forms of electromagnetic radiation lying between one hundred (100) KHz and ten (10)
GHz shall be restricted to the technical limits established in the Federal Communication
Commission’s Rules and Regulations. Additionally, electric or electronic equipment shall be
shielded so there is no interference with any radio or television reception at the lot line (or
beyond the operator’s dwelling unit in the case of multi-family dwellings) as the result of the
operation of such equipment.
B. Glare. No use shall produce a strong, dazzling light or a reflection of a strong, dazzling light
or glare beyond its lot lines. Exterior lighting shall be shielded, buffered, and directed so
that glare, direct light or reflection will not become a nuisance to adjoining properties,
adjoining dwelling units, adjoining properties, adjoining dwelling units, adjoining districts or
streets.
C. Heat. No use shall produce heat perceptible beyond its lot lines. Further, no use shall be
permitted which would cause the temperature to rise or fall in any body of water.
D. Noise. Noise levels shall be designed and operated in accordance with local regulations and
those rules established by the New Jersey State Department of Environmental Protection as
they are adopted and amended.
E. Odor. Odors shall not be discernible at the lot line or beyond.
F. Storage and Waste Disposal. No materials or wastes shall be deposited upon a lot in such
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §520
196
form or manner that they may be transferred off the lot by natural causes or forces, nor shall
any substance be deposited which can contaminate an underground aquifer or otherwise
render such underground aquifer undesirable as a source of water supply or recreation, or
which will destroy aquatic life. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust or
which constitute a fire hazard or which may be edible or otherwise attractive to rodents or
insects shall be stored indoors and enclosed in appropriate containers adequate to eliminate
such hazards.
G. Ventilation. No use shall obstruct the natural ventilation of adjacent uses nor contaminate the
air with excessive heat or odor. Further, no air conditioners or exhaust fans shall be
permitted to discharge exhausted air unless set back from all property lines 10 feet or
equipped with baffles to deflect the discharged air away from the adjacent use.
H. Vibration. There shall be no vibration which is discernible to the human sense of feeling
beyond the immediate lot.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §521
197
§ 521 Commercial and Industrial Buildings Design Standards.
A. Design Goals for All Building Types.
1. Buildings shall be designed and sited so that they provide visual interest and create
enjoyable human-scaled spaces.
2. Building design should blend with the natural terrain to minimize grading and create
an organic approach to the existing landscape.
3. Designs should be compatible in form and proportion with surrounding and
neighborhood buildings in the general vicinity.
4. Building designers should strive for creativity in form and space wherever contrast
and variety are appropriate to the larger environment.
B. Design Guidelines for All Building Types.
1. Proportion. A development's buildings should be designed so as to relate to the
proportions of architectural forms, planes, and details within the existing physical
context of the site. Proportions are the ratios established by the length, width, and
height and may exist as planar or volumetric measurements. Doors, windows, stairs,
porches, pediments, architraves, roof shapes, and entire facades are frequently used
as the elements that create proportion.
2. Horizontal building elements. Buildings shall be designed with a base, middle, and
top facade.
3. Scale. Designs should incorporate architectural elements that give scale, or a sense
of scale to buildings. Scale is the relationship of a person to a building.
4. Entrances. Entrances should clearly identify important access points, provide an
introductory architectural statement to the building and be landscaped in a fashion
complementary to the architectural elements of the entranceway.
5. Building elevation. All elevations of a building's exterior should be coordinated
with regard to color, materials, architectural form and detailing.
6. Facade treatment. The number of different materials on exterior facades should be
limited to three types.
7. Color and texture. The color and texture of a building aids in the expression of
scale, location of entrances, and provides architectural unity to the building. Offsets
in walls and building masses should be used to create visual interest in simple
buildings.
C. Roof Design Guidelines.
1. Roof shape, color, and texture should be coordinated with the exterior materials of
the building's facade.
2. Roof design should minimize the negative impact of roof protrusions by grouping
plumbing vents, ducts, and other utility structures together.
3. All rooftop mechanical and electrical equipment, including elevator penthouses,
shall be screened from the view of persons at ground level by a parapet wall, within
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §521
198
the roof structure itself, or removal to a screened ground level structure.
4. Buildings under 6,000 gross square feet in footprint should be designed with a
pitched roof such as a gable, hip, or gambrel not less than 4 inches in rise for every
12 inches in run unless necessary to meet guidelines established for the Historic
District.
D. Building Lighting.
1. Exterior lighting should be architecturally integrated with the building's style,
material and color.
2. Lighting focused downward should be used to reinforce pedestrian and vehicular
circulation (see also §526). Upward focused lighting should be used to highlight
architectural elements of the building facade.
E. Long Term Care Facility, Congregate Care, and Assisted Living Facility. The following
additional design standards for long term care, congregate care, and assisted living facility
shall apply:
1. Double loaded, rectangular, slab-configured structures are expressly prohibited.
2. The exterior of the building shall be designed to visually break up any facade in
excess of 50 lineal feet. A minimum of a 25 foot wide offset or building wing shall
be provided in each 200 lineal feet of facade length. The design should distinguish
between the base, middle, and top of the building.
3. Where an outdoor living space is required, adequate visual screening from all other
neighboring dwelling units, outdoor living spaces, parking areas and roadways shall
be provided. Screening may be accomplished with plant materials, masonry
structures or wood fencing a minimum of 4 feet in height. Architectural elements,
such as masonry walls and fences, shall be compatible in both style and materials
with the dwelling unit.
4. All utility meters or boxes, air compressors, heat pumps, or other exterior equipment
shall be located at the side or rear of buildings and shall be screened by architectural
elements or landscape plantings.
F. Neighborhood Center Design Standards. The following additional design standards for uses
permitted in the NC-1 and NC-2 districts shall apply:
1. Buildings should be two to two-and-a-half stories in height and located within 10
feet of the streetline.
2. Apartment uses above the first floor are encouraged.
3. Sidewalks along public streets should be a minimum of 10 feet wide with at least 6.5
feet free of street furniture, trees, and other pedestrian obstacles. These sidewalks
may be a combination of concrete, patterned concrete, brick and concrete pavers. If
a pattern is used, the long axis of the pattern should be oriented parallel to main
pedestrian travel.
4. Pedestrian pathways shall be established from any rear parking lot to the street
sidewalk system in the front and side(s) of a building (if applicable) and shall be a
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §521
199
minimum of 6 feet wide.
5. First and second or higher floors should be separated by means of belt or string
courses, pent roofs, awnings, porte-chocéres or similar architectural elements;
however, mansard roofs shall not be permitted.
6. Retail stores oriented towards a street or a pedestrian walkway connecting to other
adjacent lots shall have a minimum of 50% of the first floor building facade consist
of glass display windows. No more than 6 lineal feet out of each 25 feet shall be
permitted to be blank wall.
7. Exterior building materials should primarily be brick, wood siding, wood shingle, or
stucco.
8. The primary entrance to a building should be accessed directly from a public street
with secondary access oriented towards parking lots.
9. Entrances to apartments on upper floors should be oriented towards associated
parking.
10. Locations for the parking of bicycles shall be provided.
G. Professional Office District Design Standards. The following additional design standards for
professional offices shall apply:
1. Parking lots shall be oriented to the side and rear of the building line established by
the front wall of the building.
2. Dormers should be used to visually break up large roof masses.
3. Windows should be double hung sash types with the glass area divided by horizontal
and vertical muntins.
4. Exterior materials should be brick, stone, horizontal siding or wood shingle, or a
combination of such materials.
H. Retail Design Standards. The following additional design standards for retail uses shall
apply:
1. Retail stores oriented towards a street shall have a minimum of 50% of the first floor
building facade consist of glass display windows.
2. Building entrances should be oriented towards the street.
3. Common concrete block shall not be used on any elevation visible from a public
street. Where permitted, common concrete block shall be painted or otherwise
finished.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §521
200
I. Industrial and Warehousing Use Design Standards. The following additional design
standards for industrial uses shall apply:
1. Variation in the apparent height of the building shall be used to articulate its mass
either through actual changes in roof height or through the use of varying parapet
walls.
2. Vertical offsets at least two feet in depth shall be introduced for each 100 feet of
building length.
3. The exterior facade should be designed with one dominant material. This material
should be varied through the use of vertical and horizontal elements that create
texture changes along building facades.
4. The front and two side elevations shall be constructed of brick, architectural
concrete masonry units (i.e., split face block) or architectural precast concrete a
minimum of 50% of the facade. Metal siding or panels shall be limited to no more
than 50% of the facade. Where glass is used or required, the percentage of masonry
or metal shall be correspondingly reduced. Common concrete block shall not be
used on any elevation visible from a public street. Where permitted, common
concrete block shall be painted or otherwise finished.
5. At least 20% of the front elevation of the building shall consist of glass window.
J. New and Used Automobile Sales Buildings. The following additional design standards for
new and used automobile sales buildings shall apply: [Ord. 2166-13, 12/3/13]
1. The showroom should be the most prominent architectural feature of the building
and should have a two story volume.
2. The total front façade of the building facing the highest order street, excepting a
limited access highway, shall consist of at least 30% clear glass, and any portion
distinguishable from other portions of the building as the facility’s showroom shall
be at least 50% clear glass.
3. The remaining façade materials should be stone, brick, metal panel or tinted glass,
except those areas not visible from a public street may be architectural concrete
masonry units.
4. Service bays should be oriented to the sides or rear of a building.
5. Exterior display of vehicles, when permitted, shall be located at ground level and
demarcated with textured paving materials to distinguish the area from customer
parking.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §522
201
§ 522 Drainage and Storm Water Management.
[Ord. 1873-06, 2/7/2006]
A. Purpose. It is hereby determined that the lands and waterways within the municipality are at
times subjected to flooding; that such flooding is a danger to the lives and property of the
public; that such flooding is also a danger to the natural resources of the municipality, the
county and the State; that development tends to accentuate such flooding by increasing storm
water runoff due to alteration of the hydrologic response of the watershed in changing from
the undeveloped to the developed condition; that such increased flooding produced by the
development of real property contributes increased quantities of waterborne pollutants and
tends to increase channel erosion; that such increased flooding, increased erosion, and
increased pollution constitutes deterioration of the water resources of the municipality, the
county and the State; and that such increased flooding, increased erosion and increased
pollution can be controlled by the regulation of storm water runoff from such development.
It is therefore determined that it is in the public interest to regulate the development of real
property and to establish standards to regulate the discharge of storm water runoff from such
developments as provided in this Ordinance.
B. Storm Water Management Goals. Storm water management plans submitted pursuant to
Article VIII shall demonstrate careful consideration of the general and specific concerns,
values and standards of the municipal master plan and applicable county and State storm
drainage control programs, and any county mosquito commission control standards, and
shall be based on environmentally sound site planning, engineering and landscape
architectural techniques. The design of all stormwater management facilities shall address
water quality, flooding and groundwater recharge and shall incorporate the use of nonstructural
stormwater management strategies to the maximum extent practical. Land subject
to periodic or occasional flooding (flood plain hazard areas) shall not be developed in such a
way to endanger life or property or aggravate the potential for flooding. Such land shall be
reserved for open space or other similar uses. (See also §427.)
C. Best Available Technology (BAT) Required. Development shall use the best available
technology to minimize off-site storm water runoff, increase on-site infiltration, simulate
natural drainage systems, and minimize off-site discharge of pollutants to ground and surface
water and encourage natural filtration functions. Best available technology may include
measures such as extended detention basins, infiltration basins, contour terraces and swales.
D. Lot Grading. Lots shall be graded to secure proper drainage away from buildings and into
streets. Additionally, drainage shall be provided in a manner which will prevent the
collection of storm water in pools or other unauthorized concentrations of flow, and water
shall not flow across adjacent property lines unless specifically approved by the Municipal
Engineer. The Municipal Engineer may direct the installation of a piped under drain system
and soil stabilization fabric within roadways, drives and parking lots if deemed necessary.
[Ord. 1810-04, 9/21/2004]
1. Grading in lawn areas shall meet the following minimum standards:
a. Provide a minimum of 6 inch drop in the first 20 feet from a building.
b. Overland grades throughout the site shall be a minimum of 2%.
c. Grades for swales shall be a minimum of 1%
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §522
202
d. Maximum slopes on residential lots shall be 5:1 (horizontal: vertical) except
where approved by the Municipal Engineer.
2. All work shall be in accordance with the established design standards of the
municipality and as required by the Municipal Engineer.
E. Storm Water System Strategy and Design.
1. Intent. The system shall be adequate to carry off or store the storm water and
natural drainage water which originates not only within the lot or tract boundaries,
but also that which originates upstream of the lot or tract boundaries and normally
flows through the tract. Storm water run-off, natural drainage water or water
discharged from any source shall not be so diverted as to overload the existing
drainage systems or create flooding or the need for additional drainage structures on
other private properties or public lands without proper and approved provisions
being made for managing these conditions.
2. Prohibited Design. Over the sidewalk, under the sidewalk and/or through the curb
drains for the purpose of routing the discharge from sump pumps is prohibited.
These facilities must outlet into an adequate water course or drainage system as
approved by the Municipal Engineer. Roof leaders must be connected to an
approved drainage system as approved by the Municipal Engineer. In the absence of
a practical outlet for either sump pump or roof leaders, other systems, such as
drywells, as approved by the Municipal Engineer may be used. Drywells shall be
setback from all property lines a minimum of 10 feet.
3. Stormwater runoff calculations. Techniques and designs for computing storm water
runoff shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 7:8-5 and N.JA.C. 5:21.
4. Soil testing is required for all proposed infiltration basins and drywells. Testing
shall be witnessed by the Municipal Engineer, unless such requirement is waived.
5. Whenever possible, all lots shall be designed to provide positive drainage to the
roadway facility fronting same without flowing onto or across adjacent property.
Where this is impractical, the disposal of storm drainage through adjacent properties
shall be through easement areas by underground piping and inlets, swales, et cetera.
The depth of standing water at the pavement gutter line shall not exceed 9 inches
for a 100-year storm event.
F. Storm Water Management Basins. [Ord. 2081-11, 2/15/11] Storm water management basins
shall be required for all tracts except as subsequently noted below and shall be designed to
provide adequate storage of storm water runoff for a 100-year storm event. Additional
requirements include:
1. Basin required. A detention basin shall be required if site improvements will
increase storm water runoff by one (1) cubic foot per second (CFS) in the 100-year
storm event.
2. Permitted basin location. All storm water management basins shall conform to the
following siting requirements.
a. Any storm water management basin in a residential zoning district shall be
located within the setbacks for a principal building on the lot. For the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §522
203
purposes of this sub-paragraph, a residential district shall also include the
PVD-1, PVD-2 and MX-1 zones. For purposes of determining compliance,
the setback shall be measured from the toe of an exterior slope of the
bermed edge of a basin or, when the edge is not bermed, the water’s edge
reached in a 100-year storm event, whichever provides the greater setback.
b. In accordance with §525.H.1.c, no storm water management facility,
including basins, shall be located within a required landscape buffer.
3. Use of retaining walls. No storm water management facility shall make use of
retaining walls unless approved as part of a formal landscaping plan under subparagraph
-5 below or if located in the interior of a basin and not visible from a
public right-of-way or adjacent property (whether developed or undeveloped) from
ground level.
4. Naturalistic design required for detention. The detention area shall be graded
creatively to blend into the surrounding landscape and imitate a natural depression
with an irregular edge. Linear or geometric shapes are to be avoided unless
approved as part of a formal landscaping plan under sub-paragraph -5 below.
5. Formal design permitted for retention. The design for stormwater retention facilities
may use a variety of landscape forms, including formal reflecting pools, fountain
features, and naturalistic lakes and ponds. Retaining walls may be utilized when
essential to formal landscape designs which incorporate water features and/or
stormwater management functions.
6. Conveyance. Detention basins shall be designed to convey all runoff from the 100-
year storm event from the basin without creating adverse impacts on property.
Backwater impacts from the filling of the basin shall also be considered in the
design of the facility.
7. Detention basins shall discharge into a stable outfall structure, whether natural or
manmade. Stability calculations based on the 100-year storm outflow shall be
required showing adherence to Soil Conservation Service standards.
8. Any storm water facility approved as a part of site plan or subdivision application
shall be constructed and functioning prior to the issuance of a building permit for
construction of a building. In the event that an approved site plan includes the
renovation or adaptive reuse of an existing building, the Municipal Engineer shall
have the discretion to waive strict compliance with this sub-paragraph.
9. An agreement for the ownership and maintenance of detention facilities serving two
or more lots, with cross easements, shall be furnished to the satisfaction of the Board
of Jurisdiction.
10. Detention basins shall be constructed on individual lots (not part of a residential
building lot) in all residential subdivisions and may be constructed within an
easement in all residential minor subdivisions.
11. For development with less than one-quarter (¼) acre of new impervious surface
coverage, a deed restriction shall be established which limits the total new
impervious surface coverage to less than one-quarter (¼) acre. This impervious
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §522
204
surface coverage limitation shall be applied to the subject lot or equally distributed
between all lots within a subdivision, as deemed appropriate by the Board of
Jurisdiction.
G. Landscaping. Stormwater management areas including retention and detention basins,
drainage ditches and swales, and wetland areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the
standards in §525 and shall contain indigenous species to the maximum extent practical.
This may involve integration of these areas as aesthetic landscape features, naturalized
wetland areas, or active and passive recreation areas, in addition to their stormwater
management function. Detention and retention basins should be located in cleared areas
where reasonably feasible.
H. Detention Facility Maintenance. (See also §529.I)
1. Maintenance of the detention facility shall be the responsibility of the owner of the
property upon which the detention facility is located. The owner may be a
homeowner's organization or an open space organization established for the purpose
of owning and maintaining common lands and facilities including conservation,
open space, floodplain, drainage, recreation and park areas and shall be in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 and the following provisions except that, under
certain conditions, the municipality will maintain the detention facility, subject to
the conditions as defined herein. See also §529 for provisions concerning the
establishment of homeowners' associations for open space.
2. Membership in any homeowners or created open space organization by all property
owners shall be mandatory. Such required membership in any such organization
and the responsibilities upon the members shall be in writing between the
organization and the individual in the form of a covenant with each member
accepting liability for a pro rata share of the organization's costs and providing that
the municipality shall be a party beneficiary to such covenant entitled to enforce its
provisions. The terms and conditions of said covenant shall be reviewed by the
planning board attorney prior to final approval.
3. Executed deeds shall be tendered to the municipality simultaneously with the
granting of final approval stating that the prescribed use(s) of the lands in the
common ownership shall be absolute and not subject to revision for possible future
development.
4. The homeowners or open space organization shall be responsible for liability
insurance, municipal taxes, maintenance of land and facilities and inspection and
certification of facilities that may be erected on any land deeded to such
organization and shall hold the municipality harmless from any liability.
5. Any assessment levied by the homeowners or open space organization may become
a lien on the private properties in the development. The duly created organization
shall be allowed to adjust the assessment to meet changing needs and any deeded
lands may only be sold, donated or in some other way conveyed to the municipality
for public purposes only.
6. The homeowners or open space organization initially created by the developer shall
clearly describe in its bylaws the rights and obligations of any homeowner and
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §522
205
tenant in the planned development, along with the covenant and model deeds and the
articles of incorporation of the association prior to the granting of final approval by
the municipality.
7. Part of the development proposals submitted to and approved by the municipality
shall be provisions to insure that control of the homeowners or open space
organization will be transferred to the individual lot owners in the development
based on a percentage of the dwelling units sold and/or occupied, together with
assurances in the bylaws that the organization shall have the maintenance
responsibilities for all lands to which they hold title.
8. Should the proposed development consist of stages, the Board may require that
acreage proportionate in size to the stage being considered for final approval be set
aside simultaneously with granting of final approval for that particular stage, even
though these lands may be located in a different section of the overall development.
9. In the event that the detention facility becomes a danger to public safety or public
health, or if it is in need of maintenance, the municipality shall so notify in writing
the responsible person. From that notice, the responsible person shall have 14 days
to affect such maintenance and repair of the facility in a manner that is approved by
the Municipal Engineer or his designee. If the responsible person fails or refuses to
perform such maintenance and repair, the municipality may immediately proceed to
do so and shall bill the cost thereof to the responsible person.
10. In certain situations, the municipality's governing body may accept the ownership
and maintenance responsibilities of detention facilities subject to conditions
including but not limited to the following:
a. Where the only facility requiring homeowners’ organization maintenance is
the detention basin, the governing body may consider assuming ownership
and maintenance responsibilities upon agreement with the developer to pay
the pro-rata share of the cost to maintain the detention facility at the time of
the granting of a certificate of occupancy. The pro-rata share of cost shall
be the total estimated cost of such maintenance including insurance,
inspections, and certifications as required by State and local rules and
regulations in accordance with a formula on file with and calculated by the
Municipal Engineer.
I. Easement Requirements. See also §527, Land Use Restrictions.
1. Where required by the municipality, if a lot or tract is traversed by a watercourse,
surface or underground drainage way or drainage system, channel, stream or
drainage swale, there shall be provided and dedicated a drainage right-of-way
easement to the municipality or other owners of private underground drainage
system conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse or drainage
system and of such width or construction or both as will be adequate to
accommodate expected storm water runoff in the future, based upon reasonable
growth potential in the municipality and in any event, meeting any minimum widths
and locations shown on any adopted Official Map or Master Plan. Such easement
dedication shall be expressed on the plat as follows: “Drainage easement granted to
for the purposes provided for and expressed in the Land Use Ordinance of the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §522
206
Township.”
2. No structures, trees, shrubs or obstacles of any kind shall be installed within the
limits of the drainage easements and such prohibition shall be recorded as such in
the easement deeds. Fences may be constructed in drainage easements under
Lawrence Township jurisdiction if the following conditions are met:
a. Fence must cross easement at 90º angle.
b. Access opening 16’ in width must be provided via either removable sections
or gates.
c. Lower edge of fence must be minimum 6” above the ground for width of
the easement.
d. No other structures, grade alterations or landscaping may be installed in the
easement.
e. Access for Township personnel will be provided upon reasonable notice.
Owner is responsible for removing fence sections, unlocking gates, etc.
f. Fence may not be constructed directly above a drainage pipe along a
property line.
g. An agreement summarizing the above conditions must be recorded in the
Mercer County Clerk's office. Proof of recording is required prior to
issuance of a building permit.
h. Fences may be constructed in easements under other agency jurisdiction if
written authorization from easement owner is provided. [Ord. 1585-99,
9/7/1999]
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §523
207
§ 523 Energy Conservation.
A. Promotion of Conservation. The design of residential and non-residential buildings shall
promote the conservation of energy through the use of site planning, architectural elements
and construction techniques to reduce energy consumption and to provide for the maximum
utilization of renewable energy sources. Applicants for residential development consisting
of 50 or more housing units/lots and applicants for nonresidential development of 50,000
square feet or more of gross floor area shall prepare and submit a “Sustainable Design
Assessment.” This Sustainable Design Assessment shall set forth ways in which the
proposed development will utilize sustainable building design, materials and systems,
environmentally-conscious site design and development techniques, and facility management
practices which promote natural resource preservation and the reduction of energy
consumption (particularly non-renewable energy consumption). The Sustainable Design
Assessment shall include life–cycle costs analysis as appropriate which compare the
proposed development to best available practice and shall address at a minimum the
following [Ord. 1941-07, 9/4/07]:
1. Sustainable site development.
a. Reduce site disturbance and soil erosion during construction.
b. Use of natural drainage systems (e.g. NJDEP Low Impact Development
requirements, swales).
c. Preserve or restore natural site features.
d. Landscape and orient building to capitalize on passive heating and cooling.
2. Water efficiency
a. Use captured rainwater for landscaping, toilet flushing, etc.
b. Treat and re-use gray water.
c. Use low-flow fixtures and fittings.
d. Use closed-loop systems and other water reduction technologies for
processes.
3. Energy efficiency
a. Use passive solar heating/cooling and natural ventilation.
b. Enhance penetration of daylight to interior spaces to reduce need for
artificial lighting.
c. Use thermally efficient envelope including exterior roofing and sheathing
materials to reduce perimeter heating and size of HVAC.
d. Use energy management systems, monitoring, and controls to continuously
calibrate, adjust, and maintain energy-related systems.
e. Develop O&M manuals and train staff.
4. Indoor environmental quality
a. Control pollutant sources
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §523
208
b. Use low-emission materials
c. Ventilate before occupancy
d. Enhance penetration of daylight and reduce glare
e. Provide for collection of recyclables in public areas
f. Provide outdoor views
g. Provide individual occupant controls when possible
h. Provide superior indoor air quality, quality lighting and thermal quality
5. Reduce consumption of building materials
a. Select products for durability
b. Eliminate unnecessary finishes and other products
c. Reuse building shell from existing buildings and fixtures and demolished
buildings
d. Use salvaged/refurbished materials
e. Design for adaptability
B. Lot, Principal Structures, Subdivision Plans, and Site Plan Solar Standards
1. Lot orientation. The buildable area of lots shall be oriented so that an imaginary line
running perpendicular from the long axis of the buildable area will point within 30º
of true south. To accommodate the orientation of buildable areas of lots in
accordance with this section, the majority of streets should, within the limits of
practicability and feasibility, be oriented along an east west axis, with maximum
deviations of 30º from true east.
2. Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that the buildable area for each
lot will be situated so that homes built to the height permitted by Article IV will not
interfere with the availability of direct sunlight to the south sides of buildable areas
on adjacent lots in the subdivision between 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. Eastern
Standard Time on December 21.
3. Waiver provisions. Upon request of the applicant, the Planning Board may grant
relief from any of the requirements of this section to the minimum extent necessary
if the Board finds that compliance with any of these sections is not practicable or
feasible. Practicability and feasibility may be affected by, but not limited to, any of
the following factors:
a. Natural constraints, such as steep slopes, wetlands, flood plains, unsuitable
soils, rock formations, and wooded areas;
b. Manmade constraints such as existing streets and utility infrastructures;
c. Reduction in density below the density permitted in the zoning ordinance;
and
d. Conflict with other land development standards.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §523
209
e. Redevelopment constraints related to the location of existing and new
buildings, parking facilities, utilities and access ways that are required for
the customary operation of buildings on a site.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §524
210
§ 524 Fences and Walls.
The following provisions shall apply to fences and walls in non-residential districts (see §429.G for
residential standards):
A. Height. Fences shall be limited to 8 feet in height. Walls shall be limited to 6 feet in height.
B. Landscape Plan. Fencing and walls for all uses requiring site plan approval shall be
considered within the overall context of a landscape plan that considers the function and
aesthetic quality of the fencing or wall.
C. Finished Side. All permitted fences shall be situated on a lot in such a manner that the
finished or non-structural side shall face abutting properties.
D. Prohibited Types. No fence or wall shall be erected of barbed wire, topped with metal
spikes, broken bottles and glass, nor constructed of any material or in any manner which may
be dangerous to persons or animals, except that the provisions applicable to animals shall not
apply to farms.
E. Stormwater Flow. Fences and walls shall be erected to avoid damming or diverting the
natural flow of water or shall be integrated into a grading plan that provides for the adequate
movement of storm water.
F. Limitations on Chain Link. Chain link fences shall only be permitted in conjunction with
manufacturing or warehousing operations, recreational facilities, and institutional uses.
Landscaping may be required in conjunction with such fencing.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §525
211
§ 525 Landscaping.
A. General Provisions. The following general provisions shall apply to the installation and
design of landscapes:
1. All land areas not covered with buildings, parking, or other impervious surfaces
shall be landscaped with suitable materials. Landscaping shall consist of trees,
shrubs, ground cover, perennials, and annuals singly or in common as well as other
inanimate materials such as rocks, water, sculpture, art, walls, fences, and paving
materials.
2. A landscape design shall be provided as part of site plan and subdivision
submissions in accordance with Article VIII. Every applicant for subdivision or site
plan approval shall comply with the minimum standards as set forth in this section.
3. The Board of Jurisdiction may require additional landscaping to create an
appropriate landscaping scheme for the site given the nature of the site and the
proposed development.
4. Where subdivisions only are applied for, the minimum standards shall apply only to
street trees and to common open space and areas proposed to be dedicated to the
public.
5. All landscape plants shall be typical in size and weight for their species and shall
conform to the standards of the American Association of Nurserymen for quality
and installation.
6. Plants with pervasive root systems shall not be located where they may cause
damage to drainage pipes or other underground utilities and storm water
management facilities and should generally be no closer than 10 feet measured
horizontally.
7. All plants shall be tolerant of specific site conditions. The use of indigenous species
is strongly encouraged. Exotic, non-native invasive plant species shall not be
permitted.
8. Visual screening is required to buffer all trash enclosures, above ground propane
tanks and other similar structures as identified by the Zoning Officer. [Ord.1585-99,
9/7/1999]
B. Landscape Design Guidelines.
1. Landscaping shall be conceived holistically and be designed to achieve a thorough
integration of the various elements of site design, including building and parking
placement, the natural features of the site and the preservation of pleasing or
aesthetic views. Landscaping shall be used to accent and complement the form and
type of building proposed.
2. In the landscape design of sites, areas shall be designated for retaining existing trees
and the replacement of trees cleared from the site in accordance with §541.
3. Landscaping shall be located to provide effective climatic control. The east and
west walls of a building should be the most heavily vegetated to shade for summer
sun and the north to northwest area for winter prevailing winds. The southerly
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §525
212
facing side of a building should be shaded from summer sun but open for solar gain
during the winter.
4. Plant's susceptibility to disease, their colors, textures, shapes, blossoms, and foliage
characteristics shall be considered in the overall design of a landscape plan.
5. Local soil conditions and water availability shall be considered in the choice of
landscaping.
6. In the design process, the eventual maturity of the plant shall be considered for its
effect on circulation patterns, solar access, site lighting, drainage, emergency access
and relationship to buildings and the streetscape.
C. Street Trees.
1. Location. Street trees shall be installed on both sides of all streets in accordance
with an approved landscape plan. Trees shall be spaced evenly along the street
between the curb and sidewalk. Where the distance between the curb and sidewalk
is less than 5 feet, sidewalks should be placed in a public access easement outside of
the right-of-way to create a planting strip at least 5 feet wide to facilitate street tree
growth. In commercial areas with wider sidewalks that extend to the curb, trees
shall be placed in tree wells with root guard systems. Such tree wells shall have
sufficient soil volume to support tree growth as follows:
Tree Size at Maturity Soil Volume
(Height in feet) (in cubic feet)
Large trees (45'+) 200
Medium-sized trees (30'-45') 150
Small trees (to 30') 100
Areas under sidewalks may be used to meet the soil volume requirement provided
no more than 50% of the volume is located under such hard paving.
2. Spacing. When trees are planted at predetermined intervals along streets, spacing
shall depend on tree size.
Tree Size at Maturity Planting Interval
(Height in fee) (in feet)
Large trees (45'+) 40
Medium-sized trees (30'-45') 30
Small trees (to 30') 20
Trees may be planted closer together in order to avoid interference with utilities,
roadways, sidewalks, sight easements, and street lights.
3. Street tree type. Tree type may vary depending on overall effect desired but as a
general rule, all trees shall be large deciduous trees except as needed to achieve
special effects. Tree selection shall be approved by the Board in accordance with
Tables 5.4, 5.5 and 5.6. Alternate selections may be approved at the discretion of
the Board.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §525
213
Table 5.4 Recommended Small Street Trees.
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Acer campestre Hedge Maple 2½ -3” cal.
Acer ginnala Amur Maple 2½ -3” cal.
Amelanchier x hydrida ‘Cumulus’ Shadblow ‘Cumulus’ 2-2½” cal.
Acer buergeranum Trident Maple 2½ -3” cal.
Crataegus phaenopyrum x. fastigiata Washington Hawthorne 2½ -3” cal.
Crataegus viridis Green Hawthorne 2½ -3” cal.
Magnolia x lobneri ‘Merrill’ Merrill Magnolia 10'-12'
Malus baccata Siberian Crabapple 3”-3½” cal.
Malus x zumi ‘Calocarpa’ Zumi Crabapple 3”-3½” cal.
Syringa reticulata Japanese Tree Lilac 10'-12'
Table 5.5 Recommended Medium Street Trees.
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Acer rubrum 'Northwood' Northwood Red Maple 2½ -3” cal.
Acer rubrum ‘Scanlon’ Scanlon Red Maple 3”-3½” cal.
Acer saccharum ‘Goldspire’ Goldspire Sugar Maple 3”-3½” cal.
Celtis bungeana Bunge Hackberry 2½ -3” cal.
Cladratis lutea Yellowwood 2-2½” cal.
Carpinus caroliniana American Hornbeam 2½ -3” cal.
Malus baccata ‘Manchurian’ Manchurian Crabapple 3”-3½” cal.
Phellodendron amurense Amur Corktree 2½ -3 ½” cal.
Tilia cordata x. ‘Whitehouse’ Whitehouse Linden 3”-3½” cal.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §525
214
Table 5.6 Recommended Large Street Trees.
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Acer rubrum ‘October Glory’ October Glory red maple 3”-3½” cal.
Acer rubrum ‘Red Sunset’ Red Sunset red maple 3”-3½” cal.
Celtis occidentalis ‘Magnifica’ Hackberry 3”-3½” cal.
Fraxinus americana ‘Autumn Purple’ Autumn purple ash 3”-3½” cal.
Ginkgo biloba (male only) Ginkgo 3”-3½” cal.
Platanus acerifolia London Planetree 3”-3½” cal.
Platanus occidentalis Sycamore 3”-3½” cal.
Quercus coccinea Scarlet Oak 3”-3½” cal.
Quercus marcocarpa Bur Oak 3”-3½” cal.
Quercus phellos Willow Oak 3”-3½” cal.
Quercus rubra Red Oak 3”-3½” cal.
Sophora japonica ‘Regent’ Scholartree 3”-3½” cal.
Tilia x euchlora Crimean linden 3”-3½” cal.
Tilia tomentosa 'Green Mountain' Silver linden 3”-3½” cal.
Ulmus parvifolia Chinese elm 3”-3½” cal.
Zelkova serrata ‘Village Green’ Japanese zelkova 3”-3½” cal.
4. Planting Specifications. All trees shall have a minimum caliper as noted in the
appropriate table in this section unless otherwise exempted. Street trees shall be
substantially uniform in size and shape, and have straight trunks. Trees shall be
properly planted and staked in accordance with the Lawrence Township Engineering
Standards. Provision shall be made by the developer for regular watering and
maintenance until they are established. Dead or dying trees shall be replaced by the
developer during the next suitable planting season.
D. Additional Recommended Trees. Any of the trees noted in Tables 5.4, 5.5 and 5.6 may be
used in the design of landscapes as well as their use as street trees. The following trees are
recommended for site development purposes:
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §525
215
Table 5.7 Additional Recommended Trees.
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Acer palmatum Japanese Maple 6'-7'
Acer saccharum Sugar Maple 3”-3 ½” cal.
Betula pendula Weeping Birch 12'-14'
Cedrus atlantica glauca Blue Atlas Cedar 6'-8'
Cercidiphyllum japonicum Katsura-tree 3”-3 ½” cal.
Cercis canadensis Eastern Redbud 6'-8'
Cornus kousa Chinese Dogwood 2”-2 ½” cal.
Crataegus crusgalli inermis Thornless Cockspur
Hawthorn 2”-2 ½” cal.
Cryptomeria japonica Cryptomeria 5'-6'
Fagus grandifolia American Beech 3”-3 ½” cal.
Fagus atropinicea Copper Beech 3”-3 ½” cal.
Gleditsia triacanthos inermis Thornless Honeylocust 3”-3 ½” cal.
Ilex opaca American Holly 6'-7'
Koelreuteria paniculata Golden Rain Tree 2”-2 ½” cal.
Liquidambar styraciflua Sweetgum 3”-3 ½” cal.
Liriodendron tulipifera Tulip Poplar 2”-2 ½” cal.
Metasequoia glyptostroboides Dawn Redwood 8'-10'
Oxydendrum arboreum Sourwood 6'-8'
Picea abies (excelsa) Norway Spruce 5'6'
Picea omorika Serbian Spruce 5'-6'
Pinus strobus White Pine 5'-6'
Pinus thunbergiana Japanese Black Pine 5'-6'
Pinus virginiana Virginia Pine 5'-6'
Populus balsamifera Balsam Popular 2 ½”-3” cal.
Prunus cerasifera Flowering Plum 2 ½” -3” cal.
Prunus serrulata White Cherry 2 ½” -3” cal.
Pseudolarix kaempferi Golden Larch 8'-10'
Pseudotsuga menziesii Douglas Fir 5'-6'
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §525
216
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Quercus acutissima Sawtooth Oak 3” -3 ½” cal.
Quercus palustris Pin Oak 3” -3 ½” cal.
Tilia cordata 'Greenspire' Greenspire Linden 3” -3 ½” cal..
Tilia tomentosa 'Green Mountain' Silver Linden 3” -3 ½” cal.
Tsuga canadensis Canadian Hemlock 5'-6'
Ulmus americana 'Delaware' American Elm, 'Delaware' 3” -3 ½” cal.
E. Fall Planting Hazard. Certain trees have been identified as having a high degree of
transplantation failure if planted during the Fall season. These should be noted on landscape
plans as Spring planting season only. The Fall planting hazard trees include the following
genus and in some cases particular species:
Betula Pyrus
Carpinus Quercus, excluding Q. palustris
Crataegus Salix Salix babylonica
Ilex opaca Tilia tomentosa
Liquidambar styraciflua Zelkova
Liriodendron tulipifera
F. Recommended Shrubs. The following shrubs are recommended for use in the Township:
Table 5.8 Recommended Shrubs.
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Abelia grandiflora Glossy Abelia 18"-24"
Aronia arbtutifolia brilliantissim Red Chokeberry 2'-3'
Azalea delaware valley Delaware Valley Azalea 18"-24"
Azalea exbury Exbury Azalea 18"-24"
Azalea hino-crimson Hino-Crimson Azalea 18"-24"
Azalea stewartsonia Stewartson Azalea 18"-24"
Berberis julianae Wintergreen Barberry 18"-24"
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §525
217
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Berberis thunbergii Japanese Barberry 18"-24"
Clethra alnifloia Summersweet 15”-18”
Cornus alba sibirica Siberian Dogwood 3'-4'
Cornus stolonifera lutea Yellowtwig 3'-4'
Cotoneaster apiculata Cranberry Cotoneaster 12"-18"
Cotoneaster salicifolia repens Park Carpet Cotoneaster 12"-18"
Deutzia gracilis Slender Deutzia 18"-24"
Euonymous alata Dwarf Winged Euonymous 4'-5'
Euonymous alatus compactus Winged Euonymous 3'-4'
Euonymous fortunei vegetus Bigleaf Wintercreeper 18"-24"
Fothergilla gardenii Dwarf Fothergilla 12"-18"
Fothergilla major Large Fothergilla 12"-18"
Hamamelis virginiana Witchhazel 4'-5'
Hibiscus syriacus Rose of Sharon 18"-24"
Hydrangea paniculata grandiflora PeeGee Hydrangea 18"-24"
Ilex crenata hellerei Dwarf Japanese Holly 18"-24"
Ilex glabra Inkberry 18"-24"
Ilex glabra compacta Compact Inkberry 18"-24"
Juniperus chinensis glauca hetzi Hetz Juniper 2 ½'-3'
Juniperus chinensis pfitzeriana
compacta Compact Pfitzer Juniper 18"-24"
Juniperus chinensis torulosa Torulosa Juniper 4'-5'
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §525
218
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Juniperus horizontalis bar harbor Bar Harbor Juniper 18"-24"
Juniperus horizontalis plumosa Andorra Juniper 18"-24"
Juniperus horizontalis wiltoni Blue Rug Juniper 18"-24"
Juniperus sargenti Sargent Juniper 15"-18"
Kalmia latiflora Mountain Laurel 15"-18"
Leucothoe axillaris Coast Leucothoe 18"-24"
Ligustrum ibolium
Ibolium Privet
2'-3'
Lonicera fragantissima
Winter Honeysuckle
2'-3'
Magnolia soulangiana
Saucer Magnolia
8'-10'
Magnolia stellata
Star Magnolia
6'-8'
Magnolia virginiana
Sweetbay Magnolia
6'-8'
Myrica pensylvanica Northern Bayberry 4'-5'
Philadelphus virginalis Virginal Mockorange 2'-3'
Picea excelsa nidiformis Birdnest spruce #1 can
Pieris japonica Japanese Andromeda 15"-18"
Pinus montana mughus Mugho Pine 18"-24"
Potentilla fruticosa Bush Cinquefoil 12"-18"
Pyracantha fiery cascade Fiery Cascade Firethorn 18"-24"
Rhododendron catawbienese Catawba Rhododendron 2'-3'
Rhododendron maximum roseum Rosebay Rhododendron 2'-3'
Spirea vanhouttei Vanhoutte Spirea 3'-4'
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §525
219
Botanical Name Common Name
Minimum
Planting Size
Spirea bumalda ‘anthony waterer’ Anthony Waterer Spirea 18"-24"
Spirea nipponica ‘Snowmound’ Snowmound Spirea 18"-24"
Syringa vulgaris Common Purple Lilac 5'-6'
Taxus baccata repandens English Yew 18"-24"
Taxus cuspidata densiformis Dense Yew 3 ½'-4'
Taxus media hicksi Hicks Yew 18"-24"
Thuja occidentalis nigra Dark American Arborvitae 5'-6'
Viburnum burkwoodi Burkwood Viburnum 18"-24"
Viburnum carlesi Fragrant Viburnum 3'-3 ½'
Viburnum dentatum Arrowwood 2'-3'
Viburnum rhytidophyllum Leatherleaf Viburnum 5'-6'
Viburnum tomentosum Doublefile Viburnum 5'-6'
G. Recommended Plants for Wet Conditions. the following plants are recommended for
wetlands, flood plains, and stormwater management facilities:
Table 5.9 Trees and Shrubs Recommended for Wet Conditions.
Botanical Name Common Name Minimum
Planting Size
Acer negundo Boxelder 2”-2 ½” cal.
Acer rubrum Red Maple 3”-3 ½” cal.
Acer saccharinum Silver Maple 3”-3 ½” cal.
Alnus serrulata Smooth Alder 2”-2 ½” cal.
Amelanchier alleghiensis Allegheny Serviceberry 2 ½” -3” cal.
Amelanchier canadensis Shadblow (Downy Serviceberry) 2 ½” -3” cal.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §525
220
Botanical Name Common Name Minimum
Planting Size
Aronia arbutifolia Red Chokeberry 2'-3'
Aronia melanocarpa Black Chokeberry 2'-3'
Betula nigra River Birch 10'-12'
Betula populifolia Gray Birch 10’ – 12’
Celphalanthus occidentalis Buttonbush 2'-3'
Clethra alnifolia Summersweet 18”-24”
Cornus amomum Silky Dogwood 3'-4'
Cornus sericea Red Osier Dogwood 3'-4'
Fraxinus pennsyanicum Green Ash 3”-3 ½” cal.
Ilex glabra Inkberry Holly 18"-24"
Ilex verticillata Winterberry Holly 18"-24"
Itea virginica Virginia Sweetspire 12”-15”
Lindera benzoin Spicebush 18”-24”
Liquidambar styraciflora Sweetgum 3-3 ½” cal.
Magnolia virgineana Sweetbay magnolia 6'-8'
Nyssa sylvatica Black Gum 2”-2 ½” cal.
Platanus occidentalis Sycamore 3”-3 ½” cal.
Quercus bicolor Swamp White Oak 2 ½”-3” cal.
Quercus palustris Pin Oak 3”-3 ½” cal.
Rhododendron viscosum Swamp Azalea 18”-24”
Rosa palustris Swamp Rose 18”-24”
Salix discolor Pussy Willow 3'-4'
Salix babylonica Weeping Willow 3”-3 ½” cal.
Salix nigra Black Willow 2”-2 ½” cal.
Sambucus canadensis Elderberry 2'-3'
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §525
221
Botanical Name Common Name Minimum
Planting Size
Vaccinium corymbosium Highbush Blueberry 2'-3'
Viburnum dentatum Arrowwood Viburnum 2'-3'
H. Buffers. Landscaping buffers are areas required to minimize and visually screen any adverse
impacts or nuisances on a site or from any adjacent area.
1. General requirements.
a. Landscape buffers shall consist of a combination of deciduous trees,
conifers, shrubs, berms, and if appropriate, fences or walls in sufficient
quantities and sizes to perform their necessary screening function.
b. Buffers may be installed in required yard areas except for reverse frontage
buffers where they shall be in addition to the required yard area.
c. Buffers shall be continuous except for access drives as approved by the
Board. Storm water management facilities, parking, dumpster enclosures,
accessory building or above ground structures, and similar encroachments
shall not be permitted in the required buffer area.
d. The minimum width of a landscape buffer shall be dependent on the
proposed use of a property and the land uses adjacent to it in accordance
with Table 5.10.
2. Plant densities and structure requirements. The density of plantings and the
requirements for structures shall vary with the width of the buffer in accordance
with the following and Table 5.11:
a. Any buffer 15 feet or less in width shall incorporate a fence or wall into the
landscape design. The fence or wall shall be located on the side of the
buffer with the most intensive use.
b. Fences and walls may be used to reduce the required width of and number
of plants in the buffer in accordance with Table 5.12.
3. Existing vegetation may substitute for all or part of the required buffer plantings and
may be accepted in lieu of new plantings at the discretion of the Board.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §525
222
Table 5.10 Required Minimum Buffer Widths.
Proposed
Land Use
Adjacent Land Uses
Agriculture Residential
Type A (1)
Residential
Type B (2) Retail Professional
Office
Other
Office
Institutional/
Quasi-public Industrial
Agriculture None 100 ft. 100 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft.
Residential
Type A (1) 100 ft. None 25 ft. 40 ft. 25 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 100 ft.
Residential
Type B (2) 100 ft. 50 ft. None 25 ft. 25 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 100 ft.
Retail: NC-
1, NC-2 N/A 20 ft. 20 ft. None 15 ft. None None 25 ft.
Other Retail 50 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft. None 15 ft. 25 ft. None 25 ft.
Professional
Office 50 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 15 ft. None None None 25 ft.
Other Office 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. 25 ft. None None None 25 ft.
Institutional/
Quasi-public 50 ft. 50 ft. 50 ft. None None None None 25 ft.
Industrial 50 ft. 100 ft. 100 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. None
(1) - Residential Type A equals single family detached, duplex and semi-detached dwellings.
(2) - Residential Type B equals all other dwellings except those in institutional settings, i.e., residential health care facilities, skilled nursing facilities and assisted living
facilities. The Institutional category shall apply to these exceptions.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §525
223
Table 5.11 Minimum Plant Density for Buffers
Required
Buffer Width
Minimum Number of Required Plant Types per 100 Lineal Feet
Large or
Medium Trees
Small or
Ornamental
Trees
Evergreens and
Conifers Shrubs
15 feet (1) 3 4 9 20
20 feet 4 6 10 24
25 feet 5 8 15 30
40 feet 6 9 18 36
50 feet 8 12 24 48
100 feet (2) 10 15 30 60
(1) - Buffers of this width or less shall incorporate an opaque fence or wall.
(2) - 20 thorny understory, 38 thorny shrubs, 34 hedgerow shrubs and 6 large trees per 100 lineal feet may substitute for an
agricultural buffer.
Table 5.12 Allowable Reductions in Buffer Widths and Plant Densities
Required Buffer
Width
Reduced Buffer Width with
Fence (1) or Wall
Allowed Reduction in Number of
Plants Required in Table 5.10 with
Fence or Wall (2)
15 feet None None
20 feet 15 feet 20%
25 feet 20 feet 20%
40 feet 30 feet 25%
50 feet 40 feet 25%
100 feet 75 feet None
(1) - Fence or wall shall be opaque and sufficient to visually obstruct the view of persons at ground level.
(2) - Allowed reduction shall be evenly distributed over all required plant types.
4. Reverse Frontage Buffer for Residential Uses. Reverse frontage screening shall be
required where residential units or lots back onto any arterial or major collector
street. The following landscape treatments shall be provided in order to screen
private residential spaces from the roadway.
a. A landscape buffer of 25 feet in width shall be provided in accordance with
Table 5.10.
b. The preservation of existing trees in excess of 8 inches is encouraged.
Where existing understory screening does not block at least 60% of the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §525
224
view from the street, supplemental shade tolerant plantings of shrubs,
evergreen and ornamental trees shall be installed to complete screening of
residences. Sidewalks shall be designed to avoid mature plantings even if a
public access easement is necessary.
I. Cul-de-Sacs. Where a homeowner's or condominium association is established or intended
to be established for the maintenance of common open space or storm water management
basins, vegetated islands in the center of cul-de-sacs should be proposed that exhibit the
following criteria:
1. All plant material shall be designed for a mature height under 30 inches (2.5 feet) or
above 7 feet in order to allow for proper visibility.
2. All plants shall be tolerant of drought, salt and reflected heat from pavement.
3. Ground cover plantings shall be consistent with the degree of maintenance expected
for the cul-de-sacs and of sufficient density to entirely cover the ground surface.
J. Stormwater Facilities. Stormwater management areas including retention and detention
basins, drainage ditches and swales, and wetland areas shall be landscaped in accordance
with the standards in this subsection. The screening of outfall structures and emergency
spillways from public view is of particular importance in the landscape design. This may
involve integration of these areas as aesthetic landscape features, naturalized wetland areas,
or active and passive recreation areas, in addition to their stormwater management function.
Detention and retention basins should be located in cleared areas where reasonably feasible.
1. Stormwater detention facility landscaping.
a. Interior tree planting. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
(1) Basins designed as naturalized wetland areas shall be planted with
a quantity of trees equal to the number necessary to cover the entire
area of the interior of the basin to the emergency spillway elevation
at a rate of one tree per 400 square feet. Notwithstanding the
minimum planting size as otherwise required in this section, of this
number 10% shall be 2” –2.5” caliper, 20% shall be 1.5” to 2”
caliper, and 70% shall be 6-8’ height whips. The trees shall be
planted in groves and spaced 5 feet to 15 feet on-center.
(2) Basins designed to function as dry basins shall be planted with trees
in areas of the interior of the basin where there will not be
interference with the maintenance of the basin and low flow
channel, as determined by the Municipal Engineer.
b. The ground should be seeded with a wildflower or wet meadow grass mix
but in certain circumstances may require sod or hydroseeding to stabilize
the basin slopes.
c. All plants shall be tolerant of typical flood plain and wetland conditions.
See Table 5.8 for recommended wet conditions plants.
d. Planting other than wildflowers and grasses shall not be located within 10
feet of low flow channels to facilitate drainage.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §525
225
e. The perimeter area (slopes above the high water line) shall include shade
trees at a rate of 60/1000 lineal feet, evergreen trees at a rate of 30/1000
lineal feet and sufficient ornamental trees and shrubs to screen drainage
structures and create visual interest. Trees should be grouped in concert
with the grouping of trees in the interior of the basin
f. Where basins are required to be located in existing wooded areas because of
existing topological constraints, islands of existing vegetation should be
retained. If the existing vegetation is retained, the new plantings
requirement shall be correspondingly reduced.
g. Provisions for emergency access as well as general maintenance of the
basins shall be reviewed by the Board of Jurisdiction. Plantings shall be
designed to disguise yet not hinder vehicular access.
h. Plantings shall not be permitted upon any berm associated with a detention
basin unless approved by the Municipal Engineer.
2. Stormwater retention facility landscaping.
a. The planting of the perimeter of the water's edge shall accentuate views of
the water and to the extent feasible integrate pedestrian paths, sitting areas,
and other passive recreational uses. Plantings shall include formal or
informally-massed deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs to screen and
frame views with ornamental trees, shrubs and grasses used for visual
interest or special effects. A continuous landscape area shall be provided.
b. The water’s edge shall be easily maintained and shall be stabilized.
Methods of providing water edge stabilization may include rip-rap, stone
walls, natural plantings, decking and bulkheads.
c. If retention facilities are used as a recreational amenity, pedestrian access to
the water shall be controlled.
3. All basin structures shall be designed to blend into the landscape in terms of
construction materials, color, grading and planting.
K. Open Space Landscaping. (See also §529). Common or public open space provided as a part
of any cluster development shall be landscaped in one of the following ways, depending
upon the intent of the use for the open space.
1. Conservation use. Conservation areas are appropriate in areas adjacent to and
inclusive of natural features to be preserved, including wooded areas, water bodies,
streams wetlands, and steep slopes. The following conservation use design
guidelines shall apply:
a. Natural features shall be encompassed in open space areas rather than
moved or eliminated in the development process.
b. Cleared areas shall be revegetated to a naturalistic appearance where
appropriate.
c. Revegetated areas may be seeded with a wildflower and/or meadow grass
mix.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §525
226
2. Recreational Open Space. The following landscape standards shall apply for
recreational uses:
a. Grading and plantings of the recreation area shall remain consistent with the
overall landscape design. The landscape design shall consist of massed
deciduous and evergreen trees and berms to create spaces and views and
ornamental trees and shrub masses for visual variety, interest and detail.
b. In general, plants shall be provided at the following rates:
(1) Shade trees - 15 per acre
(2) Evergreen Trees - 5 per acre
(3) Flowering Shrubs - 3 per acre
(4) Shrubs - 20 per acre
These quantities are exclusive of plants that may be required for landscape
buffers pursuant to §525.H.
c. Adjacent dwelling units shall be buffered from active play areas in
accordance with §525.H.
d. In the area where a recreation facility fronts onto a public or private street,
fencing may be required to provide controlled access. The adjacent street
tree planting shall be continued along this area, and any reverse frontage
buffer planting shall be integrated with open space plantings.
L. Parking and Loading Area Landscaping. The objectives of the landscape architectural
treatment of all parking areas shall be to provide for safe and convenient movement of
vehicles, to limit pedestrian/vehicular conflicts, to limit paved areas, to provide for screening
from public right-of-way and buildings, to reduce the overall visual impact of parking lots,
and to provide shade and reduce heat island effects. All non-residential parking lots and
residential parking lots in excess of 5 spaces shall conform to the following requirements:
1. The minimum width of landscape islands shall be 8 feet on the side of parking
spaces and 10 feet between parking bays. If sidewalks are incorporated through the
long axis of the landscape islands, their width shall be added to these requirements.
Where the parking lot design will result in pedestrians cutting perpendicularly
through landscape islands, sidewalks shall be installed at regular intervals through
its short axis.
2. Landscape islands shall be planted with a combination of deciduous trees, evergreen
and deciduous shrubs, and ground cover at the rate of 6 large or medium trees, 4
small or ornamental trees and 60 shrubs per 100 lineal feet along the long axis of the
island. Trees required to be replaced from site clearing pursuant to §541 may be
placed in such landscape islands.
3. Parking and loading areas shall be screened by a combination of berms, hedges,
fences or walls. The minimum screening height at planting shall be 3 feet and shall
have a height of at least 4 feet within three years of installation. Loading dock areas
shall be screened with a minimum height of 8 feet at planting and shall achieve a
height of at least 12 feet five years after installation. Land use mitigation buffers
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §525
227
pursuant to §525.H may be used to meet these requirements.
4. Parking lot lighting should be sited within landscape islands, however, without
hindering necessary lighting coverage. See also §527 for lighting requirements.
5. No more than 20 parking spaces shall be placed in one row of parking without an
intervening landscape island except that within a regional shopping mall rows of
more than 20 parking spaces may meet the intent of this requirement by increasing
the size of landscaped islands at the end of parking bays and/or by other landscape
features which provide a comparable benefit to that of the landscaped islands which
would otherwise be required. [Ord. 1941-07, 9/4/07]
M. Historic District Landscaping. The objectives of landscape architectural treatment of sites
inclusive of historic resources and natural amenities shall be to preserve and enhance such
amenities for present and future Lawrence residents. Historic resources and natural
amenities may be areas of unique landscape character. This may include, but is not limited
to, bodies of water, streams, wetlands, wind breaks, groves of trees, hedge rows, orchards,
unique vistas, historic structures and landmarks. Redevelopment in the Lawrenceville
Historic District shall be designed to preserve and utilize cultural resources of the historic
landscape.
N. Site Protection and General Planting Requirements.
1. Topsoil preservation. Topsoil moved during the course of construction shall be
redistributed on all regraded surfaces so as to provide at least 4 inches of even cover
to all disturbed areas of the development and shall be stabilized by seeding or
planting.
2. Removal of debris. All stumps and other tree parts, litter, brush, weeds, excess or
scrap building materials, or other debris shall be removed from the site and disposed
of in accordance with New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection
regulations. No tree stumps, portions of tree trunks or limbs shall be buried
anywhere in the development. All dead or dying trees, standing or fallen, shall be
removed from the site. If trees and limbs are reduced to chips, they may, subject to
approval of the Municipal Engineer, be used as mulch in landscaped areas, provided
they have been properly composted.
3. Protection of existing plantings. Maximum effort should be made to save specimen
plants. No material or temporary soil deposits shall be placed within 4 feet of shrubs
or 10 feet of trees designated to be retained on the preliminary and/or final plat. See
Lawrence Township Engineering Standards for details on tree wells and tree
protection.
4. Slope plantings. Landscaping of the area of all cuts and fills and/or terraces shall be
sufficient to prevent erosion, and all roadway slopes steeper than 3:1 shall be planted
with ground covers appropriate for the purpose and soil conditions, water
availability, and environment.
5. Additional landscaping. In residential developments, besides the screening and
street trees required, additional plantings or landscaping elements shall be required
throughout the subdivision where necessary for climate control, privacy, or for
aesthetic reasons in accordance with a typical planting plan approved by the Board.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §525
228
Also see §541 for provisions pertaining to the minimum tree density requirements.
O. Planting Details. Planting details shall be as required in the Lawrence Township
Engineering Standards.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §526
229
§ 526 Land Use Restrictions and Easements.
Land use restrictions shall be required as applicable when a proposed development includes one or
more of the restrictions contained herein. Land use restrictions shall be recorded with the County
Recording Officer as deeds of easements or shall be placed on final plats for such recording, as
appropriate.
A. Drainage Easements. Within required drainage easements, no regrading or the installation of
structures, fences, trees and shrubs shall be permitted unless otherwise modified by §522.I.2.
[Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
B. Conservation Easements. Conservation easements for wetlands, wetlands transition buffer,
flood plain or flood plain buffer shall remain in their natural, undisturbed state within which
no regrading or clearing shall be permitted, excepting the removal of minor underbrush or
dead trees that are hazardous to people or buildings.
C. Clear Sight Easements. Areas designated as clear sight triangles shall remain free of visual
obstructions between 2½ and 10 feet in height with the exception of street and traffic control
signs, traffic control boxes, fire hydrants, lighting poles and field sited street trees as
approved by the Municipal Engineer.
D. Utility Easements. Easements for public and local utilities shall conform to any
requirements of the appropriate company or authority.
E. Cross-Access Easements. Cross-access easements shall permit pedestrians and motorists to
travel from adjacent lots to the lot in question without the necessity for traveling on the
public right-of-way provided that vehicular cross access is intended for convenience in
traveling between lots and not as a substitute for utilizing public streets during routine travel.
[Ord. 1941-07, 9/4/07]
F. Other Land Use Restrictions. Restrictions or easements of other governmental agencies with
jurisdiction of the application for development shall conform to any requirements of the
appropriate agency or authority.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §527
230
§ 527 Lighting.
A. General Requirements. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
1. Sufficient lighting shall be provided on each site or along roadways to ensure the
security of property and to protect the safety of persons between the hours of sunset
and sunrise when the establishment or facility is in use.
2. Lighting shall be so designed to avoid the creation of hazards to motorists and
pedestrians or nuisance to adjoining property owners or residents. Lighting directed
towards the sky shall be designed to prevent interference with commercial aviation
routes.
a. Security lighting design for commercial developments shall employ timers
on all or a portion of the site lighting that reduces the average illumination
to the minimum requirements of this Ordinance within one hour after close
of business or before midnight, whichever occurs earlier.
b. Safety lighting design shall employ motion sensors so that illumination
occurs only when someone is in the immediate area.
c. Display, advertising and specialty lighting, excluding interior illuminated or
backlit identification signage, shall be turned off at or before midnight.
3. Lighting levels, lamp color, and fixture type shall be consistent throughout the
parcel in question and shall complement building architecture and landscaping.
Lighting shall be designed to minimize energy and maintenance requirements and
shall comply with the U.S. Energy Policy Act of 1992 as it may be amended or
superseded.
4. Exterior lighting not building mounted shall be supplied by electricity from
underground cabling.
B. Street Lighting. All public and private streets shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure
traffic and pedestrian safety under all weather conditions.
1. Design criteria. The design of street lighting shall take into consideration:
a. The brightness of the abutting uses in comparison to pavement brightness as
seen by both motorists and pedestrians;
b. The ability to discern objects on the street or its edge in comparison to
abutting uses; its brightness contrast;
c. The time available to the motorist and pedestrian to view such objects;
d. The amount of direct glare from the luminaire or lamp and reflected glare
from the pavement.
2. Lighting standard placement. Excepting rural roads and lanes, lighting standards
shall be located at the following places:
a. At every street intersection.
b. At the end of each cul-de-sac.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §527
231
c. At curves with an inside radius of less than 300 feet, unless the standard is
within 300 feet of another.
d. A maximum of every 600 feet on straight road segments.
3. Light standards shall be staggered on both sides of the roadway.
4. Fixture type. In general, any street lamp type installed by the electric service
provider shall be permitted provided that the lamp is high pressure sodium and the
illumination provided is greater than or equal to the following:
a. A 100 watt lamp at each intersection and cul-de-sac; or, as directed by the
Municipal Engineer for special circumstances; and
b. A 50 watt lamp at all other locations.
5. Rural streets shall not be illuminated except as may be required by the Planning
Board for public safety purposes and is primarily expected at intersections with
arterial and collector roads.
C. Illumination for Surface Parking. Parking lots shall be adequately lighted for both motorists
and pedestrians in accordance with Table 5.13.
Table 5.13 Minimum Illumination for Surface Parking
Activity
Type
Vehicular
Traffic
Footcandles
Pedestrian
Safety
Footcandles
Pedestrian
Security
Footcandles
Low activity 0.5 0.2 0.8
Medium activity 1.0 0.6 2.0
High activity and
intersections 2.0 0.9 4.0
1. Lighting shall be provided by fixtures with a mounting height not more than 25 feet
or the height of the building, whichever is less, measured from the ground level to
the centerline of the light source.
2. Any other outdoor lighting such as building and sidewalk illumination, driveways
with no adjacent parking, the lighting of signs and ornamental lighting, shall be
shown on the lighting plan in sufficient detail to allow a determination of the effects
upon adjacent properties, traffic safety and overhead sky glow. The objectives of
these specifications are to minimize undesirable off-premises effects. No light shall
shine into building windows, or onto streets and driveways so as to interfere with or
distract driver vision. To achieve these requirements, the intensity of such light
sources, the light shielding and similar characteristics shall be subject to site plan
approval. Wall mounted fixtures are only permitted if directed into a site and not
positioned towards neighboring properties or public streets.
3. Maximum Lighting Controls. The ratio of average illumination, measured in
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §527
232
footcandles, to minimum illumination, as required in Table 5.13 shall not exceed 4
to 1. The maximum illumination provided on any site shall not exceed the minimum
illumination by more than a ratio of 10 to 1. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
Example: minimum illumination required = 0.5 fc
average to minimum ratio = (4 x 0.5) or 2.0 fc
maximum to minimum ratio = (10 x 0.5) or 5.0 fc
D. Pedestrian Way Illumination. Minimum pedestrian way illumination shall be as required in
Table 5.14.
Table 5.14 Pedestrian Way Illumination Requirements.
MINIMUM
AVERAGE LEVEL
AVERAGE LEVELS FOR SPECIAL
PEDESTRIAN SAFETY
Walkway
and Bikeway
Classifications Footcandles
Mounting
Heights
(9 to 15 feet)
Footcandles
Mounting
Heights
(15 to 25 feet)
Footcandles
Sidewalks (roadside) and Type A bikeways
Commercial areas 0.9 2.0 4.0
Intermediate
areas 0.6 1.0 2.0
Residential
areas 0.2 0.4 0.8
Sidewalks distant from roadways and Type B bikeways
Park, walkways
and bikeways 0.5 0.6 1.0
Pedestrian tunnels 4.0 5.0 -
Pedestrian
overpasses 0.3 0.4 -
Pedestrian
stairways 0.6 0.8 -
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §528
233
§ 528 Monumentation.
A. Major Subdivision. As part of a major subdivision, concrete monuments shall be installed at
all tract boundary corners and at all points of the right-of-way which establish a publicly
dedicated street. A metal alloy pin of permanent character shall be installed at all remaining
lot corners of all approved lots.
B. Minor Subdivision. As part of a minor subdivision, metal alloy pins of a permanent
character shall be installed at all lot corners of all approved lots.
C. Performance Bonding of Monuments. All monuments and/or pins that are not installed at
the time of subdivision approval shall be bonded in accordance with Article IX of this
Ordinance.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §529
234
§ 529 Open Space Standards.
A. Design Guidelines for Parks and Recreation Areas.
1. Consultation with the Township's Recreation Department early in the site plan and
subdivision design process is encouraged where active recreation is proposed or
required.
2. Proposed recreation areas should complement nearby existing facilities rather than
duplicating them.
3. Land proposed for field sports should have positive drainage and have a natural
grade of no more than 5%. The soil should not have a high clay content or be
excessively stony.
4. Extensions of existing parks and recreation areas into new development are highly
encouraged.
B. Design Objectives for Parks and Recreation Areas. The design of parks and recreation areas
shall achieve the following objectives:
1. Satisfy the needs of the users;
2. Achieve a balance and compatibility between active and passive recreational uses;
3. Provide visual appeal;
4. Observe appropriate relationships between the various elements of the park design;
5. Adapt the land to the features of the terrain rather than altering the land to suit the
use;
6. Provide for ease of supervision;
7. Design with regard for solar orientation and prevailing winds;
8. Incorporate the goals and objectives of the Master Plan with particular regard for the
Greenway Network;
9. Ensure protection of environmentally sensitive areas; and
10. Provide safety for users.
C. Area Requirements for Open Space. The minimum land area for inclusion in an open space
calculation shall be no less than 10,000 contiguous square feet. If the land is proposed for
public dedication, the land area shall be no less than one acre.
D. Frontage Requirements for Open Space. Unless a greater street frontage is required in the
applicable zoning district, no open space parcel shall have less than 100 feet of frontage upon
an approved public street.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §529
235
E. Minimum Width Requirements for Open Space. No open space lot shall be less than 50 feet
wide.
F. Design Guidelines for Greenways.
1. Development located near or encompassing a greenway as depicted on the
Conservation Map of the Master Plan shall provide an efficient pedestrian
connection to the greenway.
2. Consultation with the Lawrence Township Greenways Committee early in the site
plan and subdivision design process is encouraged.
3. Where there exists vacant developable land adjacent to proposed development,
pedestrian connections shall be made to permit future development to be connected
to the greenway.
4. The developer of a property containing a greenway shall incorporate the
construction of the path system in accordance with the overall greenway network.
Pedestrian walkways and bridges shall be provided as necessary to connect to open
space on adjacent tracts of land.
5. Greenways shall be used to connect other elements of the open space system of the
Township.
6. The design of greenway paths shall include a buffer zone separating the path from
residential, commercial, industrial and institutional buildings.
G. Greenway Clearing and Grubbing Limits. Land clearing for greenway paths shall conform
to Table 5.15 and the Lawrence Township Engineering Standards.
Table 5.15 Clearing Limits for Greenway Trails.
Trail Type
Clearing and
Grubbing Width
Selective Thinning
Width Clearing Height
6' hiking 10 feet 20 feet 7 feet
8' pedestrian 14 feet 24 feet 8 feet
8' bicycle 16 feet 26 feet 10 feet
10' bicycle/pedestrian 18 feet 28 feet 10 feet
6' horse 12 feet 22 feet 12 feet
10' horse/pedestrian 16 feet 26 feet 12 feet
H. Greenway Specifications. Greenway paths shall be constructed in accordance with the
Engineering Department's Standards dependent on their intended function. Natural surface
and shredded wood fiber shall be considered soft paths and all other surfaces shall be hard
paths. See Conservation Map of the Master Plan for locations of hard and soft greenway
trails. Trails for hiking and pedestrians may be developed with any of the permitted
greenway path types. Paths for bicyclists and those intended to be wheelchair accessible
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §529
236
should be limited to granular stone, asphalt, concrete, and wood decking. Horse trails should
be limited to natural and shredded wood fiber types.
I. Open Space Organization Requirements. An open space organization established for the
purpose of owning and maintaining common lands and facilities for open space shall be in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-43 and the following provisions:
1. Membership in any homeowner's or open space organization by all property owners
shall be mandatory and based upon a written covenant detailing the responsibility of
all members. Each member shall accept a pro rata share of the organization's costs
and the municipality shall be made a third party beneficiary to the covenant, with
authority to enforce its provisions. The terms and conditions shall be reviewed by
the municipal attorney prior to final approval.
2. Executed deeds shall be tendered to the municipality simultaneously with the
granting of final approval stating that the prescribed use(s) of the lands in the
common ownership shall be absolute and not subject to reversion for possible future
development.
3. The open space organization shall be responsible for liability insurance, municipal
taxes, maintenance of land and any facilities that may be erected on any land deeded
to the open space organization and shall hold the township harmless from any
liability.
4. Any assessment levied by the open space organization may become a lien on the
private properties in the development. The duly created open space organization
shall be allowed to adjust the assessment to meet changing needs and any deeded
lands may be sold, donated, or in any other way conveyed to the Township for
public purposes.
5. The open space organization initially created by the developer shall clearly describe
in its by-laws the rights and obligation of any homeowner and tenant in the planned
development, along with the covenant and model deeds and the article of
incorporation of the association prior to the granting of final approval by the
Township.
6. An applicant shall provide sufficient documentation to the Board of Jurisdiction that
the ownership of the open space shall pass to the homeowner's association when no
more than 75% of the units in the development have been sold. Such documentation
shall also ensure that the association shall own and control the common open space.
7. Should the proposed development consist of stages, the Board may require that
acreage proportionate in size to the stage being considered for final approval be set
aside simultaneously with the granting of final approval for that particular stage,
even though these lands may be located in a different section of the overall
development.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §530
237
§ 530 Parking, Loading Areas and Driveways.
A. Requirements. All sites within the Township shall be provided with adequate parking
facilities for residents, visitors, employees and customers, including but not limited to access
ways, driveways, drive aisles, internal parking lot collectors, loading areas, parking bays,
parking garages and pedestrian walkways sufficient to ensure the safe and efficient
movement of people, vehicles, and goods.
B. Parking Location. All required off-street parking and loading facilities shall be located on
the same lot or premises as the use served, excepting the Lawrenceville Historic District. No
parking facility shall be permitted as the principal use of a lot.
C. Off-Street Parking: Number of Spaces.
1. For residential developments, off-street parking shall be provided as required in
N.J.A.C. 5:21-1. (See also Table 5.2).
2. For nonresidential developments, the parking standards established in Table 5.16
shall apply.
Table 5.16 Parking Requirements for Non-Residential Uses.
[Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999; Ord. 1941-07, 9/4/07]
Parking Generator
Off-Street
Parking Spaces Required
Assembly Operations 1 per 800 sq. ft.
Assisted Living & Congregate Care Facilities 1 space for every three beds
Automobile Sales 10 spaces and 1 per employee
Bar 1 per 2 seats
Bowling Alley 4 per alley
Child (Day) Care Center 1 per 10 students, minimum 5 spaces
College or Prep School 1 per 3 students
Conference Center and Banquet Halls 10 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Convenience Store 6 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Golf Courses 4 per hole
Golf Driving Ranges 1 per tee
House of Worship 1 per 3 seats (each 21” of bench = 1 seat)
Financial Institutions 1 per 300 sq. ft. GFA
Fitness Clubs 5 per 1,000 sq. ft. GLA
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §530
238
Parking Generator
Off-Street
Parking Spaces Required
Funeral Home 1 per 150 sq. ft., minimum 35 spaces
Furniture or Carpet Store 1 per 600 sq. ft. GLA
Garden Centers 6 per 1,000 sq. ft. GLA
Home Occupations 1 per employee
Home Professions 1 per employee and 3 for visitors
Hospital 2 per bed
Hotel/Motel 1.1 per guest room
Industrial 1 per 800 sq. ft. GFA
Library 1 per 400 sq. ft. GFA
Medical Center, Outpatient 1 per 800 sq. ft. GFA
Medical or Dental Offices 5 per 1,000 sq. ft.
Nightclub/Tavern 1 per 3 seats
Nursing Home 1 per every 2 beds
Offices:
Under 49,999 sq. ft. GFA
50,000-99,000 sq. ft. GFA
100,000+ sq. ft. GFA
4.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
4 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
3.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Regional Shopping Mall 4.3/4.5 parking spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. GLA4
Research and Scientific Complexes 1 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Restaurant
Fast Food Establishments
1 per 3 seats
1 per 30 sq. ft. GFA
Roller or ice rink 5 per 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Retail Store, in group of 3 or less 1 per 200 sq. ft. GFA
Schools:
Elementary
Intermediate
Secondary
2 per classroom; but not less than 1 per
teacher and staff
1.5 per classroom; but not less than 1 per
teacher and staff
2.5 per classroom; but not less than 1 per
teacher and staff
Self Storage Facility
(Ord. 1728-02, 12/16/2002)
8 spaces or 1 per building, whichever is
greater, plus 1 space for any caretaker
apartment
Service Station 4 per bay and work area
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §530
239
Parking Generator
Off-Street
Parking Spaces Required
Shopping Center:
Under 400,000 sq. ft. GLA
400,000 – 599,999 sq. ft. GLA
600,000+ sq. ft. GLA
4 per 1,000 sq. ft. GLA
4.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. GLA
5 per 1,000 sq. ft. GLA
Theater
In Shopping Center
1 per 3 seats
1 per 4 seats
Warehousing and Shipping/Receiving 1 per 5,000 sq. ft. GFA
(1) GFA shall mean Gross Floor Area.
(2) GLA shall mean Gross Leasable Area.
(3) Additionally, uses that utilize drive-thru facilities shall provide room for at least 12 automobiles per drive-in window
for queuing purposes.
(4) See §530.Q for details on parking standards for a Regional Shopping Mall
3. Where a permitted use of land includes more than one category of parking
generation, the parking requirement shall be the sum of the individual uses
calculated separately.
4. Alternative off-street parking generator standards may be accepted by the Board if
an applicant demonstrates that other standards better reflect local conditions.
5. Electric vehicle parking [Ord. 2351-19, 12/17/19]. The number of required electric
vehicle (EV) parking spaces for industrial, commercial, institutional (excepting
religious uses), multi-family and townhouse residential uses shall be as follows:
Required minimum number
of parking spaces
Required number
of EV parking spaces
0-49 0
50 to 99 1
100+ 2, plus 1 for each additional 100 stalls
6. Shared parking. Where an applicant persuasively demonstrates that two or more
parking generators have complementary parking demand peaks, the approving
authority may permit up to a 50% reduction in the required total number of parking
spaces.
D. Parking Space Size. The following parking space sizes shall apply to all parking areas:
1. Residential uses: 9' x 18'
2. Office and industrial uses: 9' x 18'
3. Government and institutional uses: 9' x 18'
4. Retail uses.
a. Uses utilizing shopping carts: 9.5' x 18'
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §530
240
b. Other retail uses: 9' x 18'
5. Handicapped.
a. Van accessible spaces: 9' x 18'
b. Other spaces: 13' x 18'
6. Van accessible spaces shall be striped with an 8' wide loading area. Other
handicapped spaces with a 5' wide loading area. Paired handicapped spaces may
share a loading area.
7. Parallel spaces: 9' x 23'
8. Bus spaces: 10' x 40'
9. Tractor-trailer: 12' x 60'
10. Parking lots for office, governmental and institutional uses with over 300 cars shall
be permitted compact spaces measuring 8 feet by 16 feet provided the number does
not exceed 30% of the total number of required spaces.
E. Driveway Setback. Residential driveways shall be set back 5 feet from the side or rear
property line. This requirement, however, shall not prevent access from an alley.
F. Parking Lot Setback. Parking lots shall be set back from all lot lines a minimum of 25 feet
unless a larger setback is required, excepting the NC-1, NC-2 and RC districts. Parking shall
not be permitted in the front yard in the NC-1, NC-2, and PO districts. Parking shall not be
permitted to be located in any required landscaping buffer. In the RC district internal lot lines
of lots comprising a regional shopping mall development tract shall not be constructed to
require application of parking setbacks. Setbacks shall be required from any public streets
and from private internal collector access roads that serve a parking lot. Setback
measurements shall be from the right-of-way of a public street and from the curbline of a
private street to the nearest parking space. Where parking areas of the regional shopping
mall abut parking areas on contiguous property the required setback from the common lot
line shall be 10 feet. [Ord. 1941-07, 9/4/07]
G. Parking Lot Interconnection. Parking areas for individual non-residential uses shall be
designed to be interconnected with adjacent properties and shall utilize common entrance(s)
and exit(s) where feasible, to minimize access points to the street. Such interconnection shall
be established through an appropriate cross-access easement either unilaterally established
by one party or by mutual agreement. The cross-access easement shall be approved by the
Board of Jurisdiction.
H. Reserve Parking. Where the total number of off-street parking spaces required may not be
immediately required for a particular use, a staged development plan may be permitted
which requires that only a portion of the parking area, but not less than 65% of the required
spaces be completed initially, subject to the following regulations:
1. The site plan shall clearly indicate both the portion of the parking area to be initially
paved and the total parking area to be eventually paved and the total parking needed
to provide the number of spaces required.
2. The portion of the parking area not to be paved initially shall be landscaped in
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §530
241
accordance with §525.
3. Prior to construction of any future banked parking area, a bond shall be posted and a
soil disturbance permit obtained. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
4. Construction shall be in accordance with the terms of the Board approval.
[Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
5. Any change of use on a site for which the Board of Jurisdiction may have approved
a partial paving of off-street parking areas to a use which requires more parking
spaces than are provided on the site shall require submission of a new site plan.
6. The drainage system for the site shall be designed to accommodate the surface water
run-off from all parking and drainage areas, considering all such areas to be paved,
whether proposed to be paved as part of the application approval or deferred to a
possible future date.
7. The applicant shall agree in writing on the submitted plan to pave any or all of the
non-paved parking areas should the paved parking areas prove to be inadequate to
accommodate the onsite parking needs of the premises.
I. Parking Area Design.
1. Walking distance. Off-street parking areas shall be oriented to and within a
reasonable walking distance of the building(s) they are designated to serve as
follows:
User Maximum Distance
Handicapped 100 ft.
Elderly Residents 150 ft.
Other Residents 250 ft.
Guests and Visitors 400 ft.
Shoppers 600 ft.
Employees 1,000 ft.
2. Access drive length. Access drives connecting parking lots to streets shall be
designed to avoid direct access to parking or intersection with internal parking lot
collectors. The minimum length of the access drive shall be based on the total
number of parking spaces to which the drive provides access, as follows:
Total Number of Minimum
Parking Spaces Length of Drive
39 or less 25 feet
40 to 99 50 feet
100 to 249 75 feet
250 or greater 100 feet
3. Parking space access. Direct access to an off-street parking space from a public or
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §530
242
private street, or an internal collector drive is prohibited.
4. Internal collector drives. Parking lots in excess of 250 spaces shall be designed with
internal collector drives to collect and distribute vehicles from access drives to
parking aisles. The intersection of parking aisles with internal collector drives
should be at 90º and in no case shall be less than 75º.
5. Shopping cart collection. Commercial uses which utilize shopping carts, hand
trucks, or other means of handling goods by customers shall provide areas for the
collection of such carts. Collection points should be more heavily distributed in the
one-third of parking closest to the building. One such collection point shall be
required for each four rows of parking. Collection points shall have a minimum
capacity for 20 carts. Collection points shall be signed with an incidental sign (see
§535).
6. Vehicle overhang. Where sidewalks occur in parking areas, parked vehicles shall
not overhang or extend over the sidewalk unless an additional 2 feet in width is
provided in order to accommodate such overhang.
7. Tree retention. Parking facilities shall be designed to minimize the removal of any
tree 8 inches in caliper or larger.
8. Markings and signage. All off-street parking lots shall have adequate pavement
markings and signage (see §535 Signs) to indicate traffic flow and parking spaces.
J. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be required pursuant to §525.L.
K. Off-Street Loading.
1. Off-street loading shall be required for every retail, industrial, institutional and
governmental use for the loading and unloading of material or merchandise. Office
uses in excess of 20,000 gross square feet in either a single building or in a
combination of buildings as part of an office park shall also be required to provide
off-street loading. Off-street loading shall be as required:
a. Retail uses of 5,000 sf. or less shall provide one loading space 12' x 35'.
Retail uses singularly or in combination shall provide one loading space 15'
x 60' for each 25,000 sf. up to 100,000 sf., plus one space for each
additional 100,000 sf. up to 500,000 sf., plus one additional space for each
250,000 sf. thereafter.
b. Industrial uses shall provide one loading space 15' x 60' for each 20,000 sf.
or part thereof.
c. Institutional uses shall provide one loading space 15' x 60' for each 50,000
sf. or part thereof.
d. Governmental uses shall provide one loading space 12' x 35' for each
100,000 sf. or part thereof.
e. Office uses greater than 20,000 sf. shall provide one loading space 12' x 35'
for each 50,000 square feet or part thereof.
2. Additional loading spaces may be necessary and required dependent upon the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §530
243
specific activity.
L. Solid Waste Disposal Standards . See §538, Solid Waste.
M. Lighting. Lighting used to illuminate off-street parking areas shall be arranged to reflect the
light away from residential premises and public streets and shall be in accordance with §527.
N. Paving and Curbing. [Ord. 1873-06, 2/7/2006]
1. All parking and loading areas and access drives shall be paved with a durable
dustless surface as provided below except that the Board, at the request of the
applicant and in consideration of the specific parking needs of the applicant, may
permit a reduction in the paved area devoted to parking provided:
a. The submitted plan shall include all the parking spaces required by this
Ordinance and shall include those spaces to be paved and those requested
not to be paved; and
b. All parking areas not to be paved shall be suitably landscaped and such
landscaping shall be indicated on the submitted plan and shall be in addition
to landscaping otherwise required.
c. The design of all drainage for parking facilities shall address water quality,
flooding and groundwater recharge and shall incorporate the use of nonstructural
stormwater strategies to the maximum extent practical. All
parking and loading areas shall be designed to minimize impervious
surfaces by use of permeable materials where appropriate.
2. All paved parking and loading areas and access drives shall be curbed as required in
§539.H unless otherwise consented to by the Municipal Engineer and approved by
the Board as part of the development application approval. All parking areas,
regardless of size and location, shall be suitably drained and maintained (see §522).
a. Areas of ingress or egress, loading and unloading areas, major interior
driveways or access aisles and other areas likely to experience heavy traffic
shall be prepared with 4 inches of soil aggregate I-5 and paved with not less
than 4 inches of compacted base course of plant mixed bituminous
stabilized base course, Mix I-2, constructed in layers of not more than 2
inches compacted thickness and prepared and constructed in accordance
with Sections 208, 209, and 304 of New Jersey Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction
(1989) and amendments thereto. A minimum of 2-inch-thick compacted
wearing surface of bituminous concrete (FABC Mix I-5) shall be
constructed thereon in accordance with Section 404, of the aforesaid
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
b. Parking stall areas and other areas likely to experience similar light traffic
shall be prepared with 4 inches of soil aggregate I-5 and shall be paved with
not less than 3 inches of compacted base course of plant mixed bituminous
stabilized base course, Mix I-2, prepared and constructed in accordance
with Section 304, Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction. A minimum of a 2-inch-thick compacted wearing surface of
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §530
244
bituminous concrete (FABC Mix I-5) shall be constructed thereon in
accordance with Section 404.
c. Where the subgrade conditions of proposed parking and loading are wet,
contain unacceptable levels of organic matter or of such a nature that
surfacing would be inadvisable without first treating the subgrade, the
treatment of the subgrade shall be made in the following manner: The areas
shall be excavated to a suitable depth below the proposed finished grade and
filled with suitable subgrade material as determined by the Municipal
Engineer.
Where required by the Municipal Engineer, a system of underdrains, or an
alternate solution approved by the Municipal Engineer, shall be constructed
beneath the surface of the parking area and connected to a suitable drain.
After the sub-base material has been properly placed and compacted, and
proof rolled with a 10 ton, three-wheel steel roller, the parking area
surfacing material, as described heretofore, shall be spread thereon. All
work shall be in accordance with Sections 208 and 209 of the Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction.
d. All parking areas shall have a minimum slope of 1.5% over land and 0.75%
in a curbed gutter line.
e. All driveways shall have a minimum slope of 1.5% pitched towards the
roadway. A maximum slope of 10% is permitted provided that a leveling
area with a maximum slope of 4% is located for the first 20 feet at the
roadway and at the garage.
f. A paved or concrete driveway apron of sufficient strength for its intended
function shall be required.
O. Access Drive Intersections with Streets. Access points from any one lot crossing the street
line shall be limited to a maximum of two along the frontage of any single street. The
centerlines of any separate access points shall be spaced at least 65 feet apart, shall handle no
more than 2 directions of traffic; shall be at least 20 feet from any side or rear property lines;
and shall be set back from the street line of any intersecting street at least 50 feet or one-half
the lot frontage, whichever is greater, except that in no case need the setback distance exceed
200 feet. Continuous open residential driveways in excess of 22 feet at the street line shall
be prohibited. Two-way access drives for non-residential and multi-family uses shall not
exceed 12 feet per lane. Access driveways in excess of 36 feet shall be separated by a
median island at its intersection with a public street. Such a median shall be a minimum of 8
feet wide and 25 feet long. Median islands shall be landscaped in accordance with §525 and
may be used for the location of freestanding signs pursuant to §535. One-way access drives
shall be a minimum of 15 feet wide and shall not exceed 18 feet in width. In all instances,
due consideration to the proposed width, curbing, direction of traffic flow, radii of curves
and method of dividing traffic lanes shall be given. Curbing shall be depressed at the
driveway and the curbing shall be rounded at the corners.
P. Location of Parking and Loading.
1. Parking spaces may be on, above or below the surface of the ground. When parking
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §530
245
spaces are provided within a garage or other structure, said structure shall adhere to
the proper accessory or principal building setback, in accordance with Article IV.
2. The provision of parking spaces shall also include adequate driveway and necessary
turning areas for handling the vehicles for which provision is made. Parking areas
shall be designed to permit each motor vehicle to proceed to and from the parking
space provided for it without requiring the moving of any other motor vehicles,
however, this provision shall not prevent the use of stacked parking spaces for new
and used car inventory. Aisles providing access to parking areas shall have the
following minimum dimensions in Table 5.17.
Table 5.17 Minimum Parking Aisle Widths.
Angle of
Parking Space (1)
One-Way Aisle
(in feet)
Two-Way Aisle
(in feet)
90° 22 24
70° 20 22
45° 15 20
30° 12 18
Parallel 12 18
(1) - Where the angle of the parking spaces differs sharing a common aisle, the larger aisle width shall prevail.
3. Each occupied single-family residential property may have outside parking or
storage upon it for two recreational vehicles or trailers, in safe and effective
operating condition. All recreational equipment shall display thereon a current State
license and/or registration.
4. Any trailer, boat or boat trailer shall be parked in the side or rear yard area of any lot
and shall meet the applicable zoning district regulations governing setbacks of
accessory buildings.
5. To obscure from view to the maximum extent possible, any trailer, boat or boat
trailer parked or stored in a side or rear yard area and not in an enclosed building
shall be screened by evergreen plantings at least 6 feet in height, spaced 3 feet apart,
or as necessary to form a 100% visually impervious buffer.
6. At no time shall any recreational equipment parked or stored on any lot be used for
living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes.
7. No commercial vehicles in excess of 10,000 lb. gross vehicle weight may be stored
in a residential zone. See §429.K for additional requirements.
Q. Parking Management Plan – Regional Commercial District. In the event of a proposed
redevelopment and/or expansion of a Regional Shopping Mall by 100,000 square feet or
more of Gross Leasable Area (GLA), one of the following two alternative parking standards
shall apply [Ord.1941-07, 9/4/07]:
1. Alternative 1: 4.5 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of GLA;
2. Alternative 2: 4.3 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of GLA along with the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §530
246
preparation and implementation of a Parking Management Plan.
3. The selection of Alternative 1 or 2 shall be at the applicant’s discretion. Under
Alternative 1 no Parking Management Plan is required. Under Alternative 2 the
Applicant is required to submit – as part of an application for Preliminary Site Plan
approval for a project under this section – a Parking Management Plan which will
set forth the Applicant’s plan to monitor parking utilization during the peak
utilization period between Thanksgiving and Christmas after substantial completion
of construction and determine whether the supply of parking is adequate for the 20th
highest peak demand hour during the year. Parking demand shall be monitored and
evaluated utilizing the following protocol (or a substitute protocol approved by the
Planning Board):
a. Conduct a base parking count at the Mall to determine the total number of
vehicles parked at specific times (10:00 AM on Friday and Saturday; 12
noon on Sunday);
b. Conduct manual traffic counts at 15-minute intervals from 10:00 AM to
6:00 PM on the Friday after Thanksgiving and the two Saturdays before
Christmas and from 12 noon to 6:00 PM on any Sunday between
Thanksgiving and Christmas at each Mall Driveway to capture the total
amount of entering and exiting vehicles.
c. Based upon the difference in entering and exiting volumes in each 15-
minute interval, onsite parking accumulation will be determined (see
example table below).
Parking Accumulation Survey
Time Period Enter Exit Difference Parking Demand
Base Parking Count
(10:00 AM) - - - 400 spaces
10:00 AM – 10:15 AM 150 100 +50 450 spaces
10:15 AM – 10:30 AM 175 110 +65 515 spaces
10:30 AM – 10:45 AM 225 115 +110 625 spaces
4. Utilizing the observed peak parking demand, determine a peak parking demand
index based upon the occupied GLA square footage of the Regional Shopping Mall
at the time of the survey.
5. Adjust the observed peak parking demand index to reflect the design condition (20th
highest demand hour).
6. Prepare a report for submission to Lawrence Township summarizing the findings of
the parking study. If the findings of the study indicate the 4.30 parking ratio is not
sufficient, then the Parking Management Plan shall identify how the parking
shortfall will be addressed. The Parking Management Plan shall include at least the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §530
247
following three levels of response to a finding of insufficiency of parking:
a. Prepare and implement a plan in which employees of the Regional
Shopping Mall park in designated areas which are furthest from the Mall
entrances, thus maximizing the number of conveniently located parking
spaces which are available to customers;
b. Prepare and implement a plan in which employees of the Mall businesses
park at an off-site location(s), particularly during the busiest shopping
periods (on Saturdays and Sundays between Thanksgiving and Christmas);
and
c. Prepare and implement a plan for expanding the parking supply on-site by
building additional parking (either surface lots or structured parking)
sufficient to bring the parking ratio to 4.5 parking spaces per 1,000 square
feet of GLA. The location and organization of the supplemental structured
parking shall be designated on the Preliminary and Final Site Plans for the
Mall redevelopment/expansion project.
The Parking Management Plan shall set forth the timeframe for testing the results of
the responses to a finding of insufficiency and identify the point at which the
supplemental parking will be constructed,
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §531
248
§ 531 Residential Building Design Standards.
A. Apartments. The following standards shall be used in the design of apartment buildings:
1. Apartment buildings should include at least three different bedroom types in at least
two sizes each unless solely for senior citizen use.
2. Apartment buildings shall not exceed 240 lineal feet through the long axis of the
building. Longer buildings shall introduce at least a 135° angle at the intersection of
the axes between different segments of the building.
3. The minimum size for each apartment shall be 500 square feet.
4. Each unit above the ground floor shall have a balcony or terrace of at least 60 square
feet in area.
5. A minimum of 150 square feet of storage shall be provided for each unit, including
interior and exterior storage for garbage and recyclables in the front of the unit, and
bicycles, garden equipment, and other common household items in an appropriate
location.
6. Access to units shall be designed as to provide a sense of safety and security for the
residents, particularly in internal stairwells.
7. Double loaded, rectangular, slab-configured structures are expressly prohibited.
8. Access to any unit should not require a vertical assent of over two stories.
9. All stairs shall be enclosed in the building.
10. The exterior of the building shall be designed to visually break up any facade in
excess of 50 lineal feet. A minimum of a 4 foot deep offset shall be provided in
each 100 lineal feet of facade length. The design should distinguish between the
base, middle, and top of the building.
11. Where an outdoor living space is required, adequate visual screening from all other
neighboring dwelling units, outdoor living spaces, parking areas and roadways shall
be provided. Screening may be accomplished with plant materials, masonry
structures or wood fencing a minimum of 4 feet in height. Architectural elements,
such as masonry walls and fences, shall be compatible in both style and materials
with the dwelling unit.
12. All utility meters or boxes, air compressors, heat pumps, or other exterior equipment
shall be located at the side or rear of buildings and shall be screened by architectural
elements or landscape plantings.
B. Single Family Detached Residential Building Appearance.
1. Within any single-family detached residential district, no building with a permitted
home occupation shall be constructed or altered so as to be inharmonious with the
residential character of the adjacent residential areas.
2. The design of infill residential development shall be compatible with the appearance
of houses within the neighborhood context with regard to such design elements as
orientation, scale, size, massing, style, fenestration, garage and roof design, and
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §531
249
exterior materials and color. Houses which are substantially incompatible in design
with neighboring houses shall be prohibited unless physically separated and
adequately screened from such pre-existing houses. [Ord. 1920-07; 3/6/07]
3. Uniformity in the exterior design and appearance of dwellings erected in the same
residential neighborhood may adversely affect the desirability of the immediate and
neighboring areas for residential purposes and impair existing residential property in
such areas, and may tend to impair the value of both improved and unimproved real
property in such areas. It is the purpose of this subsection to prevent these and other
harmful effects of uniformity in design and appearance of dwellings erected in any
housing development in the same residential neighborhood and thus promote and
protect the general welfare of the community.
4. Not more than one construction permit shall be issued for any particular singlefamily
detached dwelling unit design in any housing development consisting of 2 or
more detached dwellings when the houses are substantially alike in exterior design
and appearance unless such similar houses either are separated by a distance of at
least 300 feet or are situated on individual lots which are themselves separated at all
points by a distance of at least 150 feet, whichever distance will provide the least
separation between houses. For the purposes of this section, a “housing
development” shall consist of the construction of 2 or more detached dwelling units
either by a single developer/builder or by 2 or more developers/builders. [Ord. 1920-
07; 3/6/07]
5. Houses within such specified distance from each other shall be considered uniform
in exterior design and appearance if they have any one of the following
characteristics:
a. The same basic dimensions and floor plans are used without substantial
differentiation of one or more exterior elevations.
b. The height and design of the roofs are without substantial change in design
and appearance.
c. The size and type of windows and doors in the front elevation are without
substantial differentiation.
6. In addition, there shall be not less than 2 separate basic house designs in every
housing development consisting of 8 or less houses; not less than 3 basic house
designs in every housing development consisting of 15 or less houses; not less than
5 basic house designs in every housing development consisting of 50 or less houses;
not less than 6 basic house designs in every housing development consisting of from
50 to 77 houses; and not less than 8 basic house designs in every housing
development consisting of 78 or more houses.
7. To insure conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance, no construction permit
shall hereafter be issued for more than one dwelling in any housing development
until the builder shall post or cause to be posted on each specific lot on the map of
the subdivision on file with the construction official, the type and model of each
house for which a construction permit has been or is being issued.
C. Townhouses. The following standards shall be used in the design of townhouse buildings:
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §531
250
1. The front facades of at least 40% of the number of units in a structure shall be set
back not less than 4 feet behind the facades of the remaining units in such structure.
2. The roof lines of at least 30% of the number of units, which are attached in a
structure shall be staggered in height by not less than 5% of the height of the roof
lines of the remaining units in such structure. The roof line should be discontinuous
through the combination of two- and three-story townhouses and two-story flats.
Chimneys, skylights, dormers, and other roof structures are encouraged to vary the
elevation and provide additional light into upper story units.
3. Where an outdoor living space is included for a unit, it shall be provided with
adequate visual screening from all other neighboring dwelling units, outdoor living
spaces, parking areas and roadways. Screening may be accomplished with plant
materials, masonry structures or wood fencing a minimum of 4 feet in height.
Architectural elements, such as masonry walls and fences, shall be compatible in
both style and materials with the dwelling unit.
D. Planned Developments. The following performance and design standards shall be used in
the creation of planned developments (excepting residential clusters):
1. The planned development shall be developed by a single entity and shall include all
contiguous or non-contiguous lands of the developer. The planned development
shall integrate all lands, buildings and related community facilities, infrastructure,
roads, transportation and open space in an architecturally complete package.
2. A comprehensive urban design concept plan shall be prepared for the entire planned
development before any plan is prepared for any section. This urban design plan
shall include the location of streets, utilities, services, building sites, described in site
plans, floor plans, building elevations, site sections, and other graphic
representations, including perspectives, models, etc., deemed necessary to show the
relationship of buildings, open spaces, streetscapes and parks, as intended to be
located, constructed, used and related to each other.
3. A comprehensive urban design plan for the planned development shall be developed
to include proposed materials, colors, streetscape elements, textures, facade
modulation, roof lines, landscaping, and lighting.
4. Generally, grid and modified grid street patterns that create civic plazas or parks as
the focal points of streets shall be favored over curvilinear patterns.
5. The development for a portion of the planned development must relate functionally
and aesthetically to the urban design plan for the entire development and contain
sufficient information to show the relationship of buildings, open spaces,
streetscapes and parks, as intended to be located, constructed, and used compared to
the approved urban design plan.
6. A program shall be provided for open space, parks, and community facilities
including operation and maintenance of such areas, facilities and improvements as
will be for common use by some or all of the occupants of or visitors to the district
but will not be provided, operated or maintained at general public expense, except as
may be deemed appropriate by the approving agency and accepted by the governing
body.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §531
251
7. Planned developments shall be approved only where an applicant agrees to provide
its pro rata share of the cost of either private facilities, utilities, and/or services
required by the increase in population and/or related community service
requirements by any appropriate public agencies having jurisdiction, or any such
facilities, utilities and/or services that are not available from the Township, that
otherwise would service the particular development, pursuant to §911.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §532
252
§ 532 Sanitary Sewers for Non-Residential Uses.
A. General Requirements.
1. All installations shall be properly connected with an approved and functioning
sanitary sewer system prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
2. Dry line system. A dry line system for the collection of sanitary sewage shall be
provided in all major subdivisions which are in the adopted wastewater management
area of the Utilities Plan of the Master Plan and are permitted only where there may
be a temporary sewer moratorium. The subdivider shall convey to the Ewing-
Lawrence Sewerage Authority (ELSA) either such title to or easements across the
lands shown on the final plat as dedicated to ELSA for these purposes which are
deemed by the approving authority to be necessary for the operation and
maintenance of either the dry line system or the complete collection, treatment and
disposal line system or the complete collection, treatment and disposal system. The
written instruments effectuating such conveyance or conveyances shall be delivered
to the executive director of ELSA at the time of final approval and will be accepted
by ELSA at such time as the improvements to be constructed thereon are accepted.
3. If a public system is not in place or cannot be extended, the developer may provide
individual subsurface or community disposal systems subject to applicable Board of
Health and New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection regulations.
B. System Design and Placement.
1. The design, construction, installation, modification, and operation of any treatment
works shall be in accordance with the applicable NJDEP regulations implementing
the New Jersey Water Pollution Control Act (N.J.S.A. 58:10A-1 et seq.) and the
New Jersey Water Quality Planning Act (N.J.S.A. 58:11A-1 et seq.), as implemented
by ELSA.
2. System design and placement shall comply with the specifications required by the
Ewing-Lawrence Sewerage Authority (ELSA). Trench restoration shall conform to
the Lawrence Township Engineering Standards.
3. In keeping with the terms of the contract creating ELSA, no extension of the
sewerage facilities originating only within the territory of the municipality may be
constructed by ELSA unless the governing body has given its written consent to
such extension.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §533
253
§ 533 Sidewalks and Bikeways for Non-Residential Uses.
A. Sidewalks. The following section provides standards for sidewalk placement and minimum
sidewalk widths. The Board of Jurisdiction may require wider sidewalk widths where
anticipated pedestrian traffic volumes would necessitate additional capacity. Calculations of
required sidewalk widths that differ from the standards as set forth herein shall be made
using the Highway Capacity Manual, latest edition, published by the Transportation
Research Board.
1. Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the street for all collector, secondary
arterial and arterial roads in non-residential development.
2. In general, sidewalks shall be placed in the right-of-way, parallel to the street unless
an exception has been permitted to preserve topographical or natural features, or to
provide visual interest, or unless the applicant shows that an alternative pedestrian
system provides equally safe and convenient circulation. Sidewalks may be placed
in a public access easement adjoining the right-of-way in order to provide sufficient
room for various functions within the right-of-way, as follows:
a. In commercial areas, the sidewalk area may abut the curb incorporating
additional width for street furniture such as bus stops and shelters, planters,
signage, benches, street tree planting holes and grates, newspaper vending
machines, traffic control devices, light poles and similar obstacles; however,
a continuous clear pedestrian passageway of 7.5 feet in width a minimum
distance of 5 feet from the curbline shall be maintained.
b. In addition to required sidewalks along streets, commercial developments
shall provide internal sidewalks creating convenient linkages between the
commercial development and all surrounding streets, including residential
streets. Internal sidewalks shall be provided linking such commercial
development to adjoining non-residential developments. Cross-access
easements pursuant to §526 shall be provided for such pedestrian linkages.
3. In planned commercial or industrial developments, sidewalks may be located away
from the road system to link the street, buildings within a complex, and on-site
activities such as parking and recreational areas.
4. The following sidewalk widths for office, governmental, educational and health care
uses shall be required:
a. Along non-residential streets
separated from the curb by at least 5 feet: 4 feet
b. Along non-residential streets adjacent to the curb: 6 feet
c. Between a main entrance and its closest parking: 8 feet
d. Where vehicles overhang the sidewalk: 6 feet
e. Within parking areas: 4 feet
f. Between buildings: 6 feet
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §533
254
5. The following sidewalk widths for retail development shall be required:
a. Along non-residential streets separated from the curb by
at least 5 feet: 8 feet
b. Along non-residential streets adjacent to the curb: 12 feet
c. Between a main entrance and its closest parking: 12 feet
d. Where vehicles overhang the sidewalk: 6 feet
e. Within parking areas: 4 feet
f. Between buildings: 6 feet
6. Handicapped passage. Sidewalks and walkways less than 6 feet in width shall
provide widened areas at least every 200 lineal feet sufficient to permit the passage
of two wheelchairs in opposite directions. The widened area shall be at least 6 feet
wide. In general, this requirement may be met through the intersection of
driveway’s paved surfaces with sidewalks.
7. Sidewalks and graded areas shall be constructed according to the Engineering
Department Standard Details established by the municipality and shall comply with
the design criteria of the American with Disabilities Act and New Jersey Department
of Transportation. Permeable paving materials shall be used where appropriate and
stormwater management and related drainage controls shall comply with §522. [Ord.
1873-06, 2/7/2006]
8. All sidewalk and drive apron construction shall be in accordance with New Jersey
Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction (1989) and amendments thereto.
9. The concrete to be used for sidewalks and drive aprons shall be Class “B” 4,000
p.s.i. air entrained. The sidewalks and drive aprons may require a crushed stone
foundation for unusual loads or soil conditions if directed by the Municipal
Engineer. The following minimum thickness shall apply:
a. Sidewalks shall be a minimum thickness of 4 inches.
b. Drive aprons and sidewalks at drive aprons shall have a minimum thickness
of 6 inches and they shall have welded wire fabric reinforcement mat not
less than #6 x #6 on a 6 inch by 6 inch grid pattern.
10. Premolded bituminous expansion joint material shall be installed every 20 feet and
half depth contraction joints installed every 4 feet.
11. Monolithic curb and drive apron construction shall be prohibited.
B. Bikeways.
1. Separate bicycle paths shall be required where specified as part of the municipality’s
adopted master plan.
2. Bicycle lanes, where required, shall be placed in the outside lane of a roadway,
adjacent to the curb or shoulder. When on-street parking is permitted, the bicycle
lane shall be between the parking lane and the outer lane of moving vehicles. Lanes
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §533
255
shall be delineated with markings, preferably striping. Raised reflectors or curbs
shall not be used. Bicycle lanes shall be considered Type A bikeways and all other
bikeways Type B.
3. Bikeways shall be constructed in accordance with the bicycle facility design
guidelines published by the New Jersey Department of Transportation and the
design of all drainage or parking facilities shall address water quality, flooding and
groundwater recharge and shall incorporate the use of non-structural stormwater
strategies to the maximum extent practical. All parking and loading areas shall be
designed to minimize impervious surfaces by use of permeable materials where
appropriate. [Ord. 1873-06, 2/7/2006]
C. Bicycle Parking. Bicycle parking areas shall be installed wherever significant attractors are
established, including, but not limited to food stores, educational uses, and shopping centers.
The number of spaces for bicycles shall equal at least 10% of the total required number of
parking spaces (see §530) for the first 100 spaces and 2% thereafter. Bicycle parking areas
shall have a minimum capacity of 6 bicycles and shall be designed to provide secure
anchoring for locking devices. If located in motorized vehicle parking lots, bicycle parking
shall be primarily located in the one-third of the parking area closest to the building. If
located on sidewalks, the parking should be adjacent to entrances. Bicycle parking shall be
located outside of travel ways for motorized vehicles and pedestrians.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §534
256
§ 534 Sight Triangles.
[Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
Sight triangle easements shall be provided at all intersections measured from the edge of right of way
in accordance with the Lawrence Township Engineering Standards.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
257
§ 535 Signs
[Ord. 2072-10, 12/21/10]
A. Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to encourage the effective use of signs as a
means of communication, to maintain the aesthetic environment and the Township's ability
to attract economic development and growth, to protect and improve pedestrian and
vehicular safety, to minimize the potential adverse effects of signs on nearby public and
private property, to protect the expressive rights of all persons within the scope of applicable
law and to enable the fair and consistent application of the regulations contained herein.
Within this Chapter, paragraphs -M through –T, inclusive, apply to signs containing
commercial speech, only, and not to non-commercial speech.
B. Performance. Signs shall be permitted as accessory uses in all zoning districts within the
jurisdiction of this Ordinance. Signs may be used, erected, maintained, altered, relocated,
removed, or demolished only in compliance with the provisions of this section and any and
all other ordinances and regulations of the municipality relating to the use, erection,
maintenance, alteration, moving, or removal of signs or similar devices. In the event of
conflicting regulations, the most restrictive shall apply.
C. Sign Permit. A sign permit shall be required for the installation or alteration of all signs,
unless exempted from such requirements under §535.G of this section, in accordance with
the following requirements:
1. Application requirements. All applications for sign permits shall be made to the
Administrative Officer on forms provided by the municipality. All applications
shall be signed by the owner of the sign and the property owner on whose premises
the sign is to be erected. All applications shall contain a sketch of the proposed sign,
drawn to scale, the wording or message and, where the sign will be attached to a
building, a plot plan showing the location of the proposed sign with dimensions to
the nearest building and lot lines. A color photograph, no smaller than 3" x 5" or
larger than 8" x 10" shall be submitted for each existing sign on the premises.
Applications for freestanding signs over 15 feet in height or 50 square feet in area
shall be accompanied by structural plans prepared by an individual duly licensed by
the State of New Jersey. All applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate
fee. Any fee for an electrical inspection shall be in addition to the fee provided for
in the sign permit. As soon as the sign has been erected, the applicant shall notify
the construction code official for a final inspection.
2. Change of copy. After a sign permit has been obtained, the copy, wording or
pictures may be changed without the necessity of obtaining a new permit or paying
any additional fees, as long as the new copy, wording or picture comply with the
provisions of this section. Any change in the size or shape of a sign or structural
alteration shall require a new sign permit.
3. Sign permit invalidation. Any of the following shall cause a sign permit to be
invalidated: [Ord. 2199-14, 10/7/14]
a. An invalidation of a Certificate of Occupancy for the use to which the sign
relates.
b. An invalidation of any permit issued for a sign by another agency or level of
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
258
government or the loss of any license held precedent to receiving such
permit.
c. An alteration in the area of a sign, the shape of a sign or structure of the sign
support.
d. Vacation of the premises by the user to which the sign relates.
e. Abandonment pursuant to §535.C.5 of this section.
4. Effect of invalidation. For a period of not more than six months, a sign may
continue to be displayed once its permit has become invalid provided the property is
being actively marketed for a new owner or tenant. In any other instance, the sign
shall be removed within 30 days of the permit invalidation. Internally illuminated
box signs shall be considered to meet the requirement for removal if the message is
turned to face the interior of the box. At no time shall the lighting elements of the
sign box be visible to passersby. It shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance for
each and every day that a sign with an expired permit is displayed. In addition to the
remedies stated above, signs which continue to be displayed in violation of this
Ordinance shall be subject to removal and the owner shall be liable for the full costs
of such removal and disposal.
5. Abandonment. If a sign advertises a business, service, commodity, accommodation,
attraction, or other enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or being offered
or conducted for a period of time greater than six months, that sign shall be
considered abandoned and shall, within 30 days after such abandonment, be
completely removed by the sign owner, owner of the property where the sign is
located, or other party having control over such sign. In this context, a seasonal
business such as a farm stand shall be considered operational even though closed for
a period not to exceed nine months.
D. Maintenance. All signs and displays shall be maintained in good order with periodic
painting, repairs and cleaning. In the event that the Zoning Officer of the municipality
determines that any sign has fallen into a state of disrepair, has become dilapidated or
constitutes a safety hazard, the sign owner and property owner shall be given written notice
to correct the condition within 20 days from the date of the mailing of the notice. Failure to
correct the condition or file an appeal within the time provided shall constitute a violation of
this Ordinance. The Township shall have the right to recover from said owner the full costs
of the removal and disposal of such signs should the owner fail to heed such correction
notice. Signs shall conform to the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code and any
other property maintenance code of the municipality.
E. General Provisions.
1. Corporate franchise signs. Signs identifying franchise operations or corporation
logos shall conform to the criteria for all other signs.
2. Items of information. Permanent freestanding signs and façade signs closer than 75
feet to the right-of-way of a principal arterial, secondary arterial or collector road as
indicated on the Circulation Map of the Master Plan shall not contain more than 9
items of information.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
259
3. Official sign imitation. No sign shall be erected that is of such character, form,
shape or color that it imitates or resembles any official traffic sign, signal or device,
when placed in a location or setting ordinarily used to give official vehicular
directional information and is likely to confuse motorists. Viewpoint signs
characterized by parody content under §535.K.3 are exempted from this restriction.
4. Permitted uses. No sign shall be erected containing a message that states or implies
that a property may be used for any purpose not permitted in the zoning district or
by duly authorized variance in which said sign is located under the provisions of this
Ordinance.
5. Prohibited placement. No sign shall be placed on any tree, telegraph, electric light,
or public utility pole, or upon rocks or other natural features, or within a public
right-of-way, except as permitted in sub-paragraph -6, below. Signs placed illegally
in such locations shall be subject to removal by the municipality.
6. Public property and rights-of-way. Any sign installed or placed on public property,
except in conformance with the requirements of this section, shall be forfeited to the
public and subject to removal. In addition to other remedies that may be imposed
under this Ordinance, the municipality shall have the right to recover from the owner
or person placing such sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign. No
sign other than traffic control or similar official governmental signs shall be erected
within or project over the right-of-way of any public street or sidewalk, except as
hereinafter provided. Any sign located along the right-of-way of a State or Federal
highway shall comply with any more restrictive requirements of the State and
Federal government.
7. Relief and sign face distance. Excepting viewpoint signs under §535.K.3, no sign
shall contain characters or graphics exceeding 3 inches in relief from the sign face.
No façade sign shall project more than 12 inches from the plane of the attaching
surface. The maximum distance between the faces of a double-faced sign shall not
exceed 18 inches; otherwise it shall be considered two signs and any “V”-shaped
sign, regardless of the separation dimension of the faces, shall be considered two
signs. [Ord. 2199-14, 10/7/14]
8. Setback and separation distance. Except where a greater setback is required, no
freestanding sign or any part thereof shall be located closer than 10 feet to any lot
line, excepting viewpoint signs under §535.K.3 if the lot dimensions would
otherwise preclude an owner or tenant’s ability to erect such a sign. Any new
commercial sign shall be not less than a distance of 100 feet from any existing
adjacent freestanding sign, excepting commercial properties within 200 feet or less
of frontage from which direct vehicular access is obtained, directional and directory
signs. Any off-site commercial sign, where permitted, shall be separated from any
other off-site commercial sign by a distance of not less than 1,000 feet in any
direction. Any off-site commercial variable message sign, where permitted, shall be
separated from any other commercial variable message sign by a distance of not less
than 3,000 feet for any sign aligned to face the same direction of travel. [Ord. 2199-
14, 10/7/14]
9. Sight triangles. No sign shall be erected within the clear sight triangle area as
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
260
otherwise established in this Ordinance, unless the topmost portion of such sign is
less than 2 ½ feet (30 inches) high. In no case shall any sign be so erected that it
impedes the vision of motorists or pedestrians in the course of driving or walking in
such a manner that it endangers their safety or the safety of others.
10. Unlawful cutting of trees or shrubs. No person may, for the purpose of increasing or
enhancing the visibility of a sign, damage, trim, destroy, or remove any trees,
shrubs, or other vegetation located:
a. Within the right-of-way of any public street or road, unless the work is done
pursuant to an approved site plan or subdivision plat.
b. On property that is not under the ownership or control of the person doing
or responsible for such work, unless the work is done pursuant to the
express authorization of the person owning the property where such trees or
shrubs are located.
c. In any area where such landscaping is required to remain under any Board
approval or permit issued under this Ordinance.
F. Design Standards. Design guidelines for all signage are as follows:
1. Signs should strengthen the architectural diversity of the municipality's buildings.
Signs which obscure or ignore a building's architecture should be avoided. Signs
should be integrated with a building's architecture in terms of form, materials, color,
and size.
2. Signs should be appropriate for the era in which the building was constructed.
3. Signs should not alter the way in which a building functions.
4. Designers should strive for creativity in the form and variety of signage within the
size limitations set forth herein.
5. Designers are strongly encouraged to include symbols, images, and other graphic
objects to convey the type of establishment using the sign.
6. The typeface used to represent words should convey the character of the
establishment and the era of the building.
7. Contrast. The contrast of a sign's lettering and symbols with its background should
be disparate to convey legibility.
8. Outside of the historic district, back lighted individual letter channel signs to convey
text, mounted on masonry, is preferred. See §535.T.2 for design standards specific
to the historic district.
9. The background of internally illuminated signs should not be lighted but only the
individual letters, logos, or symbols that convey the sign's message.
G. Signs Allowed Without Permit. The following signs shall be allowed without the issuance of
a permit:
1. Emergency. Emergency warning signs erected by a governmental agency, public
utility, pipeline company, or contractor doing such work authorized or permitted by
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
261
such agency, utility, or company. Such signs may be illuminated.
2. Flags. Any non-commercial viewpoint expression flag or pennant may be displayed
or flown, provided that such flag shall not exceed 130 square feet in area and shall
not be flown from a pole that exceeds 40 feet in height. No provision of this section
shall be held applicable to flags, banners or pennants used or displayed by any
person as a means of non-commercial viewpoint communication, including but not
limited to parades, rallies, demonstrations, or other activities of non-commercial
viewpoint expression. For commercial and non-profit institutional uses no more
than 5 flags shall be flown or suspended from poles along any frontage of a
property. Flags displayed inside windows or flags of two sf. of sign area or less
shall be exempted. Any other flags shall be considered freestanding signs and shall
be governed by such regulations that may apply in the applicable zoning district in
which such flag is located. Flags may be illuminated.
3. Governmental. Signs posted by governmental agencies.
4. Historic markers. Historic tablets, cornerstones, memorial plaques and emblems
which are installed or installed under the direction of government agencies or civil
or religious organizations, provided that the sign area does not exceed 6 square feet.
5. Incidental signs. Non-illuminated or internally illuminated incidental signs, such as
those identifying the availability of rest rooms, telephone, or similar public
conveniences, provided that such signs do not advertise any commercial
establishment, activity, organization, product, goods or services, except those of
public utilities. Incidental signs provided for the guidance and convenience of the
public within commercial properties may also be erected. Any such sign shall not
exceed two square feet in area.
6. Name and Address. Name and address signs attached to the façade of a building,
lamp post or on a mailbox, provided that the size of the sign does not exceed one
and a half square foot. Address lettering shall be a minimum height as required
under §535.J in order to be legible to emergency personnel.
7. Public notice. Any sign providing public notice required by a valid and applicable
federal, state, or local law, regulation, court order or ordinance.
8. Public transportation. Signs indicating public transportation stops when installed by
the municipality or a public transportation operating entity.
9. Temporary signs pursuant to the requirements of §535.K.
10. Advisory data. Advisory data signs shall comply with the following requirements:
a. Advisory data signs shall be permitted in any district in which commercial
uses are permitted except in a historic district, provided that they do not
encompass more than 20% of the allowable sign area for the type of sign,
upon which they are placed, not to exceed 4 sf. in sign area.
b. Advisory data signs shall be permitted in addition to any other allowable
signage for the property.
c. The advisory data display may alternate, provided that the period of time
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
262
that one display is shown is not less than one second.
11. Traffic control signs. Temporary and permanent traffic signs and signals installed
by the municipality, county and State for the purpose of directing and regulating the
flow of traffic.
12. Trespassing and warning. Trespassing signs; signs indicating the private nature of a
road, driveway, or premises; and signs prohibiting or otherwise controlling the
fishing or hunting upon particular premises, and signs warning of a hazard or risk to
entrants upon a particular premises, provided that the sign area shall not exceed two
square feet.
13. Vending. Illuminated and non-illuminated signs which are an integral part of
vending machines, including gasoline pumps and juice machines, provided that they
do not exceed six square feet in area.
H. Sign Area Calculation. For the purposes of this section, "sign area" shall mean the area
expressed in square feet, within a rectangle enclosing the extreme limits of writing, symbols,
logos, letters, figures, emblems, or other representations plus all material or color forming an
integral part of the sign or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it
is placed, provided that:
1. In the event a sign is designed with more than one face, the area shall be computed
by including only the maximum surface display area of one face, provided that the
message is the same on each face. For round, triangular or other non-standard signs,
the size shall be computed by the area that may be viewed from one vantage point
expressed as one plane, provided that;
2. The supports, uprights, skirting or other structure on which any sign is attached or
supported shall not be included in the calculation of sign area unless such structure
is designed in such a manner as to form an integral part of the sign or conveys
meaning;
3. The area of lamps, neon tubing, or other artificial illumination visible on a sign shall
be counted as part of the total allowable sign area. The area of lamps trained on a
sign to provide external illumination, however, shall not be included in this
calculation.
I. Illumination. Signs exempt from permits in accordance with §535.G shall not be
illuminated, unless otherwise excepted. Any other sign may be illuminated, unless otherwise
prohibited. Illuminated signs shall conform to the following provisions: [Ord. 2199-14,
10/7/14]
1. Where illuminated signs are permitted and approved, illumination may be provided
by floodlights, spotlights, incandescent bulbs, fluorescent tubes or compact
fluorescent bulbs, LED spotlights or internal illumination, metal halide, mercuryvapor,
or quantum dot lamps. Neon, LED or similar tubing shall not be permitted as
a means of illumination unless used for illumination internal to the sign. Regardless
of the type of illumination employed, all illuminated signs shall be properly shielded
and so located as to prevent glare or blinding effects upon motor vehicle traffic and
so as not to cause a nuisance to residents on the premises of their home in the area.
Upon a finding by the Zoning Officer that a sign creates glare or blinding
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
263
conditions, the property owner or owner of the sign, as the case may be, shall correct
the situation within 14 days of the notification of such effects by the Zoning Officer.
The Zoning Officer may be assisted in such determination by such lighting or visual
acuity experts as necessary. Failure to correct the condition or file an appeal within
the time specified shall constitute a violation of this Ordinance by the property
owner or sign owner, as appropriate.
2. Signs capable of illumination shall be turned off between the hours of 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m. the following morning, unless the business or uses advertised are open
to the public later than 10:00 p.m. or earlier than 7:00 a.m., in which event any such
establishment may keep a sign illuminated during business hours, only. Variable
message signs, where permitted, shall be turned off between the hours of 1:00 am
and 6:00 am.
3. The contrast between the ambient light level of the cartway closest adjacent to a sign
and the illuminance of the sign shall not exceed a ratio of 1:20.
4. Signs shall not be permitted to emit more than fifty percent (50%) of its illumination
as the color white or light blue.
5. The level of light being emitted by such sign shall not exceed 0.3 foot-candles of
luminance 50 feet from the vertical plane of the sign face at the edge of a travel lane,
or 250 feet measured level and at 90º from its center.
J. Required Street Numbering. Street numbering shall be required for every dwelling unit and
non-residential building in accordance with Ord. No. 1137-88, as it may be amended or
superseded. Residential uses shall be identified with numbers of lettering at least 4 inches in
height. Non-residential uses shall be identified with numbering or letters at least 6 inches in
height. Such signage shall not be included in the sign area nor sign number limitations.
Street numbering shall be located within 3 feet of the main entrance, on a mailbox or
lamppost on the same lot as the building, or incorporated into an approved freestanding sign.
K. Temporary Signs. Temporary signs as indicated below shall be allowed without the need to
first obtain a sign permit, provided that the following regulations are met:
1. Contracting signs. Temporary lawn signs of contractors, mechanics, painters,
paperhangers and/or artisans, on the lot on which the contracting work is being
performed shall be permitted during the period of work. Contracting signs shall
conform to the size limitations for real estate signs. They shall be removed within 7
days of the completion of the work to which the sign relates. Pursuant to §535.E.6,
no contracting sign shall be placed within a public-right-of-way. Signs placed
illegally in such locations shall be subject to removal by the municipality.
2. Grand opening, business relocation, bankruptcy and final closing signs. Grand
opening, “under new management”, business relocation and bankruptcy, final
closing/liquidation signs shall be permitted for a period of time not to exceed 30
days from the initial opening of a new business or a change in the ownership or
tenancy of the premises on which the sign is located. Bankruptcy and final
closing/liquidation signs shall be permitted for the duration of the pendency of a
bankruptcy proceeding with respect to a particular premise, or as directed by the
Bankruptcy Court. Grand opening, bankruptcy and final closing signs may be
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
264
façade signs, freestanding signs, or banners. Business relocation or “Under New
Management” signs may be façade or window signs. All signs shall not exceed the
total sign area permitted on the premises for permanent façade signs. Relocation
signs shall be permitted in addition to any permanent signage allowed. Relocation
signs shall be restricted to the present location of the relocating business and the
future location of the relocating business. No provision herein shall be construed to
operate in conflict with any supervening federal or state statute, or administrative
regulations pertaining to bankruptcy or business liquidations.
3. Viewpoint signs. A viewpoint sign shall conform to the following requirements:
a. Viewpoint signs in residential zones shall not exceed 16 square feet, the
dimension shall not exceed 4 feet on any side and they shall not exceed 6
feet in height. The total sign area of the total array or assemblage of signs
or expressive décor upon a premise shall not exceed 130 sf.
b. Viewpoint signs in all other zones shall not exceed the dimensions or total
sign area otherwise permitted for commercial signage upon the premises,
but any sign, symbol or display not exceeding 15 feet in height or having an
area greater than 130 square feet shall be permitted in any commercial or
institutional zone in conformance with the standards herein.
c. Such signs shall be exempt from the requirement limiting the number of
items of information as otherwise required; the style and design standards,
type size, changeable copy, setback and quantity requirements; all content
regulations within the scope of protected speech; and any other
requirements in conflict with federal and state common law protecting
expressive activity and viewpoint communication.
d. Any viewpoint sign installed or placed on public property including public
rights-of-way, excepting such public property which the Township may
designate for such use, shall be forfeited to the public and subject to
removal and no viewpoint sign shall be placed upon private property except
with the consent of the owner or tenant.
e. Viewpoint signs shall not be constructed, held, installed or erected so as to
present a hazard to the safe transit of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to
impede the free and safe ingress or egress from any premises.
f. Any portable viewpoint sign or display, although unrestricted as to style,
design, dimensions, or content, shall at all times be under the firm and
secure control of the operator(s), or be otherwise secured so as to not
present a hazard to persons or property.
g. Viewpoint signs may be illuminated subject to the conditions of
subparagraph -e above.
4. Project development. One sign announcing the name of the project developer,
architects, engineers, contractors, and/or financing institution shall be permitted at a
site under construction, alteration or repair, provided the sign shall not exceed 32
square feet in area. The sign shall be removed before any certificate of occupancy is
issued for non-residential uses and when 75% of the certificate of occupancies for
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
265
residential uses has been issued. Such signs shall be exempt from the requirement
limiting the number of items of information as otherwise required.
5. Public functions. Signs advertising public functions; providing public service or
information; or any events for non-commercial purposes shall be permitted for a
period of 30 days prior to and during the event and shall be removed within 5 days
after the event. The sign may be erected either on the premises of the event or as a
banner, provided that the location of the banner is approved by the appropriate
governmental authority if suspended over a public right-of-way. A sign erected on
the premises shall not exceed 32 square feet and 8 feet in height. Banners may
project over a right-of-way provided that the lowest edge of the sign is a minimum
of 17 feet 6 inches above the highest part of the cartway. Banners over a right-ofway
shall not exceed 60 square feet in area.
6. Real estate. Real estate lawn signs announcing the sale, rental or lease of the
premises on which the sign is located. The sign may be double-faced. Only one
sign per street frontage shall be permitted. The maximum size of the sign shall be in
accordance with the following schedule:
a. Residential zones: 6 sf.
b. Commercial zones: 32 sf.
c. Industrial zones: 32 sf.
d. All real estate signs shall be removed within 7 days after closing or
settlement on said property or the execution of the lease.
7. Off-tract directional real estate signs identifying an open house shall also be
permitted. Signs may be two-sided and may not exceed 3 sf. per side. Signs may be
installed only with the consent of the property owner(s). Signs may be installed for
a period of time up to 12 hours preceding the open house and must be removed the
same day. Pursuant to §535.E.6, no real estate sign shall be placed within a publicright-
of-way. Signs placed illegally in such locations shall be subject to removal by
the municipality. Pursuant to §535.L.1 and -2, no moving devices, including but not
limited to, streamers, tinsel, or similar components, shall be affixed to a real estate
sign except as permitted by paragraph –K.10, herein. Special events. Special event
lawn and other signs in conjunction with a temporary use permit issued in
accordance with §431.L.
8. Window signs. Window signs and internal signs located within the outer face of a
building and visible to the outside shall be permitted, provided that all of the signs
individually or collectively do not exceed 25% of all available window space or
10% of the total facade area, whichever is less. No window sign, excepting a
business relocation sign or real estate sign, shall be permitted whenever the subject
premises ceases to be occupied by a tenant, owner, or other entity.
9. Yard and garage sale signs. Such signs shall not exceed four square feet; shall not
be erected more than seven days prior to such sale; and shall be removed within 48
hours after the sale. No premise shall be permitted to erect such signs more than two
times in any calendar year. No more than 8 signs shall be permitted to be installed.
No sign shall be attached to a utility pole or traffic sign or signal. Signs may be
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
266
placed on private property with the permission of the land owner.
10. Lawn signs. Lawn signs shall be permitted in any zoning district and may have a
maximum of one balloon attached thereto with a tether of not more than 12 inches in
length. Lawn signs shall be limited to 3 sf. per side, unless a larger size is otherwise
specifically permitted.
L. Prohibited Commercial Signs. All commercial signs not permitted by this Ordinance are
hereby prohibited, with the following commercial signs specifically prohibited:
1. Flashing, blinking, occulting, twinkling, animated, moving, or projected signs of any
type, with the exception of advisory data displays as otherwise permitted, and
commercial or institutional holiday displays erected and operating for a period not to
exceed 35 days.
2. Banners, pennants, streamers, pinwheels or similar devices (except as a display of
merchandise for sale upon the premises); vehicle signs (except for ordinary
commercial signage on registered business vehicles used in the normal course of
business and legally parked or garaged at the business or owner/employees
premises, or grand opening, business relocation, “Under New Management”, or
bankruptcy/final closing signs); portable signs (unless otherwise exempted); balloon
signs or other inflated signs (excepting grand opening or final closing signs or signs
otherwise exempted); and searchlights (excepting grand opening or closing lights
which shall not interfere with motorists’ or pedestrians’ vision and shall not create a
hazard to motor vehicle traffic), displayed for the purpose of attracting the attention
of pedestrians and motorists; unless otherwise exempted.
3. Signs which emit smoke, visible vapors or particles, sound or odor. Any sign that
emits electromagnetic radiation outside the wavelengths of visible light which is
measurable beyond the property boundary and signs causing interference with radio,
two-way radio, television or cellular telephone reception, motor vehicle or computer
wireless signal transmission, or with medical devices.
4. Any sign attached or affixed to the roof of a building, or a façade sign that projects
above the lowest level of a roof or beyond the corner of a wall.
5. Any sign which:
a. the average person, applying contemporary community standards would
find that the sign, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest;
b. that the sign depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual
conduct specifically defined by the applicable state law; and
c. that the sign, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific value.
6. Signs which attempt to imitate or otherwise cause confusion with existing signs
erected by any governmental board, body or agency, excepting viewpoint signs
whose content is based on parody.
7. Any sign so erected, constructed, or maintained as to obstruct any fire escape,
window, door, or other opening used as a means of ingress and egress or which
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
267
prevents adequate light and air to the interior of any building, or which obstructs the
access of firefighters or other emergency personnel to a premises.
8. A series of two or more signs placed in a line parallel to a street each of which,
comprising a single commercial message sentence or clause thereof.
9. Signs attached to or part of canopies over motor fuel dispensers.
10. Signs attached, affixed or painted on trees, fences, utility poles, light poles, signs
attached to other signs, signs temporarily placed upon motor vehicles or signs
displayed upon the exterior of any motor vehicle which are continuously or
repeatedly parked in a conspicuous location to serve as a sign. This subsection shall
not be construed to prohibit the placement of directional signs which identify the
general location of parking areas in large parking lots or to advise of any emergency
or hazard to persons upon the premises.
11. Off-premise signs with a commercial message, the predominating content of which
directs attention to an off-premises business unrelated to the business premises upon
which the sign is located, and the sign is erected in addition to other or existing
commercial signage upon the same premises, or if it is erected upon non-commercial
premises, unless otherwise excepted. Such signage shall be permitted only upon
showing by the applicant that the sign is necessary to enhance traffic flow and
safety, or that he or she would be unduly burdened by its absence.
12. Portable commercial signs, unless otherwise excepted. Hand-carried or sandwich
board type signs shall be permitted to announce grand opening, business relocation,
final closing or bankruptcy/liquidation sales. Such signs shall not exceed 8 square
feet in area, and no person shall carry or hold more than two signs. No commercial
sign carrier shall impede or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic or create a
hazard thereto; obstruct any public right-of-way or means of ingress or egress to any
premises; or loiter in any residentially zoned area. No garment shall be deemed a
commercial sign, irrespective of content displayed thereupon.
13. Signs where the message is changed by electronic or electro-mechanical means,
excepting advisory data signs.
14. Billboards and billboard-type commercial displays, whether of permanent, semipermanent,
or mobile construction, except as a zoning-permitted use and authorized
as part of any approved site plan or variance application, or as otherwise permitted.
15. Any sign which is in disrepair so as to constitute blight, or any sign which is
unstable, insecure or otherwise defective so as to present a hazard to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic or to entrants upon the premises.
M. Awning Sign Requirements. Awning signs, where permitted, shall comply with the
following provisions and any more specific regulations in this section:
1. An awning shall only be permitted in lieu of an allowed façade sign, except as
permitted in subparagraph 5, below.
2. Sign letters shall be aligned with the lower edge of the awning and shall not extend
higher than the vertical flap or one-fifth of the arc of the curve, whichever may be
the case, but in no event shall the lettering height exceed 9 inches.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
268
3. Company logos or symbols may be placed on the sloped portion or upper curved
area of the awning.
4. For the purposes of this subsection, the sign area shall be the total of the lettering
and logo or symbol, computed separately, in accordance with §535.H.
5. An awning sign that is part of an entrance canopy, where the long axis of the canopy
is perpendicular to the face of the building, may be used in conjunction with a
façade sign. The sides of the canopy may be lettered as permitted in subparagraph -
2, above, except that any lettering shall be no higher than 6 inches. The end of a
canopy that is parallel with the façade of the building shall be permitted a sign or
symbol not exceeding 20 sf. in area.
N. Changeable Copy Sign Requirements. Changeable copy signs, where permitted, shall
comply with the following provisions and any more specific regulations in this section: [Ord.
2199-14, 10/7/14; Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19]
1. Changeable copy signs shall be allowed only as an integral part of a freestanding or
façade sign, except as may be allowed in sub-paragraph –N.8 hereinbelow. The area
of a changeable copy sign shall be included in the sign area calculation for the
freestanding or façade sign and shall not exceed 50% of the total sign area,
excepting movie theater marquee and variable message signs.
2. Changeable copy signs shall not be permitted on temporary or portable signage.
3. Copy shall not be changed more than once every 24 hours, excepting advisable data
displays. Changeable copy signs that are changed more frequently shall be
considered animated signs and are prohibited.
4. The maximum number of lines of changeable copy shall be 4 lines, except for
variable message signs.
5. The minimum height of changeable copy letters shall be 4 inches.
6. No changeable copy sign, excepting advisory data signs, variable message signs and
fuel pricing signs, shall be changed by electronic or electro-mechanical means.
7. Changeable copy signs that are variable message signs shall adhere to the following
standards and any other standards specific to the zoning district in which they are
permitted:
a. The variable message sign shall be equipped with a dimmer control and a
photocell which automatically adjusts the intensity of the display in
response to natural ambient light conditions in accordance with the
illumination standards of §535.I;
b. When first installed, the sign shall be calibrated and certified by the sign
installer that the level of illuminance does not exceed the limitation set forth
in §535.I.5.
c. The displayed message shall not change more frequently than once per 8
seconds. The sign shall only display static messages and shall be changed
instantaneously from one message to the next;
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
269
d. The sign shall be equipped with a default mode of operation that turns the
sign message entirely to black should a malfunction in static image display,
dimmer control and/or photocell occur.
e. Prior to the issuance of a sign permit approving such sign under the
provisions of this Ordinance, the owner of the sign shall prepare a report
indicating the anticipated life span of the sign and the means whereby the
sign’s electronic components shall be recycled at such time. No new permit
for a variable message sign replacing a previously installed variable
message sign shall be issued until the owner shall certify to the satisfaction
of the Zoning Officer that a credible means of recycling of the prior sign has
been established. Once certified, the sign owner shall be permitted to
replace modules within the variable message sign as needed.
f. Prior to the issuance of a building permit, or in the absence of a building
permit being required, the sign permit, a structural engineer licensed by the
State of New Jersey shall certify that the existing sign structure is capable of
supporting the variable message sign intended to replace an existing static
message sign. In the event that the sign structure is inadequate to support
the static and live loads of the variable message sign, the structural engineer
shall supply a credible design whereby the structure shall be reinforced to
accept such variable message sign and shall certify upon completion that the
sign has been reinforced in conformance with the design.
8. Changeable copy signs that are for fuel pricing shall adhere to the following
additional standards and any other standards specific to the zoning district in which
they are permitted.
a. The fuel pricing sign shall be equipped with a dimmer control and a
photocell which automatically adjusts the intensity of the display in
response to natural ambient light conditions in accordance with the
illumination standards of §535.I.
b. The level of illumination of the fuel pricing sign shall not exceed the
limitation set forth in §535.I.5.
c. The sign shall be equipped with a default mode of operation that turns the
sign message entirely to black should a malfunction in static image display,
dimmer control and/or photocell occur.
M. Directional Sign Requirements. Directional signs shall comply with the following
requirements:
1. Directional signs for indicating the path of pedestrian or vehicular traffic from a
public street shall meet the following regulations:
a. Such signs may contain more than one commercial message and may be
illuminated.
b. The size of each sign shall not exceed 4 square feet and exceed 2½ feet in
height.
c. The number of signs shall be limited to the number of driveway or
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
270
pedestrian walkway intersections with a public street or public sidewalk,
respectively.
2. Directional signs for indicating the path of pedestrian or vehicular traffic internal to
a site shall meet the following regulations:
a. The sign shall not be located within 50 feet of the tract perimeter.
b. The sign shall be freestanding, unless otherwise excepted.
c. Such signs may contain more than one commercial message and may be
illuminated.
d. Any such sign shall not exceed 16 square feet in area or 6 feet in height.
e. Such signs are intended for large retail, office park, research and
development, and institutional complexes but may be appropriate in other
circumstances as approved by the Board of Jurisdiction.
P. Directory Sign Requirements. Directory signs shall comply with the following requirements:
1. The sign shall be located within the site or complex so as to allow motorists to leave
the flow of traffic and safely read the directory; or, shall be placed at the main
entrance to a building.
2. The sign shall contain a site map or floor plan diagram, as the case may be,
indicating the location of the buildings or offices listed on the directory.
3. Any such sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in sign area for building mounted
signs and 16 square feet in area for freestanding signs, unless otherwise excepted.
4. A freestanding directory sign shall not exceed 6 feet in height.
5. Directory signs may contain more than one commercial message.
Q. Façade Sign Requirements. Façade signs, where permitted, shall comply with the following
provisions and the more specific regulations in this section:
1. Size Limitation. Unless otherwise modified herein, no façade sign shall exceed 5%
of the total façade area to which it is attached. Additional limitations may apply in
specific zoning district.
2. One façade sign per building, or ground level store in a shopping center, shall be
permitted. Where the building is located on a corner lot, a second façade sign shall
be permitted provided:
a. The message is the same on both signs;
b. The façade of the building to which the sign would be attached does not
face a residential use across the intervening street;
c. The sign does not face a principal arterial (limited access highway) as
defined by the Master Plan.
3. Location on buildings. Façade signs shall be located in the following places:
d. Above the first floor windows;
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
271
e. Below a parapet, mansard roof, or pent roof;
f. Beside the main entrance.
4. Bonus for individual letter sign types. The sign area limitations in §535.Q.1 may be
increased by 10% when the message consists of individual letters or symbols and by
20% when the message consists of individual back lighted letters or symbols.
5. Construction of signs flat against buildings. Any sign attached flat against the
surface of a building shall be constructed of durable material and attached securely
to the building with rust-proof metal hardware. When a sign is to be installed on a
masonry building, holes shall be drilled in the masonry, and proper rust-proof
expansion bolts shall be used. The use of wood or fiber plugs is prohibited.
6. Menu sign. Restaurants or other eating establishments may erect one additional
façade sign for the placement of a menu or other bill of fare at the main entrance,
provided the sign does not exceed 6 sf. in area.
R. Freestanding Sign Requirements. Freestanding signs, where permitted, shall comply with
the following provisions and any more specific regulations herein:
1. Unless otherwise modified, the following sign area limitations and requirements
shall apply to all freestanding signs (minimum letter height shall apply to the
primary message on the sign):
Table 5.18 Freestanding Sign Area.
No. of
Travel
Lanes
Posted
Speed
Limit
(MPH)
Maximum Sign Area
Minimum
Letter
Height
No Residential Use
Abutting Side Yard or
Across the Street
Residential Use
Abutting Side Yard
or Across the Street
2 0-25 15 sf. 10 sf. 5 in.
26-45 35 sf. 20 sf. 8 in.
46+ 75 sf. 50 sf. 12 in.
4 0-25 20 sf. 15 sf. 6 in.
26-45 50 sf. 35 sf. 10 in.
46+ 120 sf. 80 sf. 15 in.
6 26-45 65 sf. 40 sf. 11 in.
46+ 130 sf. 90 sf. 16 in.
2. Bonus for individual letter sign types. The sign area limitations in §535.R.1 may be
increased by 10% when the message consists of individual letters or symbols and by
20% when the message consists of individual back lighted letters or symbols.
3. No freestanding sign shall be permitted if the building line is less than 35 feet from
the street line, excepting signs in a historic district.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
272
4. No freestanding sign shall block the view of any existing signs. All signs shall be
placed in a location which will allow sufficient reaction time for drivers on the
adjacent road(s) to safely exit the street into the entrance to the site of the business
or commercial use.
5. Freestanding signs shall be permitted only in the front yard.
6. No freestanding sign, excepting viewpoint expression and real estate signs, shall be
directed towards a street from which the property does not have direct access.
7. Freestanding signs shall not exceed a height of 15 feet.
8. Freestanding signs shall be skirted to enclose the supporting pole or pylon of the
sign, except for historic district signs. The skirting shall extend the full dimensions
of the sign at its lower edge from ground to sign. The skirting shall not be included
in the sign size calculation unless it displays a message.
9. The base of the freestanding sign shall be liberally landscaped with a combination of
shrubs, ground cover, flowers, or other plant material.
S. Off-Premise Sign Requirements. Off-premise signs, where permitted, shall comply with the
size and locational limitations for freestanding signs, unless otherwise modified.
T. Historic District Signs. Signs in a historic district and throughout any NC-1 district adjacent
to a historic district shall comply with the requirements of this subsection, notwithstanding
the zoning district in which the property is located.
1. The following signage shall be permitted:
a. Façade signs. Either one non-illuminated façade sign per street frontage not
to exceed 20 square feet or one illuminated façade sign per street frontage
not to exceed 10 square feet, in accordance with §535.Q. Establishments
with entrances accessible from a rear yard public parking area may have an
additional façade sign not to exceed 6 square feet.
b. Freestanding signs. One freestanding sign per lot not to exceed 12 square
feet or 6 feet in height in accordance with §535.R.
c. Awning signs. One awning sign per premises.
d. Projecting signs. One projecting sign per lot in lieu of a freestanding sign
shall be permitted not to exceed 8 square feet in area. The minimum height
clearance of the lower edge of any such sign shall be 9 feet.
e. Directory sign. Where commercial establishments are located on a floor
other than the first floor, one directory sign per building, located on the
building, shall be permitted.
f. A-frame sign. An A-frame sign for retail establishments conforming to the
following:
(1) The sign may be displayed only during business hours.
(2) Each side of the sign may not exceed 6 square feet.
(3) The sign shall consist of a framed chalkboard or tack board.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
273
(4) The location of the sign shall not interfere with pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
(5) Pursuant to §535.E.6, no A-frame sign shall be placed within a
public-right-of-way. Signs placed illegally in such locations shall
be subject to removal by the municipality.
g. Off-premise sign with commercial message. One off-premise sign with a
commercial message may be located at each intersection of Main with
Gordon Avenue, Philips Avenue, and Craven Lane. Such sign may contain
more than one commercial message. Each sign shall not exceed 9 square
feet and 12 feet in height.
h. Any sign allowed without permit, pursuant to §535.G.
2. The following standards are to be followed in the placement and design of signs
unless specifically waived by the approving authority:
a. Façade sign locations. The following façade sign locations are required in
any historic district.
(1) Single story commercial buildings. The parapet wall above the
glass storefront.
(2) Two or more story commercial buildings. The wall above the glass
storefront but below the window sills of the second floor. If there
are projecting cornices or beltlines separating the first and second
stories, the façade sign should be placed below them.
(3) Combined commercial and residential buildings. Next to the first
floor doorway or window, below any porch or added mansard or
pent roof between the first and second floors.
b. Freestanding sign location. Freestanding signs shall be set back from the
sidewalk five feet, or ten feet from the curbline if there is no sidewalk.
c. Projecting sign locations. Projecting signs for first floor establishments
should be just below the second floor windows. Projecting signs for second
floor or higher establishments should be located above the second story
windows.
d. Sign complexity. Façade and freestanding signs oriented towards motorists
shall convey no more than 9 items of information. More complex signage
should be limited to projecting signs oriented towards pedestrians.
e. Sign materials. Sign materials should relate to the architectural style of the
building. Where modern buildings are designed to evoke an earlier era,
signage should reflect that age. Sign materials permitted within the historic
district include painted or carved, smooth surfaced wood; carved stone; cast
bronze or brass; tinned and forged metal; gold-leafed lettering; individual
wood or metal letters on the building façade.
f. Consideration will be given to other sign materials or to more modern
signage materials for older buildings provided that the purposes of the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
274
design guidelines are maintained.
3. Illumination. In general, unless the building belongs to the present era, internally
illuminated signs are discouraged. Illumination should be accomplished through
external floodlights trained on the sign face.
U. Signs Permitted in the EP-1, EP-2, R-1, R-2A, R2-B, R-3, R-4 and R-5 Districts.
1. Any sign allowed without permit, pursuant to §535.G.
2. Residential uses. One freestanding development sign for each collector or arterial
roadway that provides access to the neighborhood or residential complex, provided
that: [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19]
a. The sign is owned and maintained by a homeowner's or condominium
association, or other duly constituted organization approved by the Board of
Jurisdiction; or, the sign is owned by a private entity with responsibility for
maintenance.
b. Each sign shall not exceed a height of 5 feet and shall meet the size
limitations for freestanding signs.
c. At an approved rental or sales office installed pursuant to §431.I, one
freestanding non-illuminated sign identifying the office for customers shall
be permitted but not to exceed 16 square feet in area and more than 5 feet in
height. Such sign shall be removed with the removal of the temporary
office.
d. Real estate signs, the sole purpose of which is to direct the public to housing
for sale or land development shall be permitted 4 temporary freestanding
non-illuminated signs at key intersections within the housing development.
Each sign shall not exceed 15 square feet in area and 8 feet in height above
ground.
e. One sign identifying a home occupation, not exceeding two square feet in
area, attached to the exterior wall or porch of the dwelling.
3. Commercial uses. One freestanding sign not to exceed 10 square feet in area or 4
feet in height and one directory sign attached to the façade of the building.
4. Agricultural uses.
a. Farm stands may have 2 freestanding signs, each not larger than 12 square
feet in area and not exceeding 8 feet in height. Such signs may have
changeable copy. In addition, one sign no larger than 16 square feet in area
may be erected flat against the face of the farm stand or farm building
where the products are sold.
b. Farm markets shall be permitted one façade sign and one freestanding sign
in accordance with §535.Q and -R.
5. Institutional uses. The following signs shall be permitted for institutional uses
within the subject districts:
a. One freestanding sign not exceeding 20 square feet in area or 5 feet in
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
275
height.
b. Freestanding signs shall be set back from all streetlines 30 feet or half the
distance between the building and the street, whichever is less.
c. One façade sign per building in accordance with §535.Q, not to exceed 40
square feet.
d. One changeable copy sign pursuant to §535.N not to exceed 18 square feet.
e. Directional signs pursuant to §535.O.
f. Directory signs pursuant to §535.P.
V. Signs Permitted in the AT, SCR, PVD-1, PVD-2 and MX-1 Districts. [Ord. 2174-14, 3/18/14;
Ord. 2199-14, 10/7/14]
1. Any sign allowed without permit, pursuant to §535.G.
2. One freestanding development sign for each collector or arterial roadway that
provides access to the residential complex identifying the name of the development
only, provided that:
a. The sign is owned and maintained by a homeowner's or condominium
association, or other duly constituted organization approved by the Board of
Jurisdiction; or, the sign is owned by a private entity with responsibility for
maintenance.
b. Each sign shall not exceed a height of 5 feet and shall meet the size
limitations for freestanding signs.
c. At an approved rental or sales office installed pursuant to §431.I, one
freestanding non-illuminated sign advertising the office, not to exceed 16
square feet in area and not more than 5 feet in height. Such sign shall be
removed with the removal of the temporary office.
d. Real estate signs, the sole purpose of which is to direct the public to a
housing or land development shall be permitted 4 temporary freestanding
non-illuminated signs at key intersections. Each sign shall not exceed 15
square feet in area and 8 feet in height above ground.
3. One façade sign per building in accordance with §535.Q and not exceeding 6 square
feet in area.
4. Directional signs pursuant to §535.O.
5. Directory signs pursuant to §535.P.
6. Commercial uses, where permitted, shall conform to the requirements for the NC-1
district.
W. Signs Permitted in the NC-1, NC-2 and PO Districts.
1. Any sign allowed without permit, pursuant to §535.G.
2. One freestanding sign per premises pursuant to §535.R and not exceeding 6 feet in
height.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
276
3. Façade signs in accordance with §535.Q and not exceeding 20 square feet,
whichever is less.
4. A-frame sign. An A-frame sign for retail establishments conforming to the
following:
a. The sign may be displayed only during business hours.
b. Each side of the sign may not exceed 6 square feet.
c. The sign shall consist of a framed chalkboard or tack board.
d. The location of the sign shall not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular
traffic.
e. Pursuant to §535.E.6, no A-frame sign shall be placed within a public-rightof-
way. Signs placed illegally in such locations shall be subject to removal
by the municipality.
5. Awning signs pursuant to §535.M.
6. One changeable copy sign pursuant to §535.N.
7. Directional signs pursuant to §535.O.
8. Directory signs pursuant to §535.P.
9. One projecting sign per building in lieu of a freestanding sign not to exceed 12
square feet in area. The minimum height clearance of the lower edge of any such
sign shall be 9 feet.
10. One off-premise sign with a non-commercial message in lieu of a freestanding sign.
11. The standards set forth in §535.T “Historic District Signage” shall apply throughout
any NC-1 district which includes property which is also within a historic district.
X. Signs Permitted in the O, RD-1, RD-2, MX-2, MX-3 and LI Districts. [Ord. 2174, 3/18/14;
Ord. 2199-14, 10/7/14; Ord. 2250-16, 12/6/16]
1. Any sign allowed without permit, pursuant to §535.G.
2. One freestanding sign for each collector or arterial roadway that provides access to
the building or complex pursuant to §535.R and not exceeding 10 feet in height.
3. Freestanding signs shall be set back from all street lines a minimum of 30 feet.
4. Façade signs in accordance with §535.Q and not exceeding 100 square feet,
whichever is less, excepting RD-2 districts.
5. Façade signs, in accordance with §535.Q located in the RD-2 district shall conform
to the following:
a. Façade signs for principal uses may be increased to no more than 200
square feet in area, whichever is less.
b. One façade sign for each accessory use shall be permitted not to exceed 40
square feet in area.
c. Awning signs in lieu of a façade sign shall be permitted for accessory uses.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
277
6. Directional signs pursuant to §535.O.
7. Directory signs pursuant to §535.P.
8. One off-premise sign with a non-commercial message in lieu of a freestanding sign.
9. In the Mixed Use 2 district, only, a changeable copy sign that meets the definition of
a variable message sign, provided it meets the following criteria:
a. The sign is oriented to a highway designated as part of the Dwight D.
Eisenhower National System of Interstate and Defense Highways by the
Federal Highway Administration;
b. The sign meets the separation distances of §535.E.8; and
c. The sign shall not exceed 14 feet tall by 48 feet wide in sign area.
Y. Signs Permitted in the HC District. [Ord. 2350-19, 12/17/19]
1. Any sign allowed without permit, pursuant to §535.G.
2. One freestanding sign for each collector or arterial roadway that provides access to
the building or complex, pursuant to §535.R.
3. Freestanding signs shall be set back from all property lines a minimum distance of
15 feet.
4. Façade signs shall conform to §535.Q and shall not exceed 100 square feet,
whichever is less, excepting shopping centers.
5. Façade signs for shopping centers shall conform to §535.Q and the following
requirements:
a. Where a principal use occupying at least 750 square feet of segregated area
has direct access from the outside, a façade sign conforming to §535.Q and
not exceeding 80 square feet in area shall be permitted.
b. Where a principal use in a shopping center exceeds 20% of the total floor
area or 50,000 gross square feet, the area of the façade sign may increase to
not more than 300 square feet and shall conform to §535.Q.
6. One changeable copy sign pursuant to §535.N.
7. Directional signs pursuant to §535.O.
8. Directory signs pursuant to §535.P.
9. One off-premise sign with a non-commercial message in lieu of a freestanding sign.
10. Senior citizen residential uses shall be permitted signage in accordance with §535.V.
11. New car and truck nationally franchised dealerships with at least 400 feet of
contiguous street frontage shall be permitted one additional freestanding sign,
pursuant to the size limitations of Table 5.18. The additional sign may be attached
to the primary freestanding sign or located on a second support structure.
12. Service stations shall also be permitted a changeable copy sign on each fuel
dispensing pump not to exceed 3 square feet in area and on each freestanding sign
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
278
not to exceed 18 square feet.
13. Fast food restaurants with a drive-thru facility shall be permitted two menu signs.
Any such sign shall not be legible from the public right-of-way. The sign shall not
exceed 60 square feet in area and 7 feet in height.
14. An A-frame sign for a tenant at a shopping center conform to the following:
a. The sign may be displayed only during business hours.
b. Each side of the sign may not exceed 6 square feet or 5 feet in height.
c. The sign shall be located on the sidewalk in front of the store to which it
relates.
d. The design, materials and color of the sign and supporting frame shall
complement the building design and shall be consistent with that of other
A-frame signs at the shopping center, if applicable.
e. The location of the sign shall not interfere with pedestrian, vehicular
traffic or clear sight distance requirements.
f. Pursuant to §535.E.6, no A-frame sign shall be placed within a publicright-
of-way. Signs placed in such locations shall be subject to removal
and confiscation by the municipality.
Z. Signs Permitted in the RC District.
1. Any sign allowed without permit, pursuant to §535.G.
2. Awning sign, pursuant to §535.M.
3. One freestanding sign for each collector or arterial roadway that provides access to
the building or complex, pursuant to §535.R.
4. Freestanding signs shall be set back from all property lines a minimum distance of
20 feet.
5. Façade signs shall conform to §535.Q and shall not exceed 100 square feet,
whichever is less, excepting regional shopping malls.
6. Façade signs for regional shopping malls shall conform to §535.Q and the following
requirements:
a. Where a principal use occupying at least 750 square feet of segregated area
has direct access from the outside, a façade sign not exceeding three percent
(3%) of the total façade area or 80 square feet in area, whichever is less,
shall be permitted.
b. Where a principal use in a regional shopping mall exceeds 50,000 square
feet of gross leasable area, the area of the façade sign shall not exceed 5%
of the total façade area or 400 square feet, whichever is less. Such signs
shall be permitted on up to three elevations which face the parking lots of
the regional shopping mall.
7. Changeable copy signage pursuant to §535.N shall be permitted to be integrated into
a freestanding sign otherwise permitted under subparagraph -3 above for a theatre or
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
279
live entertainment use in a regional shopping mall. Notwithstanding any other
provision to the contrary, movie theatres shall be permitted the following:
a. Changeable copy signage pursuant to §535.N may be integrated into a
freestanding sign in a regional shopping mall otherwise permitted under
subparagraph -3 above. Such signs may also display messages directed to
the general public for health, safety and welfare purposes.
b. The number of lines of copy may equal the number of screens.
c. The freestanding sign may include the theatre’s name and the changeable
copy portion may occupy up to 80% of the sign area.
d. A movie theatre freestanding sign shall comply with the size limitations of
§535.R.
8. Directional signs pursuant to §535.O, except that freestanding directory signs
internal to a regional shopping mall site may be up to 50 square feet in area and may
be 8 feet in height and may contain commercial messages for business with 50,000
sf. or more of gross leasable area.
9. Directory signs pursuant to §535.P, except that at an enclosed entrance to a common
access point in a regional shopping mall, the directory sign may be 50 square feet in
area, either wall-mounted or freestanding, if such sign is located with 50 feet of such
enclosed entrance.
10. One off-premise sign with a non-commercial message in lieu of a freestanding sign.
11. Parking Structures. Where there are multiple parking structures, each structure may
have one sign attached to each side, but not to exceed 4 such signs on any one
structure. Such sign shall be located on a spandrel or stair tower and shall be limited
to a single letter or number, not exceeding ten square feet in area. Directional signs
internal to the parking structure shall be permitted without limitation. Each entrance
and exit to a parking garage shall be marked with an incidental sign attached to the
façade of the structure. Each vehicular entrance shall be marked with an incidental
sign indicating the maximum height of vehicles permitted to enter the structure. In
the event that a fee is charged for parking within the structure each vehicular
entrance shall be marked with a bill of fare, no less than 6 or more than 10 square
feet in area, indicating at a minimum the hours and rates applying thereto, the
maximum charge, the operator of the facility and an active telephone number in the
event of a dispute between the user and the operator.
AA. Signs Permitted in the OS and EGI Districts.
1. Any sign allowed without permit, pursuant to §535.G.
2. One freestanding sign in accordance with §535.R, not exceeding 6 feet in height.
3. Freestanding signs shall be set back from all street lines a minimum of 30 feet.
4. One façade sign per building in accordance with §535.Q, not to exceed 40 square
feet.
5. One changeable copy sign pursuant to §535.N not to exceed 18 square feet.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §535
280
6. Directional signs pursuant to §535.O.
7. Directory signs pursuant to §535.P.
BB. Non-Conforming Signs.
1. Subject to the remaining restrictions of this section, non-conforming signs that were
otherwise lawful on the effective date of this Ordinance may be continued except as
provided below.
2. No person may engage in any activity that causes an increase in the extent of
nonconformity of a non-conforming sign. No non-conforming sign may be enlarged
or altered in such a manner as to aggravate the non-conforming condition, nor may
illumination be added to any non-conforming sign.
3. A non-conforming sign may not be moved or replaced except to bring the sign into
complete conformity with this Ordinance.
4. If a non-conforming sign is destroyed by natural causes, it may not thereafter be
repaired, reconstructed, or replaced except in conformity with all the provisions of
this Ordinance, and the remnants of the former sign structure shall be cleared from
the land. For purposes of this section, a non-conforming sign is ‘destroyed’ if
damaged to an extent that the cost of repairing the sign to its former stature or
replacing it with an equivalent sign equals or exceeds 50% of the value (tax value if
listed for tax purposes) of the sign so damaged.
5. If a building to which a non-conforming sign is attached or to which it relates is
demolished or destroyed by man-made or natural causes, the non-conforming sign
shall be brought into conformance with the provisions of this section.
6. The message of a non-conforming sign may be changed as long as this does not
create any new non-conformity.
7. Subject to the other provisions of this section, non-conforming signs may be
repaired and renovated as long as the cost of such work does not exceed within any
12 month period 50% of the value (tax value if listed for tax purposes) of such sign.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §536
1. 281
§ 536 Siting of Buildings
A. Design Guidelines for Siting Buildings.
1. Buildings, particularly those on wooded or steeply sloped (in excess of 15% slope)
land, shall be carefully sited to take advantage of aesthetic features and views,
refrain from infringing on critical areas, and retain woodland and specimen trees.
2. Buildings should be compatible with neighboring areas through attention paid in the
architectural design process to scale, size, style, placement of doors and windows, its
form, color, and exterior materials. Incompatible styles, where proposed, should be
physically separated from other buildings or screened through a combination of
landscaping or fencing. Buildings shall be located in such a manner as to reduce
adverse impacts from shadows, changing climatic conditions, noise, and glare on
outdoor living spaces and shall ensure safety and privacy.
3. Building placement and design shall be fitted to the natural contours of the site.
4. Where a site encompasses both level and sloped areas, parking should be located on
the level portion of the site and buildings on the sloped portion.
B. Solar Orientation. See §523, Energy Conservation.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §537
282
§ 537 Soil Erosion and Sediment Control
A. Purpose: The purposes for the control of soil erosion and its resulting sedimentation include:
1. The control of soil erosion and sedimentation damage resulting from the excavation,
relocation, removal or disturbance of soil within the municipality;
2. The prevention of flooding due to the constriction of stream channels by the
depositing of sediment;
3. The preservation of the lands and the existing environment within the municipality;
4. The protection of exposed soil surfaces for the protection of persons and the
property of its inhabitants; and
5. The preservation of public health, safety and general welfare.
B. Applicability: The following regulations shall govern disturbance of soil within the
municipality.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or public agency to excavate,
cut, strip, or otherwise disturb land or soil for use on or off the plot unless a permit
or permits is first obtained pursuant to the provisions of this section.
2. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any owner from excavating,
cutting, stripping, or otherwise disturbing lands or soil for the following purposes:
a. The construction, use and modification of a single family dwelling and
accessory uses; provided any related land disturbance does not exceed an
area of 5,000 square feet. The exemption applies only where such single
family dwelling is not part of a subdivision, site plan, conditional use,
zoning variance, planned development or construction permit application
involving two or more such units. New construction of single family homes
which are part of a larger plan of development are required to secure
approval of a soil erosion and sediment control plan. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
b. Gardening for noncommercial purposes.
c. Commercial, agricultural or horticultural use when in accordance with
accepted farm agricultural practices, approved by the Mercer County Soil
Conservation District.
d. Excavation, cutting, stripping or other land or soil disturbance necessary for
the construction or reconstruction of curbs, sidewalks, private residential
driveways, drainage systems and other utility service connections.
e. Installation, removal, replacement or maintenance of landscaping, including
trees, shrubs, flowers and cover, where the existing land contours are not
changed by more than one foot.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §537
283
C. Soil Disturbance Permit. The following procedures and standards shall govern the issuance
of soil disturbance permits required by this section:
1. Soil disturbance plans and applications will not be accepted for review until site
plan/subdivision approval has been obtained and any appropriate conditions of the
resolution of approval have been met to the satisfaction of the Municipal Engineer.
A soil disturbance permit will not be issued until the site plan/subdivision plans have
been stamped approved and distributed by the municipality and all fees and bonding
have been posted.
2. An application for such permit shall be made to the Municipal Engineer, prior to any
land disturbance as defined and not exempted herein. If such application includes
soil removal as well as soil disturbance, the application and the plot plan required by
§537.C.3 shall also comply with the requirements of §537.D.
3. The applicant shall provide a true and accurate plot plan, in a sufficient number of
copies for distribution pursuant to §537.C.4, below, at a scale of not less than
1”=50', clearly indicating the following information:
a. Contour lines at intervals of 2 feet, in accordance with accepted land
surveying practices.
b. Existing natural and manmade features on and surrounding the site, include
the exact size, shape, location and elevation of existing buildings and
structures; general topographic information; the various soil characteristics,
as defined in the current version of the U.S.D.A. Soil Survey of Mercer
County, and such other particular information as may be reasonably
required by the Municipal Engineer for the evaluation of the effects of the
proposed land disturbance.
c. The location and description of any proposed site development and/or land
disturbance projects.
d. An erosion and sedimentation control plan or farm conservation plan.
e. The construction schedule of the project, including commencement date,
anticipated completion date and implementation of soil erosion and
sedimentation control measures.
f. Data derived from accepted engineering practices on the existing and
anticipated high water table levels on the site and the relationship of such
levels to the proposed final project grade(s).
4. The Municipal Engineer may forward the submitted copies to the Environmental
Resources Committee for advice and recommendations. If requested, the
Environmental Resources Committee shall notify the Municipal Engineer of any
objections or recommendations within 14 days from the date the plans are received.
The Municipal Engineer may, at his or her discretion, consult the New Jersey State
and the Mercer County Soil Conservation Committee and District and the United
States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service in the review of such
plot plan.
5. The Municipal Engineer shall review the application and plot plan and shall either
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §537
284
issue, issue with conditions, or deny the soil disturbance permit within 30 days of
the submission of the applications by mutual agreement in writing between the
Municipal Engineer. The Municipal Engineer shall not be required to act until the
application is complete. If incomplete, the Municipal Engineer shall notify the
applicant within the 30 day period. This time period for a decision may be extended
for an additional 30 days. Failure of the Municipal Engineer to make a decision
within such period or such extension thereof, shall constitute approval. The
applicant shall be provided with written notice of any determination by the
Municipal Engineer. A copy of such determination shall be sent to the Mercer
County Soil Conservation District. Any other information required by the District
shall also be made available.
6. In reviewing applications and plot plans for soil disturbance permits, the Municipal
Engineer shall consider the following criteria:
a. Any proposed soil disturbance shall be done in a manner which will
minimize erosion and sedimentation damage and other adverse
consequences.
b. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained and protected.
c. The extent of the disturbed area and the duration of its exposure shall be
kept within practical geographic and time limits.
d. Either temporary seeding, mulching or other suitable stabilization measures
shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during the land/soil
disturbance.
e. Drainage provisions shall accommodate any increased water runoff
resulting from modified soil and surface conditions during and after the land
or soil disturbance.
f. Water runoff shall be minimized and retained on-site wherever possible to
facilitate ground water recharge and to mitigate possible downstream
damage.
g. Sediment shall be retained on-site to the maximum extent feasible.
h. Necessary diversions and sedimentation basins and similar required
preventive measures shall be installed prior to any on-site land or soil
disturbance.
i. Compliance with minimum standards and specifications contained in
Standards for Soil Erosion and Sediment Control in New Jersey.
j. Such other factors as may reasonably bear upon or relate to the public
health, safety and general environmental welfare as provided in §537.A.
D. Soil Removal Permit. The following procedures and standards shall govern the issuance of
soil removal permits required by this section:
1. The procedures and standards required in §537.C for soil disturbance permits shall
also be followed for a soil removal permit. Soil removal permits shall be required
when an amount of soil exceeding 600 cubic yards is to be removed from any site,
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §537
285
regardless of the time span to accomplish such removal. Application for such permit
shall be made on a prescribed form to the Municipal Engineer concurrently with an
application for a soil disturbance permit, in which case the plot plan required under
§537.C.3, above, to accompany the application for such soil disturbance permit,
shall also contain information as to the amount and extent of soil to be removed.
2. In reviewing such applications for soil removal permits, the Municipal Engineer
shall consider the criteria set forth in §537.C.6; however the term “soil removal” for
“soil disturbance” shall be substituted wherever the latter term appears, and shall
also consider the following additional criteria pertaining only to soil removal:
a. Prevention and control of dust and mud on the premises in question, as well
as on abutting lands.
b. Preservation of soil fertility and the resulting ability of the affected area to
support plant and tree growth by preservation of adequate topsoil.
c. Maintenance of necessary lateral support and grades of abutting lands,
structures and other improvements.
d. Prevention of pits and declivities which are hazardous or which provide
insect breeding locations.
e. Physical characteristics and limitations of the soil for the uses to which the
land may lawfully be put.
f. Drainage provisions to accommodate any increased runoff resulting from
such soil removal activity.
g. Such other factors as may reasonably bear upon or relate to the public
health, safety and general environmental welfare as provided in Section
1202 hereof.
E. Conditions Applicable to Issuance of Either Soil Disturbance or Soil Removal Permits.
Conditions applicable to the Municipal Engineer’s issuance of any permit under this section
may include such following additional criteria as, but not limited to:
1. Posting of a performance bond or other security to insure proper and timely
completion and maintenance of the work in accordance with specified requirements
included in the Municipal Engineer’s report.
2. Time limitations for commencement and completion of the project, together with
provision for inspection and approval following completion in accordance with all
applicable conditions and provisions of this section.
F. Appeal. If any applicant shall be aggrieved by any action of the Municipal Engineer
pursuant to this section, an appeal in writing to the governing body may be taken within 30
days after the date of such action. The governing body shall determine and notify the
appellant in writing of the time and place for a public hearing on said appeal. After such
hearing, the governing body shall affirm, modify, or reverse the action of the Municipal
Engineer, stating its findings and the reasons for its actions and transmitting a written copy
of such action to the appellant and the Municipal Engineer.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §537
286
G. Performance Guarantee. Upon issuance of a soil removal permit and/or a soil disturbance
permit, but prior to commencement of construction, the applicant shall issue a performance
guarantee in accordance with Article IX.
H. Inspection and Enforcement.
1. All soil erosion control installations shall be inspected during the time of their
installations under the supervision of the Municipal Engineer to insure satisfactory
completion. The cost of said inspection shall be in accordance with Article IX.
2. The requirements of this section shall be enforced by the Municipal Engineer, under
whose supervision periodic inspections of the work shall be carried out to insure
compliance. If the Municipal Engineer finds violation of the terms and conditions of
the permit(s) at any time, he or she may revoke said permit(s) forthwith, may require
necessary emergency erosion and sedimentation control measures to be installed
promptly, and may pursue such other remedies as are provided in §537.J hereof. In
the event that building permit violations are also involved in the alleged violation,
the Construction Code Official shall, on his or her own initiative or at the request of
the Municipal Engineer, revoke said building permit, which shall be effective until
reissued upon abatement of the violation.
3. The applicant shall have the soil erosion plan as approved by the Municipal
Engineer on-site at all times during construction. The Municipal Engineer may
further issue a stop construction order concurrently with permit revocation if a
project is not being executed in strict accordance with the approved plot plan. No
certificate of occupancy for a project shall be issued unless there has been
compliance with the provisions of the approved plot plan for permanent measures to
control soil erosion and sedimentation, as evidenced by a formal report by the
Municipal Engineer of such compliance to be filed with the Construction Code
Official prior to issuance of any such certificate of occupancy. A copy of this report
shall also be sent to the Mercer County Soil Conservation District by the
Construction Code Official.
I. Fees. A fee shall be paid by the applicant in accordance with Article IX at the time of filing
of the application.
J. Penalty. If any person violates any of the above provisions of this section, any standard
promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this section, or fails to comply with the provisions
of a certified plan, the municipality or the district may institute a civil action in the Superior
Court for injunctive relief. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section,
any standard promulgated pursuant to this section, or fails to comply with the provisions of a
certified plan shall be liable to a penalty of not less than $25.00 nor more than $3,000.00 to
be collected in a summary proceeding pursuant to the Penalty Enforcement Law (N.J.S.A.
2A:58-1 et seq.). The Superior Court, County Court, County District Court, and municipal
court shall have jurisdiction to enforce said Penalty Enforcement Law. If the violation is of a
continuing nature, each day during which it continues shall constitute an additional separate
and distinct offense.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §538
1. 287
§ 538 Solid Waste
A. All developments shall provide for adequate solid waste disposal, including provisions for
recycled materials.
B. There shall be at least one trash and recycling pick-up location provided for each multifamily
or non-residential building which shall be separated from parking spaces either inside
or outside the building. All trash and recycling locations shall be enclosed and located in a
manner which is obscured from view from parking areas, streets and adjacent residential uses
or zoning districts by a fence, wall, planting or combination of the three.
C. All exterior solid waste enclosures shall be constructed of masonry compatible with the
architectural materials of the building.
D. If located within the building, the doorway may serve both the loading and trash/garbage
functions and if located outside the building, it may be located adjacent to or within the
general loading area(s) provided the container in no way interferes with or restricts loading
and unloading functions. Moreover, if located outside the building, the container shall be
situated on the same horizontal plane as the driveway providing access to the container.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §539
1. 288
§ 539 Streets and Curbing
A. General.
1. The arrangement of streets shall conform to the Circulation Element of the Master
Plan or Official Map for the municipality. Right-of-way widths for non-residential
streets shall be as indicated in the Circulation Element of the Master Plan or Official
Map.
2. For streets not shown on the Master Plan or Official Map, the designer shall provide
for the extension of existing streets.
3. Residential streets shall be arranged so as to discourage through traffic but not to
such an extent that the mobility of residents is impaired. Residential streets shall be
designed to permit their extension to adjacent undeveloped lots or lots that have not
been constructed to their permitted zoning density.
4. In the event that a development adjoins or includes existing streets that do not
conform to widths as shown on the adopted master plan and/or official map or the
street width requirements of this Ordinance, additional land along either or both
sides of said street, sufficient to conform to the right-of-way requirements, shall be
dedicated for the location, installation, repair and maintenance of streets, drainage
facilities, utilities and other facilities customarily located in street rights-of-way.
a. The necessary deeds of ownership shall be furnished, and the dedication
shall be expressed as follows: Street right-of-way granted permitting the
entrance upon these lands for the purposes provided for and expressed in the
Land Use Ordinance of the Township. This statement shall in no way
reduce the developer’s responsibility to provide, install, repair or maintain
the facilities in the area dedicated by ordinance and/or as shown on the plan
and/or as provided for by any maintenance or performance guarantees.
b. If the development is along one side only, one-half of the required extra
width shall be dedicated. Additionally, that portion of the existing street or
road adjoining or included within a site plan or major subdivision shall be
improved by the developer, including excavation, grading, base courses and
surfacing in accordance with the street improvement standards of this
Ordinance.
B. Design Guidelines for Residential Streets. In addition to the regulations of the RSIS, the
following requirements shall also apply to the layout of residential streets:
1. Cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs shall be avoided to the greatest feasible extent. Short loop
streets shall be preferred to cul-de-sacs. Cul-de-sacs in excess of 1,000 feet shall be
designed with an intermediate turnaround not to exceed every 500 feet.
2. Alleys. Alleys may be required when net residential density exceeds 5 units per
acre.
C. Right-of-Way for Non-Residential Streets.
1. Required width. The right-of-way shall be measured from lot line to lot line.
a. Arterial streets - 80 feet.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §539
289
b. Collector streets - 60 feet to 66 feet as may be required by the Mercer
County Planning Board and/or the Lawrence Township Planning Board.
c. Minor streets - 50 feet.
d. Cul-de-sac - 60 feet.
2. Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed 600 feet in length and shall be paved with a minimum
radius of 50 feet at its turnaround end.
3. The right-of-way shall be sufficiently wide to contain the cartway, curbs, shoulders,
sidewalks, graded areas, utilities and street tree planting strip.
4. The right-of-way width of a new street that is a continuation of an existing street
shall in no case be continued at a width less than the existing street.
5. The right-of-way shall reflect future development as indicated by the Master Plan.
D. Specifications for Non-Residential Streets. The quality of surfacing and base materials shall
adhere to the minimum standards set forth by the municipality, county, or State engineers
when said paving concerns roads under their jurisdiction and where such standards exist.
The following municipal standards shall apply:
1. A crown of 6 inches shall be provided, unless otherwise directed by the Municipal
Engineer.
2. The minimum requirements of any new street shall be constructed according to the
specifications and procedures as set forth in the New Jersey Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (1989)
and amendments thereto.
3. On all local roads, the base course shall be 5 inches of Bituminous Stabilized Base,
Mix I-2, placed on a compacted, unyielding subgrade consisting of a minimum of
six inches of solid aggregate I-5 or Dense Graded Aggregate Base Course (DGABC)
which has been inspected and approved by the Municipal Engineer.
4. On all municipal non-residential collector and arterial streets, the base course shall
consist of bituminous stabilized base, Mix I-2, applied in two lifts upon a compacted
unyielding subgrade consisting of a minimum of 6 inches of soil aggregate I-5 or
Dense Graded Aggregate Base Course (DGABC) which has been inspected and
approved by the Municipal Engineer. Municipal collector streets shall have 6 inches
of base course, while municipal arterial streets shall have 7 inches.
5. The surface course for all classes of municipal streets shall consist of 2 inches of
bituminous concrete, FABC, Mix I-5 applied according to New Jersey Department
of Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (1989)
and amendments thereto.
6. In all cases, an atomized spray tack coat shall be applied between the surface course
and the base course in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Road and
Bridge Construction (1989) and amendments thereto.
7. All streets shall have a minimum grade of 0.75%. The maximum grade for new
local streets shall be 6% and the maximum grade for new collector and arterial
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §539
290
streets shall be 4%.
8. The approval of any Official Map delineating streets by the governing body of the
municipality shall in no way be construed as an acceptance of any street indicated
thereon.
E. Lighting. See §526, Lighting.
F. Street Signs. Appropriate street signs meeting municipal specifications and approved by the
Municipal Engineer as to size and location shall be installed at the intersection of all streets.
G. Additional Standards.
1. No subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be approved
except where the control and disposal of land comprising such strips has been placed
in the governing body under conditions approved by the approving authority.
2. Subdivisions that adjoin or include existing streets that do not conform to widths as
shown on the Master Plan or Official Map or the street width requirements of this
section shall dedicate additional width along either one or both sides of the street. If
the subdivision is along one side only, one-half of the required extra width shall be
dedicated.
3. Maximum grades within intersections shall be 3%.
4. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as is possible and in no case
shall be less than 60”. Approaches to all intersections shall follow a straight line for
at least 100 feet.
5. No more than two streets shall meet or intersect at any one point and the centerlines
of both intersection streets shall pass through a common point. Measuring from this
common point, two intersections shall be spaced a sufficient distance to permit a
minimum of two lots between the two street rights-of-way.
6. The block corners at intersections shall be rounded at the curbline with the street
having the highest radius requirement determining the minimum standard for all
curb lines. Curb radii shall be as follows:
a. Arterial streets: 30 feet
b. Collector streets: 25 feet
c. Local streets: 20 feet
d. On undersized streets without on-street parking, curb radii may be enlarged
to accommodate adequate turning movements for passenger vehicles.
7. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be prohibited.
8. A tangent at least 200 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on
arterial and collector streets. When connecting street lines deflect from each other at
any one point, they shall be connected by a curve with a radius conforming to
AASHTO or ITE standards to establish minimum sight distances within the right-ofway
based on the design speed of the street.
9. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of sufficient radius to
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §539
291
provide a smooth transition and proper sight distance.
10. If a dead-end street is of a temporary nature, a similar turn-around shall be provided
and provisions made for future extension of the street and reversion of the excess
right-of-way to the adjoining properties. Alternatively, the Board of Jurisdiction
may require that a temporary dead end be constructed with a cul-de-sac and
landscaped traffic island which will become a traffic circle once the temporary street
is extended.
11. No street shall have a name which will duplicate or so nearly duplicate the name of
an existing street within the Township or in a neighboring municipality as to be
confused with the existing street. The continuation of an existing street shall have
the same name.
12. In order to enforce basic traffic laws and regulations, developments with private or
semipublic streets, off-street parking, off-street loading, sidewalks, bikeways and
other circulation facilities shall, as a condition of approval, request that the provision
of N.J.S.A. 39:5A-1 be made applicable to the development.
H. Curbs and Gutters for Non-Residential Streets.
1. Curbs shall generally be required on all cartways but may be substituted for graded
shoulders on low volume streets where appropriate (see following subsection).
Curbs are intended to provide the functions of a vehicular barrier, as a control for
storm water runoff, and as slope protection.
2. Curbs shall be constructed in accordance with the Lawrence Township Engineering
Standards.
3. A sidewalk curb ramp shall be provided wherever a public sidewalk or public
pedestrian easement crosses a curb or other change in elevation such as a graded
shoulder. Curb ramps shall be constructed in accordance with standards published
by the Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board and the New
Jersey Department of Transportation, Pedestrian Compatible Planning and Design
Guidelines. Curb ramps shall be designed to fully incorporate the required sidewalk
width. Curb ramps shall be designed to provide tactile warning of the cartway for
the visually impaired.
4. Belgian block curbing may be installed in business and office park developments.
Stones used for secondary and primary local roads shall not be less than 10 inches in
height and shall be constructed to show a vertical face above the roadway pavement
of 6 inches. Stones used for municipal collector and arterial roads shall not be less
than 12 inches in height and shall be constructed to show a vertical face above the
roadway pavement of 8 inches. The concrete to be used shall be Class “B” concrete
(minimum 4,000 p.s.i., air entrained) as specified in the New Jersey Department of
Transportation Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction (1989)
and amendments thereto. Pre-molded bituminous expansion joint material shall be
installed not less than every 50 feet through the curb footing.
5. Concrete curbing shall meet the following specifications:
a. The concrete to be used for curbs shall be Class “B” concrete (minimum
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §539
292
4,000 p.s.i., air-entrained) as specified in the Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction (1989) and amendments thereto.
b. Curbs shall be constructed in 20 foot sections. Pre-molded bituminous
expansion joint material shall be installed every 20 feet and half depth
contraction joints installed every 10 feet. Joints shall be sealed as specified
by the Municipal Engineer.
c. Concrete curbs for secondary and primary local roads shall be 8 inches wide
at their base and not less than 6 inches wide at their top. Their heights shall
not be less than 18 inches and be constructed to show a vertical face above
the roadway pavement of 6 inches. The rear top corner of this curb shall
have a radius of 0.25 inch and the front top corner shall have a radius 0.5
inch. Curbs at driveway openings shall be constructed to the full depth of
18 inches, which depth shall extend a minimum of 6 inches on either side of
the depression.
I. Graded Shoulders for Non-Residential Streets.
1. Shoulders and/or drainage swales may be required instead of curbs when:
a. Shoulders are required by the approving authority;
b. Soil and/or topography make the use of shoulders and/or drainage swales
preferable; and/or
c. It is in the best interest of the municipality to preserve its rural character by
using shoulders and/or drainage swales instead of curbs. The approving
authority shall review and approve all waivers from curbing.
2. Shoulders shall be a minimum of 4 feet wide on each side of the cartway and shall
be located within the right-of-way. Wider shoulders may be required where existing
grade dictates.
3. Shoulders may consist of a paved shoulder constructed in accordance with the street
specifications as otherwise required in this section, a gravel shoulder, a stabilized
turf shoulder, or a graded turf shoulder without stabilization. Stabilized turf
shoulders are preferred. The construction method used shall be based on anticipated
traffic speeds, volumes and vehicle usage on the roadway and shall be designed to
be bicycle compatible. The Municipal Engineer shall provide the Board of
Jurisdiction with a recommendation during the application process as to the
appropriate shoulder design for the development in question.
J. Roadway Excavation. Roadway excavation shall include the removal and satisfactory
disposal of all materials taken from within the limits of the work that are necessary for the
construction and preparation of the roadbed, embankment, subgrade, shoulders, slopes, side
ditches, drainage structures, trenches, waterways, intersections, approaches, and private
entrances, as indicated or directed. All suitable materials removed from the excavations shall
be used as far as practicable in the formation of the embankment, subgrade and shoulders,
and at such other places as directed. Ditches and waterways shall be excavated to the depth
and width shown on plans, or as may be indicated or directed by the Municipal Engineer.
During construction of the roadway the roadbed shall be maintained in such condition that it
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §539
293
will be well drained at all times. After construction, the road shall be restored and repaved to
the satisfaction of the Municipal Engineer.
1. Embankments. Embankments shall be formed of suitable material placed in
successive layers of not more than 12 inches in depth for the full width of the crosssection
commencing on a subgrade approved by the Municipal Engineer, and shall
be compacted by approved mechanical equipment and by distributing the necessary
hauling uniformly over each succeeding layer. Stumps, trees, rubbish, and/or other
unsuitable material or substances shall not be placed in the embankments, nor shall
the embankment be commenced on soft or organic-laden soil.
2. Borrow excavation. When embankment from off-site is required, sufficient suitable
material shall be obtained by the subdivider from borrow pits located beyond the
limits of the work. This material shall be shown as ?borrow? and shall be of a
quality satisfactory for the purpose for which it is required and it shall be approved
by the Municipal Engineer. Borrow will include the furnishing, removal, placing
and satisfactory compacting of the additional material necessary to complete the
embankments, subgrade and shoulders.
3. Formation of subgrade. The bottom of excavation of the box to receive the
pavement surface shall be true to line, grade and cross-section established or
indicated on approved drawings. After all drains and drainage structures have been
installed and the subgrade has been shaped and compacted, it shall be brought to a
firm unyielding surface by rolling the entire area with an approved three wheel
power roller weighing not less than 10 tons. Any areas which are soft and yielding
or which will not compact readily when rolled or tamped shall be removed. All
loose rock or boulders found in the earth excavation shall be removed or broken off
to a depth of not more than 6 inches below the surface of the subgrade. All holes or
depressions made by the removal of material shall be filled with suitable material
and the whole surface compacted uniformly. If the surface of a present roadway
conforms approximately to the surface of the finished subgrade, it shall be scarified
or rooted to a uniform depth for the full width of the paved surface sufficient to
eliminate all depressions and irregularities and to permit uniform reshaping. When
necessary, additional approved material shall be added to bring the subgrade to the
desired elevation and cross-section, and the whole shall be rolled as previously
specified, until thoroughly compacted. Sod, roots, and other objectionable material
shall not be used in forming the subgrade.
4. Protection of subgrade. All ditches and drains shall be completed before placing any
pavement construction material. The subdivider shall protect the subgrade and keep
it drained at all times. Neither foundation nor surfacing material shall be deposited
on the subgrade until the subgrade has been checked and approved by the Municipal
Engineer.
5. Slopes. Slopes in embankment and excavation shall be formed with a slope not
steeper than one unit vertically to two units horizontally unless otherwise directed by
the Municipal Engineer.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §540
1. 294
§ 540 Subdivision Layout.
Subdivision layout shall be designed to encourage the development of the land which, through the
standards adopted in this Ordinance, provide for flexibility in planning and development and that
respect the natural character of the land, its drainage system, soil capabilities, groundwater and
aquifer recharge quality, and to include only those uses that are compatible with allowed uses in the
zoning district and existing uses on adjacent lands. Such compatibility shall be determined on the
basis of inventories of the natural features of the site, plans indicating the physical relationship
among types of uses and any natural or manmade barriers, existing or planned, between different uses
both within and adjacent to the proposed development. Subdivision plans shall be designed to meet
these goals and the following guidelines.
A. Lot Configuration. Lots shall be configured to meet the following requirements:
1. Side lot lines shall be either at right angles or radial to street lines.
2. Lots shall be regular in shape.
3. Pie slice-shaped lots are to be avoided except on a radius of less than 100 feet.
4. Each lot must front upon an approved public street.
5. Where extra width has been dedicated, or proposed for dedication or reservation, for
the widening of existing streets, lots shall begin at such new street line and all
setbacks shall be measured from such line.
6. Where there is a question as to the suitability of a lot or lots for their intended use
due to factors such as poor drainage conditions or flood conditions, soil tests or test
borings indicating the ground conditions to be inadequate for proper sewage
disposal for on-lot treatment of effluent or similar circumstances, the Board of
Jurisdiction may withhold approval of such lots. If approval is withheld, the Board
shall give reasons for such withholding on the record.
B. Blocks. Blocks shall be configured to meet the following requirements.
1. Blocks shall be wide enough for two tiers of lots and shall not be less than 200 feet
in width. This requirement shall not preclude the appropriate design of alleys
through blocks.
2. Blocks shall be designed to include no more than 24 residential lots.
3. Blocks shall generally be not less than 500 feet long nor more than 1,000 feet long.
Blocks in excess of 800 feet shall incorporate a mid-block pedestrian right-of-way at
least 20 feet wide connecting through the block. Pedestrian rights-of-way shall be
improved with sidewalk in accordance with the RSIS.
4. Pedestrian and bicycle paths conforming to Table 5.14 and the Lawrence Township
Engineering Standards shall be designed and constructed from the end of cul-de-sacs
and from loop streets to abutting or adjoining residential, collector and arterial
streets, parks, schools, retail uses, and the Greenway Network (see §529.G). The
width for combined pedestrian and bicycle paths shall be used for any length in
excess of 400 lineal feet, unless the RSIS permits a lesser width. Such path systems
shall be constructed regardless of the existence of such paths on abutting or
adjoining lands.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §541
1. 295
§ 541 Tree Removal and Tree Cutting.
A. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to control and regulate indiscriminate or excessive
removal, cutting, and destruction of trees, and to control, regulate, and prevent conditions
which cause an increase in storm water runoff, sedimentation, soil erosion, reflected heat, air
or noise pollution, or inhibit aquifer recharge. The regulations which follow are designed to
limit such adverse impacts.
B. Permit or Board Approval Required. No person directly or indirectly shall, without either
first obtaining a zoning permit or an approval in the site plan or subdivision application
process, remove or relocate to another site any tree within a tree save area; or, remove any
specimen tree regardless of location. "Removal" shall include, but not be limited to, damage
inflicted to the root system by machinery, storage of materials and soil compaction, change
of natural grade above or below the root system or around the trunk; damage inflicted on the
tree permitting fungus, pest, or other infestation; excessive pruning or thinning leading to a
failure to thrive; and paving over the root system with an impervious material within such
proximity as to be fatally harmful to the tree.
C. Exemptions. The following tree cutting and tree removal activities shall be exempt, unless it
is a specimen tree, from the provisions of this section:
1. Individual lot owners may remove up to 5 trees of 8" or more in caliper in any one
year period. There is no restriction on the number of trees removed less than 8" in
caliper. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
2. Any tree growing on property approved to operate as a nursery or garden center.
3. Any tree growing on property actively operated as a farm, which is removed to
create fields for crops or forage and not sold for profit.
4. Trees which, in the opinion of the Township, its employees or agents, constitute an
immediate threat to the health, safety or welfare of the general public.
5. Public or local utilities maintaining easements or rights-of-way in the normal course
of business.
6. Communications companies regulated by the Federal Communications Commission
maintaining communications lines and equipment.
7. Approved game management practice, as recommended by the State of New Jersey,
Department of Environmental Protection, Division of Fish, Game and Wildlife.
8. Properties devoted to the practice of silviculture for which farmland assessment has
been approved.
D. Application Procedures. Any person wishing to cut and remove trees within the
municipality, unless exempted, shall file with the Township a tree protection plan prior to
soil disturbance, the issuance of a building permit, or as part of the site plan and subdivision
submittal process pursuant to Article VIII. The tree protection plan shall include the
following information:
1. Tax map, lot and block number.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §541
296
2. Area of tract.
3. Location upon the lot of trees or wooded area.
4. The location upon the lot where tree removal is to take place.
5. A survey of the size (8" caliper or larger), species and quantity of trees which are to
be removed. Where the area to be surveyed is greater than 10,000 square feet, a
representative wooded rectangular area 100' x 100' may be surveyed and its results
extrapolated to the remaining wooded area. A minimum of one sample plot per five
(5) acres of total wooded area identified for the tree removal project shall be
surveyed. The location of the sample plots shall be subject to the approval of the
Board engineer, who may seek recommendations from the Board's planning
consultant and/or the Township Shade Tree Advisory Committee. Notwithstanding
the above, the tree survey shall individually locate each specimen tree on the entire
site. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
6. A description of the type of tree removal project, that is:
a. Thinning;
b. Selective cutting;
c. Clear cutting; or
d. Aesthetic improvement cut.
7. General slope and topography taken from either a survey of the property or official
Township mapping.
8. Location of streams and wetlands, as depicted on Township mapping.
9. Specific proposals for replanting or reforestation, if applicable, including a list of
trees to be planted, selected from the recommended trees lists pursuant to §525.
10. The tree removal or tree replacement plan shall be overlaid on a map or survey
depicting existing conditions of the site.
11. Location of buildings.
12. Location of roads, driveways, parking lots, staging areas, recreation areas, and
garden areas.
13. Grading plan.
14. Schedule for tree removal and planting.
15. Provision for removal of excess stumps and branches from the property.
E. Tree Protection Zone. Tree protection zones shall be established on all areas of a site
contemplated for development; or, tree removal in the absence of an application for
development. The tree protection zone shall be that area exclusive of buildings, parking,
driveways, streets, storm water management facilities including swales, and utilities plus an
additional width at the perimeter of such uses of land of 15 feet for a building and 10 feet for
all other classes to permit appropriate grading. The intent is to create an area or areas in
which trees shall be retained, planted initially, or are to be planted with replacement trees for
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §541
297
areas that have been cleared for site development. Special attention should be given to
placing old growth woodland into the tree protection zone. Utilities should be grouped into
common easements to maximum tree save areas as illustrated in Figure 5.1.
Figure 5.1 Schematic Tree Save Areas and Location of Utilities.
1. Trees within tree protection zones shall be grouped into tree save areas wherein
retention is required unless waived by the Board of Jurisdiction or by the
Administrative Officer, as the case may be. For permits that do not require an
application for major subdivision or major site plan, the Administrative Officer shall
determine the adequacy of the management plan. The Administrative Officer may
consult with the Environmental Resources Committee, Shade Tree Commission or
appropriate professional staff in his or her decision.
2. Tree protection zones and any tree save area within such zone for individual single
family detached lots not subject to major subdivision approval shall be delineated on
a plot plan or lot grading plan pursuant to §1202.C in order to determine compliance
with this section.
F. Standards for Tree Retention. The following standards shall apply to all trees regardless of
location:
1. Existing trees on a site contemplated for development shall be retained to the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §541
298
greatest feasible extent.
2. In off-street parking areas and storm water management facilities, islands of trees
shall be retained. These requirements shall not pertain to individual single family
detached and two-family dwellings.
3. No paving of any impervious nature shall be placed within the dripline of any tree,
and the grade shall be such that drainage of rainwater will water the root area
without pooling or exceeding the requirements of the species. Excess water shall be
admitted to storm sewers in the parking lot or drained by other means acceptable to
the Municipal Engineer.
4. Any live tree which is substantially damaged as a result of grading or general
construction shall be replaced with another tree. A tree shall be substantially
damaged when one-half (1/2) or more of the tree bark is destroyed below 4 feet or
the trunk is girdled.
5. Any tree used in a required planting, or to replace a damaged tree, shall have a trunk
or main stem which is at least 2.5 inches in caliper, unless the tree is used for storm
water management facility plantings, and shall meet the specifications of the
American Nurserymen's Association standards.
6. Existing trees are encouraged to be used for the required buffer zone of trees and
shrubs to be established in accordance with §525.H.
7. Trees in the area between the street line and the setback line of the building shall be
preserved to the greatest extent possible (see Figure 5.1).
8. Specimen trees shall not be removed unless diseased or constitute a hazard to the
general public.
9. No trees on public rights-of-way, parks, or public areas are to be removed by private
individuals except as approved by the Administrative Officer or other officer
designated by the governing body. The removal of trees shall not be permitted from
a Master Plan right-of-way unless trees are dead, diseased, or endanger life or
property, or a letter of approval is obtained from the governing body or
Administrative Officer. Conversely, no trees are to be planted on public rights-ofway
without express approval granted as part of a site plan or subdivision
application or by the Administrative Officer.
G. Methods of Tree Protection. All persons shall exercise due care to protect trees which are to
be retained from damage during construction. Critical root zones shall be protected by the
use of fencing located at the dripline in accordance with the Lawrence Township
Engineering Standards. The procedures in this subsection shall be observed in order to
protect retained trees, as follows:
1. Protection from mechanical injury.
a. Prior to any grubbing or clearing, all trees in the tree protection zone from
its edge to a depth of 25 feet into the zone shall be protected from
equipment damage by enclosing the area at the dripline. Individual trees to
be retained shall be completely encircled as required herein. All exposed
roots, trunks, and low lying branches shall be equally protected. Groups of
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §541
299
trees in a tree save area may be protected by fencing the entire area where
they are located. Compaction of the ground by mechanical, vehicular,
storage of materials, or other means within the dripline shall not be
permitted.
b. Feeder roots shall not be cut within the dripline; however, if feeder root
cutting is waived in order to further other objectives of this section, such
cuts shall be made by hand with pruning shears to produce sharp, clean cuts.
Removal of feeder roots by mechanized equipment shall not be permitted.
c. Tree trunks and exposed roots shall not be damaged. However, accidental
damage shall be addressed and action taken to avoid further injury to the
tree. Damaged branches shall be sawed off at the branch collar. No shellac
or pruning paint shall be used. When the portion of the tree that is damaged
is diseased, pruning equipment shall be dipped in alcohol to prevent further
spread of disease.
d. Deciduous trees shall be given a liquid, slow-release, low-nitrogen, allpurpose
fertilizer to aid in their recovery from potential damage from
construction activities. Such application shall be made at a distance of 1
foot from the trunk extending out in concentric circles to the dripline. The
fertilizer shall be injected into the ground at the time of the cease of
construction and one year thereafter.
e. Trees shall not be used for roping, cabling, signs, or fencing. Nails and
other fastening devices shall not be driven or attached to the tree.
f. The area in the critical root zone under the dripline shall be left open to
provide access for water and nutrients. No impervious cover, storage of
equipment, materials, debris or fill shall be allowed within this area except
as specifically approved by the Board of Jurisdiction or Administrative
Officer.
g. Trees being removed under the allowances in this section shall not be felled,
pushed, or pulled into a tree protection or tree save area.
2. Protection from grade change.
a. Increase in grade. If an increase in the grade of the land is proposed, the
applicant shall install either:
(1) A system of gravel and drains at the old soil level which opens into
a dry well built around the trunk and individually designed for the
contour of the land to provide aeration and drainage in accordance
with the Lawrence Township Engineering Standards.
(2) A retaining wall between the existing grade and higher grade to the
satisfaction of the Municipal Engineer.
b. Lowering the grade. If a lowering of the grade is proposed one of the
following methods to protect the tree shall be followed:
(1) Terracing the grade at the dripline and out from the tree in
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §541
300
accordance with the Lawrence Township Engineering Standards.
(2) A retaining wall between the existing grade and lower grade to the
satisfaction of the Municipal Engineer.
3. Protection from excavation. Trenches for utility lines or other similar uses shall
adhere to the following, listed in descending order of preference:
a. Trenches shall bypass the critical root area unless the approving authority
determines that no other practical alternative exists; in which case:
b. Trenches should be tunneled under the feeder roots a minimum of two feet
from existing grade, in accordance with the Lawrence Township
Engineering Standards, unless the approving authority determines that no
other practical alternative exists; in which case:
c. Trenches may be dug within the dripline of the tree, provided that the
following provisions shall be observed:
(1) Trenches shall be no closer to the trunk than half the distance to the
dripline.
(2) Roots shall be cut with sharp hand tools to reduce feeder root
damage.
(3) The trench shall be backfilled within the shortest amount of time
possible and the soil shall not be compacted.
d. Protection during cleanup.
(1) All construction debris shall be hauled to an approved landfill and
shall not be buried or burned.
(2) Snow fences, barriers or other tree protection devices shall be the
final item to be removed from the site prior to occupancy.
H. Required Tree Density and Replacement From Development.
1. Each lot for which a major site plan application and approval pursuant to Article
VIII is required shall have, after development, a minimum density of trees per acre
of the gross area of the tract. The number of trees required to achieve the minimum
density required shall be as set forth in this subsection. If a site initially lacks the
sufficient density of trees required or if site clearing reduces the tree density to
below the minimum required, the developer shall plant additional trees to meet the
minimum. These trees are termed “replacement” trees regardless of whether they
are for initial planting to meet minimum requirements or for replanting after site
clearing has occurred. Trees otherwise required to be planted for landscape buffer
areas or parking lots pursuant to §525, as the case may be, may be counted towards
the required tree density. The planting of replacement trees shall be required under
the following conditions:
a. To establish the minimum tree density requirements for the site;
b. Where grading occurs in the tree protection zone;
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §541
301
c. If areas permitted to be cleared leave no tree protection zone;
d. If no trees are present within the tree protection zone.
e. Where specimen trees outside the tree protection zone are to be removed;
f. Where trees are illegally removed or irreparably damaged during the
construction process.
2. The quantity of replacement trees shall be sufficient to produce a total Required
Tree Density (RDS) of at least 15 units per acre as described herein. Units shall be
determined based on the conversion factors in Tables 5.19, 5.20 and 5.21.
3. The spacing of replacement trees shall be compatible with areal limitations and the
characteristics of the species that are planted.
4. When the Administrative Officer or his designee has determined that areal
constraints result in an absolute inability to provide the required tree density, as
many trees as possible shall be planted on the site. The remaining balance of trees
shall be provided in the form of payment of 80% of the Uniform Unit Prices for
Bond Estimates as prepared by the Division of Engineering and shall be placed in a
shade tree account.
I. Calculations for RTD. Calculations for determining the Required Tree Density (RTD) are as
follows:
1. Step 1. Required Tree Density shall be calculated by multiplying the factor of 15 by
the gross tract area.
EXAMPLE: 2 acre site has a RTD of 30 (2 x 15 = 30)
2. Step 2. The Existing Tree Density (ETD) of the trees that are to remain within the
tree save area of the tree protection zone shall be calculated by converting the
caliper from the tree survey (see paragraph -D.4 and -D.6 above) to tree density
units as indicated in Table 5.19.
EXAMPLE: The tree survey identifies 15 trees that will remain on the site in the
Step 1 example after development, as follows:
7 - 12" locusts
3 - 14" maples
3 - 18" oaks
1 - 20" oak
1 - 30" sycamore
Converting the caliper to tree density units yields the following values:
Caliper Density Units No. Trees ETD
12" .8 x 7 = 5.6
14" 1.1 x 3 = 3.3
18" 1.8 x 3 = 5.4
20" 2.2 x 1 = 2.2
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §541
302
30" 4.9 x 1 = 4.9
Total = 21.4
This total represents the Existing Tree Density on site.
3. Step 3. Calculation of the replacement trees is determined by subtracting the
Existing Tree Density from the Required Tree Density.
EXAMPLE: RTD-ETD = replacement tree units
or
30 - 21.4 = 8.6 replacement tree units
Table 5.19 Conversion of Caliper to Tree Density Units for Existing Trees.
[Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
Caliper
(inches)
Density
Units
Caliper
(inches)
Density
Units
Caliper
(inches)
Density
Units
8-9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
.5
.6
.7
.8
.9
1.1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.9
3.1
3.4
3.7
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
4.0
4.3
4.6
4.9
5.2
5.6
5.9
6.3
6.7
7.1
7.5
7.9
8.3
8.7
9.1
9.5
10.0
10.5
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60+
11.0
11.5
12.0
12.6
13.2
13.8
14.4
15.1
15.8
16.5
17.2
18.0
18.8
19.6
20.2
21.0
4. Step 4. The number of replacement trees that would need to be planted, if any, is
determined by converting the replacement tree units to caliper inches or tree height
based on Tables 5.20 and 5.21. Any number or combination of trees that meets the
minimum required for replacement may be used; however, coniferous evergreens
shall be limited to no more than 40% of the total required replacement trees.
EXAMPLE: 10 – 3” red oaks = 6.0 tree units; 2 – 4” sycamores = 1.4 tree units; and
3 – 2” river birch = 1.5 tree units for a total of 8.9. Since 8.9 is greater than 8.6, the
minimum replacement trees requirement has been met.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §541
303
Table 5.20. Conversion from Caliper to Tree Density Units for Deciduous
Replacement Trees.
Caliper (Inches) Density Units Caliper (Inches) Density Units
1*
2*
3
4
5
6
7
.4
.5
.6
.7
.9
1.0
1.2
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
1.3
1.5
1.7
1.9
2.1
2.3
2.5
* - Permitted only when approved as an exception or for storm water management basin plantings.
Table 5.21 Conversion from Height to Tree Density Units for Coniferous
Replacement Trees.
Height (Feet) Density Units Height (Feet) Density Units
3-4*
4-5*
5-6
.6
.7
.8
6-8
8-10
10-12
1.0
1.3
1.7
* - Permitted only when approved as an exception or for storm water management basin plantings.
J. Plan Review and Enforcement. All applications for a tree removal permit not a part of a site
plan or subdivision application are to be submitted to the Department of Community
Development. The Department shall review all applications to insure compliance with the
requirements of this section. Applications will be approved or denied within 20 days of
receipt of a complete application.
K. Revocation. The Administrative Officer may revoke the approval where there has been false
or misleading application or there is a noncompliance with the approved management plan.
L. Fees. The application and escrow fees for tree cutting and tree removal shall be in
accordance with Article IX.
M. Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the decision of any officer, pursuant to the provisions of
this section, may appeal to the Zoning Board of Adjustment within 10 days of receipt of such
decision. Such appeal shall follow the procedures as set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a.
N. Violations and Penalties. In addition to any other penalties that may be assessed for violation
of this Ordinance, any person violating any provisions of this section shall be liable to a fine
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §541
304
not to exceed $500.00 or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days, or both, for each
offense. The destruction or substantial damage/destruction of an individual tree shall be
construed to be a separate offense. In addition, any tree(s) removed without a permit shall be
replaced by the violator with nursery stock, equal, whenever possible, to the caliper of the
tree(s) unlawfully removed. Replanting shall be completed in one year of the non-permitted
removal if the land is not to be lawfully developed. In addition to the foregoing, the
municipality may institute and maintain a civil action for injunctive relief restraining the
continuance of any unlawful tree removal project.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §542
1. 305
§ 542 Water Supply.
A. Public Water Required. Where a site is located within a public water franchise and public
water is accessible, water mains shall be constructed in such a manner as to make adequate
water service available to each lot or building within the development. The entire system
shall be designed in accordance with the requirements and standards of the local and/or State
agency having approval authority and shall be subject to their approval. The system shall
also be designed with adequate capacity and sustained pressure and in a looped system with
no dead-end lines, whenever possible.
B. Main Extension. Residential subdivisions shall be connected to an existing public water
supply system if public service is available within the following distances: 200 feet for one
unit, 400 feet for two units, 600 feet for three units, 800 feet for four units, and 1,000 feet for
five to fifteen units. For developments greater than fifteen units which are within one mile
of an existing public water system, adequate justification should be provided as to why they
should not provide a connection to the existing public water supply system. For
developments of greater than fifteen units which are more than one mile from an existing
systems, the water supply strategy shall be determined on a case-by-case basis taking into
consideration, the density of the developments, economic considerations, and ground water
availability and quality.
C. Non-Residential Uses. All non-residential uses, excepting religious and recreational uses,
shall be connected to a public water supply system.
D. Dry Lines. If a public water supply system will be provided to the area within a 6 year
period as indicated in the Utility Element of the Master Plan, Official Map, or other official
document, a municipality may require installation of a capped system or “dry lines” (mains
only) within the road right-of-way; or alternatively, a municipality may require a payment in
lieu of the improvement.
E. Individual Wells. Where no public water is accessible, water shall be furnished either on an
individual lot basis or by community well. The following provisions shall apply to the
installation of individual wells:
1. No person shall locate, construct or alter any individual water supply until a permit
for the proposed activity has been issued by the Municipal Health Officer.
2. No building permit for a new home or other structure for which an individual well is
required shall be issued unless the well has been drilled, tested and certified to be in
compliance with the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection rules
pursuant to N.J.A.C. 7:10-12.1 et seq. for the construction of such public noncommunity
and non-public water systems. Such certification shall be made by the
applicant's engineer or well driller.
3. Prior to preliminary subdivision approval of ten or more lots, test wells shall be
drilled and observations taken to ensure sufficient water quality and quantity
pursuant to the requirements of the Municipal Health Officer for the proposed
development. The number of test and observation wells shall be as follows:
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §542
306
Number Number of Number of
of Lots Test Wells Observation Wells
10-19 1 1
20-29 1 2
30-49 2 2
50+ In accordance with NJDEP standards
Additional test and observation wells may be required by the Municipal Health
Officer for unusual soil and geologic conditions.
4. All wells shall conform to the standards for construction of public non-community
and non-public water systems promulgated under N.J.A.C. 7:10-12.1 et seq. and the
following additions:
a. A minimum of 50 feet of well casing shall be provided;
b. No wells shall be located within 100 feet of any other existing or proposed
well; and
c. Blasting for the construction or reconstruction of a well is prohibited.
F. Capacity Requirements.
1. The water supply system shall be adequate to handle the necessary flow based on
complete development.
2. The demand rates for all uses shall be considered in computing the total system
demand. Where fire protection is provided, the system should be capable of
providing the required fire demand plus the required domestic demand.
3. Non-residential water demand may be computed in accordance with the data shown
Table 5.22 or as promulgated by the standards of the American Water Works
Association (AWWA).
4. The water supply system shall be designed to carry peak-hour flows and be capable
of delivering the peak hourly demands indicated in Table 5.22.
Table 5.22 Water Demand for Selected Non-Residential Uses.
Use
Expected Water Consumption
Unit Basis Mean Annual Daily
Consumption (gpd)
Peak Hour
Consumption (gal.)
General Offices sf. 0.093 0.521
Medical Office sf. 0.618 4.97
Retail sf. 0.106 0.271
Hotel sf. 0.256 0.433
Motel sf. 0.224 1.55
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §542
307
Use
Expected Water Consumption
Unit Basis Mean Annual Daily
Consumption (gpd)
Peak Hour
Consumption (gal.)
Restaurant seat 24.20 167.0
School, elementary student 3.83 37.4
School, high student 8.02 79.9
Service Station bay sf. 0.251 4.89
Movie Theater seat 3.53 3.33
Bakery employee 220 -
Plastic Products employee 527 -
Metal Work employee 196 -
Medical Instruments employee 506 -
Electronic Components employee 203 -
Scientific Instruments employee 181 -
G. System Design and Placement. System design and placement shall comply with the
construction specifications of the appropriate public or local utility. Trench restoration shall
comply with the requirements of the Lawrence Township Engineering Standards or other
such governmental standards for state and county roads.
H. Fire Protection.
1. Fire protection shall be furnished for any development connected to a public water
supply system.
2. Minimum flow capacity for fire hydrant design shall be based on recommendations
by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), as indicated in Table 5.23.
Table 5.23 Minimum Flow Capacity Design Parameters for Fire Control.
Design Population Flow (gallons per minute) Duration of Flow (hours)
Under 100 persons 500 4
100 - 1,000 persons 1,000 4
1,001 - 1,500 persons 1,250 5
1,501 - 2,000 persons 1,500 6
2,001 - 3,000 persons 1,750 7
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §542
308
Design Population Flow (gallons per minute) Duration of Flow (hours)
3,001 - 4,000 persons 2,000 8
4,001 - 5,000 persons 2,250 9
5,001 - 6,000 persons 2,500 10
6,001 - 10,000 persons 3,000 10
3. In addition to the water flow minimums established in Table 5.23, the distance
between buildings for both residential and non-residential structures shall be
considered in the design of the fire control system as indicated in Table 5.24.
Table 5.24 Short Method for Determining Minimum Flow
Capacity Design for Fire Control.
Distance Between Buildings
Design Flow
(gallons per minute)
Over 100 feet 500
31 - 100 feet 750 - 1,000
11 - 30 feet 1,000 - 1,500
10 feet or less 1,500 - 2,000
Attached buildings 2,500
4. Fire Hydrants.
a. Hydrants shall be spaced to provide necessary fire flow, and the average
area per hydrant typically should not exceed 120,000 square feet. In
addition, hydrants shall be spaced so that each building shall be within 400
feet of a hydrant.
b. A hydrant shall be located at all low points and at all high points with
adequate means of drainage provided.
c. Hydrants shall be located at the ends of lines, and valves of full line size
shall be provided after hydrant tees at the ends of all dead lines which may
be extended in the future.
d. Size, type and installation of hydrants shall conform to the specifications as
set forth in NFPA Standard 291.
e. Final fire hydrant location shall be subject to the approval of the Municipal
Engineer who may consult with appropriate fire officials. The final location
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §542
309
of fire hydrants shall be marked as set forth in the Lawrence Township
Engineering Standards.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §600 - 608
310
ARTICLE VI
AGENCY ESTABLISHMENT AND RULES
§ 600 Establishment of the Planning Board
A. Classes of Membership. A Planning Board is hereby established consisting of nine regular
and two alternate members of the following four classes:
1. Class I - The mayor or the mayor's designee in the absence of the mayor.
2. Class II - One of the officials of the municipality, other than a member of the
governing body, to be appointed by the mayor, provided that any member of the
Environmental Resources Committee who is also a member of the Planning Board
as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1 shall be deemed to be the Class II Planning Board
member if there is both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment and a member
of the Board of Education among the Class IV regular or alternate members.
3. Class III - A member of the governing body to be appointed by it.
4. Class IV - Regular Members. Six other members of the municipality to be
appointed by the governing body. The members of Class IV shall hold no other
municipal office, position, or employment except that one such member may be a
member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment or Historic Preservation Advisory
Committee. No member of the Board of Education may be a Class IV member of
the Planning Board, except that in the case of a nine member board, one Class IV
member may be a member of the Board of Education. If there be an Environmental
Resources Committee, the member of the Environmental Resources Committee who
is also a member of the Planning Board, as required by N.J.S.A. 40:56A-1, shall be a
Class IV Planning Board member, unless there be among the Class IV or alternate
members of the Planning Board both a member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment
or Historic Preservation Advisory Committee and a member of the Board of
Education, in which case the member common to the Planning Board and
Environmental Resources Committee shall be deemed a Class II member of the
Planning Board. For the purpose of this section, membership on a municipal board
or committee whose function is advisory in nature, and the establishment of which is
discretionary and not required by statute, shall not be considered the holding of a
municipal office.
5. Class IV - Alternate Members. Two other citizens of the municipality to be
appointed by the governing body. Alternate members shall meet the qualifications
of Class IV regular members and shall be designated by the governing body at the
time of their appointment as “Alternate No. 1" and “Alternate No. 2.”
6. The adoption of this Ordinance shall not be construed to affect any standing member
of the Planning Board.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §600 - 608
311
B. Terms of Membership.
1. The term of the member composing Class I shall correspond with his or her official
tenure.
2. The terms of the members composing Class II and Class III shall be for one year or
shall terminate at the completion of their respective terms of office, whichever
occurs first, except for a Class II member who is also a member of the
Environmental Resources Committee. The term of a Class II or Class IV member
who is also a member of the Environmental Resources Committee shall be for three
years or terminate at the completion of term of office as a member of the
Environmental Resources Committee, whichever comes first.
3. The term of Class IV member who is also a member of the Zoning Board of
Adjustment or the Board of Education shall terminate whenever he or she is no
longer a member of such other body or at the completion of his or her Class IV term,
whichever comes first.
4. The term of each Class IV regular member shall be four years.
5. The terms of the Class IV alternate members shall be two years, except that the
terms of the alternate members shall be such that the term of not more than one
alternate member shall expire in any one year.
C. Role of Alternate Members. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member
of any Class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of
an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member
is to vote, “Alternate No. 1” shall vote.
D. Vacancies. If a vacancy of any Class shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it
shall be filled for the unexpired term, only.
E. Compensation. Members of the Planning Board shall serve without compensation except
that reimbursement of reasonable expenses in the execution of official duties may be made
by the municipality.
F. Removal. Any member other than a Class I member may be removed by the governing body
for cause but only after public hearing and other due process proceedings.
G. Conflict. No member or alternate member of the Planning Board shall be permitted to act on
any matter in which he or she has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial
interest. No member who is so disqualified may act on that particular matter, shall not
continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter, nor shall participate in any
discussion or decision.
H. Substitute Members. If the Planning Board lacks a quorum of its regular or alternate
members either by reason of vacancy or conflict of interest, regular members of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall be called upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary
members of the Planning Board. Such temporary members shall be selected in order of
seniority of continuous service to the Zoning Board of Adjustment until the required
minimum number of members necessary to constitute a quorum has been reached. The
Chairman or Chairwoman of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall determine which
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §600 - 608
312
member serves in the event there are members of equal seniority.
I. Reorganization. Yearly, the Planning Board shall organize by selecting from among its
Class IV regular members a chairman and a vice chairman. The Board shall also select a
secretary who may or may not be a member of the Board or a municipal employee.
J. Funding. The governing body shall make provisions in its budget and appropriate funds for
the expenses of the Planning Board.
K. Board Attorney. The position of Planning Board Attorney is hereby created. The Planning
Board may annually appoint to such office and fix compensation or rate of compensation of
an attorney-at-law of New Jersey other than the municipal attorney. The adoption of this
Ordinance shall not be construed to affect any existing appointment.
L. Staff. The Planning Board may also employ or contract for and fix compensation of such
experts and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The Board, however, shall not
authorize expenditures which exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants, the amounts appropriated
by the Township Council for its use.
§ 601 Powers and Jurisdiction of the Planning Board.
The Planning Board shall have the powers listed below in addition to other powers established by
law:
A. Make, adopt, and from time to time, amend a master plan for the physical development of
the municipality, including any areas outside its boundaries which, in the Board’s judgment,
bear essential relation to the planning of the municipality;
B. Participate in the preparation and review of programs or plans required by state or federal
law or regulation;
C. Assemble data on a continuing basis as part of a continuous planning process;
D. Annually, prepare a program of municipal capital improvements projects projected over a
term of 6 years and amendments thereto and recommend same to the Township Council;
E. Consider and make report to the Township Council within 35 days after referral as to any
proposed development regulation submitted to it and also pass upon other matters
specifically referred to the Planning Board by the Township Council;
F. Prepare, at least every 6 years, a periodic reexamination of the Master Plan;
G. The Planning Board shall have such other powers as prescribed by law, including, but not
limited to, the power to grant the following variances, to the same extent and subject to the
same restrictions as the Zoning Board of Adjustment, when the Planning Board is reviewing
applications for approval of subdivision plans, site plans or conditional uses:
1. Variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a-c;
2. Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 for issuance of a permit for a building or
structure in the bed of a mapped street or public drainage way, flood control basin or
public area; and
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §600 - 608
313
3. Direction pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-35 for issuance of a permit for a building or
structure on a lot not abutting a street.
§ 602 Establishment of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. Membership. A Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby created consisting of seven regular
members and two alternate members, each of whom shall be appointed by the Township
Council.
B. Terms of Members.
1. The term of each regular member shall be four years and the term of each alternate
member shall be two years.
2. Alternate Members. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of their
appointment as “Alternate No. 1" and “Alternate No. 2.”
3. The adoption of this Ordinance shall not be construed to affect any standing member
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
C. Role of Alternate Members. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member.
A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote,
“Alternate No. 1" shall vote.
D. Additional Memberships. No member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall hold an
elective office or position under the municipality.
E. Compensation. Members of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall serve without
compensation except that reimbursement of reasonable expenses in the execution of official
duties may be made by the municipality.
F. Removal. Any member may be removed by the governing body for cause but only after
public hearing and other due process proceedings.
G. Vacancies. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be filled for
the unexpired term, only.
H. Conflict. No member or alternate member of the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has either directly or indirectly any
personal or financial interest. No member who is so disqualified may act on that particular
matter, shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter, nor shall
participate in any discussion or decision.
I. Substitute Members. If the Zoning Board of Adjustment lacks a quorum of its regular or
alternate members either by reason of vacancy or conflict of interest, Class IV members of
the Planning Board shall be called upon to serve, for that matter only, as temporary members
of the Zoning Board. Such temporary members shall be selected in order of seniority of
continuous service to the Planning Board until the required minimum number of members
necessary to constitute a quorum has been reached. The Chairman or Chairwoman of the
Planning Board shall determine which member serves in the event there are members of
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §600 - 608
314
equal seniority.
J. Reorganization. Yearly, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall organize by selecting from
among its regular members a chairman and a vice-chairman. The Board shall also select a
secretary who may or may not be a member of the Board or a municipal employee.
K. Funding. The Township Council shall make provisions in its budget and appropriate funds
for the expenses of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
L. Board Attorney. The position of Zoning Board of Adjustment Attorney is hereby created.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment may annually appoint to such office and fix compensation
or rate of compensation of an attorney-at-law of New Jersey other than the municipal
attorney. The adoption of this Ordinance shall not be construed to affect any existing
appointment.
M. Staff. The Zoning Board of Adjustment may also employ or contract for and fix the
compensation of such experts and other staff and services as it may deem necessary. The
Board, however, shall not authorize expenditures which exceed, exclusive of gifts or grants,
the amount appropriated by the Township Council for its use.
§ 603 Powers of the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have the power to:
A. Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order,
requirement, decision, or refusal made by the Administrative Officer based on or made in
enforcement of the Land Use Ordinance.
B. Hear and decide requests for interpretation of the Zoning Map or Land Use Ordinance or for
decisions upon other special questions upon which the Zoning Board is authorized to pass on
any Zoning or Official Map Ordinance;
C. Grant a variance from the strict application of a regulation, upon an application or an appeal,
so as to relieve difficulties or hardships:
1. Where in an application Where by reason of exceptional narrowness, shallowness,
or shape of a specific piece of property; or by reason of exceptional topographic
conditions or physical features uniquely affecting a specific piece of property; or by
reason of an extraordinary and exceptional situation uniquely affecting a specific
piece of property or the structures lawfully existing thereon, the strict application of
any zoning regulation would result in peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties
to, or exceptional and undue hardship upon the developer of such property; or
2. Where in an application or appeal relating to a specific piece of property the
purposes of this Ordinance set forth in §102 would be advanced by deviation from
the Land Use Ordinance requirements and the benefits of the deviation would
substantially outweigh any detriment, grant a variance to allow the departure from
zoning regulations; provided, however, that no variance from those departures
enumerated in §603.D shall be granted under this section; and provided, further, that
the proposed development does not require approval by the Planning Board of a
subdivision, site plan, or conditional use in conjunction with which the Planning
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §600 - 608
315
Board has power to review a request for a variance pursuant to §700.A.2.
D. Grant a variance to allow a departure from the zoning regulations, in particular cases and for
special reasons to permit:
1. A use or principal structure in a district restricted against such use or principal
structure;
2. An expansion of a non-conforming use;
3. Deviation from a specification or standard pertaining solely to a conditional use;
4. An increase in the permitted floor area ratio;
5. An increase in the permitted density except as applied to the required lot area for a
lot or lots for detached one or two dwelling unit buildings which lot or lots are either
an isolated undersized lot or lots resulting from a minor subdivision; or
6. A height of a principal structure which exceeds by 10 feet or 10% the maximum
height permitted in the district for a principal structure.
A variance under this subsection shall be granted only by the affirmative vote of at least five
members.
E. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall, at least once a year, review its decisions on
applications and appeals for variances and prepare and adopt by resolution a report of its
findings on Land Use Ordinance provisions which were the subject of variance requests and
its recommendations for Land Use Ordinance amendment or revision, if any. The Zoning
Board of Adjustment shall send copies of the report and resolution to the Township Council
and Planning Board.
§ 604 Establishment of the Historic Preservation Advisory
Committee.
A. Classes of Members. A Historic Preservation Advisory Committee (HPAC) is hereby
established consisting of nine regular members and which may include two alternate
members, each of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor, of the following three classes:
1. Class A - Persons who are knowledgeable in building design and construction or in
architectural history;
2. Class B - Persons who are knowledgeable or have a demonstrated interest in local
history;
3. Class C - Persons who are residents of the municipality and who hold no other
municipal office, position or employment except for membership on the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment.
4. There shall be a total of four members representing classes A and B with at least one
member from each class.
5. Alternate members shall meet the qualifications of Class C members and shall be
designated “Alternate No. 1” and “Alternate No. 2” at the time of appointment.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §600 - 608
316
6. All members shall be residents of the municipality.
7. The adoption of this Ordinance shall not be construed to affect any standing member
of the Historic Preservation Advisory Committee.
B. Terms of Membership.
1. The term of each regular member shall be four years and the term of each alternate
member shall be two years.
2. Alternate members. Alternate members shall be designated at the time of their
appointment as “Alternate No. 1” and “Alternate No. 2”.
3. The term of any member in common with the Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall be for the term of membership on such Board.
C. Role of Alternate Members. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member
of any Class. A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of
an alternate member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member
is to vote, “Alternate No. 1" shall vote.
D. Vacancies. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be filled by
appointment for the unexpired term, only.
E. Compensation. Members of the HPAC shall serve without compensation except that
reimbursement of reasonable expenses in the execution of official duties may be made by the
municipality.
F. Removal. Any member may be removed by the governing body for cause but only after
public hearing and other due process proceedings.
G. Conflict. No member or alternate member of the HPAC shall be permitted to act on any
matter in which he or she has either directly or indirectly any personal or financial interest.
No member who is so disqualified may act on that particular matter, shall not continue to sit
with the Committee on the hearing of such matter, nor shall participate in any discussion or
decision.
H. Organization. The HPAC shall elect from its members a chairman and vice-chairman and
select a secretary who may or may not be a member of the HPAC or a municipal employee.
I. Funding. The governing body shall make provisions in its budget and appropriate funds for
the expenses of the Historic Preservation Advisory Committee.
J. Rules and Procedures. The HPAC shall adopt and may amend internal rules and procedures
for the transaction of its business subject to the following:
1. A quorum for any action by the HPAC shall be 5 members.
2. All HPAC minutes and records shall be public records.
3. All HPAC meetings shall comply with the Open Public Meetings Act (N.J.S.A.
10:47 et seq.).
4. HPAC meetings shall be scheduled at least once every month or as often as required
to fulfill its obligations to advise the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Adjustment,
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §600 - 608
317
governing body, or construction official.
K. Role of the HPAC. The Planning Board is empowered to oversee the system of preservation
regulations to complement existing land use regulation and shall review and grant final
approval for the HPAC’s designation of buildings, structures, sites, objects and districts
having historic significance. Based on the advice and recommendation of the HPAC, the
Planning Board shall make the final determination on the approval of development
applications. For review of building permit applications, the HPAC shall submit reports to
the construction official.
L. Historic Preservation Guidelines. The HPAC shall recommend to the Planning Board
guidelines for review to be utilized in determinations of historic landmark status and for
review of development applications or permits affecting historic landmarks or improvements
within historic districts. The Planning Board may recommend modifications of the
guidelines and shall make the final decision as to their adoption.
M. Council Liaison. A member of the Township Council shall be so designated as liaison
between the HPAC and the governing body.
§ 605 Powers and Responsibilities of the Historic Preservation
Advisory Committee.
The Historic Preservation Advisory Committee shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
A. To prepare a survey or surveys of historic sites and districts pursuant to criteria established in
such survey;
B. To make recommendations to the Planning Board on the Historic Preservation Element of
the Master Plan and on the implications of any other Element on the preservation of historic
sites and districts;
C. To advise the Planning Board on the inclusion of historic sites in the recommended capital
improvement program;
D. To advise the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment on applications for
development;
E. Provide written reports on the application of the zoning provisions of this Ordinance or other
land development regulations on historic sites and districts;
F. Provide technical assistance upon request to property owners on the preservation, restoration,
and rehabilitation of historic structures;
G. To carry out such other advisory, educational, and informational functions as will promote
historic preservation in the municipality.
§ 606 Additional Powers, Duties and Responsibilities.
The Historic Preservation Advisory Committee shall have the following additional powers, duties and
responsibilities:
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §600 - 608
318
A. To identify and record historic buildings, structures, sites, objects or districts and evaluate
these resources against the criteria in Article XI. The survey material shall be reviewed and,
if necessary, updated at least every other year to incorporate any newly acquired historical
documentation and to reflect changes to a resource’s integrity or condition.
B. To assist other public bodies in aiding the public in understanding historic resources,
significance and methods of preservation.
C. To compile and monitor notices regarding use of detection-type devices; consider, determine
and condition the granting of requests for provision to dig, disturb or remove anything from
historic landmarks or sites.
D. To advise the Township Council on the relative merits of proposals involving public lands to
restore, preserve and protect historical buildings, places and structures, including the
preparation of a long-range plan therefore securing State, Federal and other grants and aid to
assist therein and monitoring such projects once underway.
E. To recommend to the Planning Board and the Township Council the establishment and
boundaries of historic districts where appropriate.
F. To recommend to the Zoning Board of Adjustment the granting of use variances where such
are deemed to be within the intent and purposes of this Ordinance.
G. To secure the voluntary assistance of the public and (within the limits of the budget
established by the municipality for the Historic Preservation Advisory Committee’s
operation) to retain consultants and experts and incur expenses to assist the Historic
Preservation Advisory Committee in its work to provide testimony in support of its position
before other bodies, boards, commissions or courts.
H. To cooperate with local, county, State or National historical societies, governmental bodies
and organizations to maximize their contributions to the intent and purposes of this
Ordinance.
I. To recommend to applicable county, State and Federal agencies, where appropriate,
recognition of historic buildings, structures, sites, objects or districts.
J. To request the Township Council to seek, on its own motion or otherwise, injunctive relief
for violations of this Ordinance or other actions contrary to the intent and purposes of this
Ordinance.
K. To spend money in the course of its duties as it is duly authorized by the Township Council.
L. No duties or powers of the Historic Preservation Advisory Committee shall supersede or
infringe on the powers of other municipal boards or agencies.
§ 607 Establishment of the Affordable Housing Board.
A. Establishment. An Affordable Housing Board (AHB) is hereby established for the purpose
of monitoring the compliance of the municipality in providing housing for low and moderate
income households pursuant to the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (N.J.S. 52:27D-301 et seq.).
B. Membership; Terms of Office.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §600 - 608
319
1. The AHB shall consist of 7 voting members, all of whom shall be appointed by the
governing body. Two of the members shall be occupants of affordable housing
units. In addition, a member of the governing body shall be appointed the council
liaison member and shall have no voting rights. The municipal manager and the
director of the Office of Housing and Redevelopment shall be ex-officio members of
the AHB with no voting rights.
2. The governing body may appoint alternate members, designated as “Alternate No.
1” and “Alternate No. 2" at the time of their appointment.
3. The term of office for voting members and alternate members shall be for 3 years
and the term of office of the governing body member shall be his or her term on
Township Council.
4. The adoption of this Ordinance shall not be construed to affect any standing member
of the Affordable Housing Board.
C. Role of Alternate Members. Alternate members may participate in discussions of the
proceedings but may not vote except in the absence or disqualification of a regular member.
A vote shall not be delayed in order that a regular member may vote instead of an alternate
member. In the event that a choice must be made as to which alternate member is to vote,
“Alternate No. 1" shall vote.
D. Compensation. Members of the Affordable Housing Board shall serve without
compensation except that reimbursement of reasonable expenses in the execution of official
duties may be made by the municipality.
E. Removal. Any member may be removed by the governing body for cause or absence but
only after public hearing if requested by the member and other due process proceedings.
Any voting member of the AHB who has been absent without excuse for 3 successive
regular meetings may be removed from office by the governing body after notice.
F. Vacancies. If a vacancy shall occur otherwise than by expiration of term, it shall be filled for
the unexpired term, only.
G. Conflict. No member or alternate member of the Affordable Housing Board shall be
permitted to act on any matter in which he or she has either directly or indirectly any
personal or financial interest. No member who is so disqualified may act on that particular
matter, shall not continue to sit with the Board on the hearing of such matter, nor shall
participate in any discussion or decision.
H. Reorganization. Yearly, the Affordable Housing Board shall organize by selecting from
among its voting members a chairman and a vice-chairman. The Board shall also select a
secretary who may or may not be a member of the Board or a municipal employee.
I. Funding. The Township Council shall make provisions in its budget and appropriate funds
for the expenses of the Affordable Housing Board upon submission by the AHB of an annual
budget request to the municipal manager.
J. Staff. The governing body may employ or assign at the request of the AHB such personnel
or experts and other staff as the AHB deems necessary, provided such obligations do not
exceed the municipal budgetary allocation available to the AHB for such use.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §600 - 608
320
K. Quorum. Attendance by 4 voting members shall constitute a quorum.
§ 608 Powers of the Affordable Housing Board.
The AHB is hereby granted and shall have and exercise the following powers:
A. Sales and Rentals. Review with the assistance of the director of the Office of Housing and
Redevelopment regulations pertaining to the sale, rental, resale and re-renting of affordable
housing units.
B. Ordinance Amendments. With the assistance of the director of the Office of Housing and
Redevelopment prepare amendments and additions to regulations pertaining to the provision
of affordable housing as it deems necessary or appropriate to implement the purposes of
Article X for recommendation to the Township Council.
C. Appeals from Office of Housing and Redevelopment Decisions. Hold hearings upon notice
and adjudicate the complaints of developers or applicants, owners and renters if the
developer, applicant, owner or renter is not satisfied with the rulings of the Office of
Housing and Redevelopment. In matters involving a hearing, the office shall give 10 days’
written notice to all parties involved and shall give all interested parties an opportunity to be
heard.
D. Funding Requests. With the assistance of the director of the Office of Housing and
Redevelopment review requests from Federal, State, county, or local agencies regarding
funding or applications for funding.
E. Use of Funds. With the assistance of the director of the Office of Housing and
Redevelopment make recommendations to the governing body regarding how municipal
funds or funds collected for affordable housing from developers of land not subject to an
affordable housing set aside should be spent and propose priorities for such expenditures.
F. Marketing Plans. Review all housing marketing plans submitted to the Office of Housing
and Redevelopment by developers.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §700 - 711
321
ARTICLE VII
DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES
§ 700 Division of Jurisdiction in Development Applications.
A. Planning Board. The following provisions set forth the jurisdiction of the Planning Board in
the review of development applications:
1. The Planning Board shall have the power to grant subdivision or conditional use
approval simultaneously with site plan approval.
2. Review by Planning Board in lieu of Zoning Board of Adjustment. Whenever the
proposed development requires approval of a subdivision, site plan, or conditional
use, but not a variance pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d, the Planning Board, in lieu
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment, to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions, shall receive, review, and act upon applications for variances and the
issuance of permits pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-32, -34, -36 and -70c.
3. Bifurcation of application. A developer may elect to submit a separate application
requesting approval of variances and the issuance of permits pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-32, -34, -36 and -70c and a subsequent application for any required approval
of a subdivision, site plan, or conditional use. The separate approval of any variance
or issuance of permit shall be conditioned upon the grant of all required subsequent
approvals by the Planning Board. No such subsequent approval shall be granted
unless the approval can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good
and without substantial impairment of the intent and purpose of the zone plan and
zoning ordinance, or where a deviation would advance the purposes of the Master
Plan and the Land Use Ordinance and the benefits of the deviation would outweigh
the detriments. Whenever relief is requested pursuant to this subsection, the public
notice shall include a reference to the request for a variance or direction for issuance
of a permit, as the case may be.
4. Grant variances pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70c.
5. Direct issuance of a permit for a building or structure in the bed of a mapped street
or public drainage way, flood control basin or public area reserved pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34.
6. Direct issuance of a permit for a building or structure not related to a street pursuant
to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-36.
B. Zoning Board of Adjustment Action in Lieu of Planning Board. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall have the power to grant, to the same extent and subject to the same
restrictions as the Planning Board, site plan, subdivision or conditional use approval when
reviewing an application for approval of a “use variance” pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §700 - 711
322
§ 701 Provisions Applicable to Both the Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. Meetings
1. Meetings of both the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be
scheduled at least once a month, and any meeting so scheduled shall be held as
scheduled unless canceled for lack of applications for development to process.
2. Special meetings may be scheduled for at the call of the chairman or on the request
of any two board members, which shall be held on notice to its members and the
public in accordance with the Open Public Meetings Act, P.L. 1975.
3. Actions at meetings; quorum. All agenda items requiring action by the Board,
except adjournments, shall be taken with a quorum present.
4. No action shall be taken on an application unless it has been declared complete
pursuant to §804. The Board may delegate the determination of completeness to a
subcommittee or its designee.
5. All actions shall be taken by a majority vote of the members present at such
meeting, except as otherwise provided in this Article. Failure of a motion to receive
the number of votes required to approve an application for development pursuant to
the exceptional vote requirements of §603.D shall be deemed an action denying the
application. A member of the Board who was absent for one or more of the
meetings at which a hearing was held shall be eligible to vote on the matter upon
which the hearing was conducted, notwithstanding his or her absence from one or
more of the meetings: provided, however, that such a Board member has available to
him or her the transcript or recording of all the hearings from which he or she was
absent, and certifies in writing to the Board that he or she has read such transcript or
listened to such recording.
6. All meetings shall be open to the public. Notice of all such meetings shall be given
in accordance with the requirements of the Open Public Meeting Law, C. 231, Laws
of New Jersey, 1975. An executive session for the purpose of discussing and
studying any matters to come before the agency shall not be deemed a regular
meeting within the meaning of this Ordinance.
B. Records of the Board
1. Minutes of every regular or special meeting shall be kept and shall include the
names of the persons appearing and addressing the Planning Board or the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, and of the persons appearing by attorney, the action taken by
the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, the findings, if any, made by it
and reasons therefore. The minutes shall thereafter be made available for public
inspection during the normal business hours at the office of the Administrative
Officer. Any interested party shall have the right to compel production of the
minutes for use as evidence in any legal proceedings concerning the subject matter
of such minutes. Such interested party shall be charged a reasonable fee for the
reproduction of the minutes, as indicated in §900.A of this Ordinance.
2. A verbatim recording shall be made of every hearing. The recording of the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §700 - 711
323
proceedings shall be made by either stenographer, mechanical or electronic means.
The municipality shall furnish a transcript or duplicate recording in lieu thereof on
request to any interested party at his or her expense, provided that the charge for a
transcript shall not exceed the maximum amount permitted in N.J.S.A. 2A:11-15 as
indicated in §900.A of this Ordinance. Each transcript shall be certified in writing
by the transcriber to be accurate.
§ 702 Public Hearings.
A. The Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, shall hold a hearing
on each application for development. Each Board shall make the rules governing such
hearings.
B. Any maps and documents for which approval is sought at a hearing shall be on file in the
office of the Administrative Officer and available for public inspection during normal
business hours at least 20 days before the date of the hearing. If maps or related material are
to be revised as a result of any Planning Board meeting, the applicant shall file the
appropriate number of copies in accordance with Article VIII of all revised maps and related
material, with revision date noted on same, at least 20 days prior to the meeting of the
Planning Board at which discussion and/or hearing is scheduled to take place.
C. In the case of an application before the Zoning Board of Adjustment, the applicant shall file
the appropriate number of copies in accordance with Article VIII of all revised maps and
related material, with revision date noted on same, at least 20 days prior to the meeting of the
Zoning Board of Adjustment at which discussion and/or hearing is scheduled to take place.
D. The applicant may produce other documents, records or testimony at the hearing to
substantiate or clarify or supplement the previously filed maps and documents.
E. The officer presiding at the hearing, or his or her designee, shall have power to administer
oaths and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of
relevant evidence, including witnesses and documents presented by the parties, and the
provisions of the “County and Municipal Investigations Law,” N.J.S.A. 2A:67A-1 et seq.
shall apply.
F. The testimony of all witnesses relating to an application for development shall be taken
under oath or affirmation by the presiding officer, and the right of cross-examination shall be
permitted to all interested parties through their attorneys, if represented, or directly, if not
represented, subject to the discretion of the presiding officer and to reasonable limitations as
to time and number of witnesses.
G. Technical rules of evidence shall not be applicable to the hearing, but the Board may exclude
irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §700 - 711
324
§ 703 Decisions.
A. Findings and Conclusions. The municipal agency shall include findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon in each decision on any application for development and shall
reduce the decision to writing. The municipal agency shall provide the findings and
conclusions through:
1. A resolution adopted at a meeting held within the time period provided in this
section for action by the municipal agency on the application for development; or
2. A memorializing resolution adopted at a meeting held not later than 45 days after the
date of the meeting at which the municipal agency voted to grant or deny approval.
Only the members of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment who voted
for the action taken may vote on the memorializing resolution, and the vote of a
majority of such members present at the meeting at which the resolution is presented
for adoption shall be sufficient to adopt the resolution. An action resulting from the
failure of a motion to approve an application shall be memorialized by resolution as
provided above, with those members voting against the motion for approval being
the members eligible to vote on the memorializing resolution. The vote on any such
resolution shall be deemed to be a memorialization of the action of the municipal
agency; however, the date of the adoption of the resolution shall constitute the date
of the decision for the purposes of the mailings, filings, and publications required by
§710.
B. Failure to Adopt Resolution. If the municipal agency fails to adopt a resolution or
memorializing resolution as hereinabove specified, any interested person may appeal to the
Superior Court in a summary manner for an order compelling the municipal agency to reduce
its findings and conclusions to writing within a stated time, and the cost of the application,
including attorneys’ fees, shall be assessed against the municipality.
C. Findings for Planned Developments. Prior to approval of a planned development the
Planning Board shall make the following findings and conclusions pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-45:
1. That departures by the proposed development from zoning regulations otherwise
applicable to the subject property conform to the zoning ordinance standards
pursuant to this Article;
2. That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common open space are
reliable, and the amount, location, and purpose of the common open space are
adequate;
3. That provisions through the physical design of the proposed development for public
services, control over vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and the amenities of light and
air, recreation and visual enjoyment are adequate.
4. That the proposed planned development will not have an unreasonably adverse
impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be established;
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §700 - 711
325
5. In the case of a proposed development which contemplates construction over a
period of years, that the terms and conditions intended to protect the interests of the
public and of the residents, occupants and owners of the proposed development in
the total completion of the development are adequate.
§ 704 Public Notice of a Hearing.
The following public notice requirements shall apply to all hearings of the Planning Board and
Zoning Board of Adjustment.
A. Notice Required. Public notice of a hearing shall be given for the following applications for
development: [Ord. 1592-99, 12/7/1999]
1. Any request for a variance (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70);
2. Any request for conditional use approval;
3. Any request for a certificate of non-conforming use (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68).
4. Any request for the issuance of a permit to build within the bed of a mapped street
or public drainage way or on a lot not abutting a street (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-34 and -35);
5. Any request for an informal or conceptual review;
6. Any request for general development plan approval;
7. Any request for preliminary subdivision approval;
8. Any request for interpretation of the Land Use Ordinance or Zoning Map;
9. Any request for preliminary site plan;
10. Any request for site plan approval involving subsections -1 through -3; and
11. Any request for a zoning change not part of a general reexamination of the Master
Plan or Master Plan adoption.
B. No Notice Required. Public notice shall not be required for the following applications.
1. Appeals pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70a or -b.
2. Final subdivision plan.
3. Final site plan.
4. Any other type of application or action by the Board not specifically listed in
§704.A.
C. Classes of Notice. The secretary of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as
the case may be, shall notify the applicant at least two weeks prior to the public hearing for
the subject application. Notice of a hearing requiring public notice shall be given by the
applicant at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing in the following manner:
1. By publication in the official newspaper of the municipality or in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality.
2. To all owners of real property as shown on the current tax duplicate located in the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §700 - 711
326
State and within 200 feet in all directions of the property which is the subject of the
hearing; provided that this requirement shall be deemed satisfied by notice to a
condominium association, in the case of any unit owner whose unit has a unit above
or below it, or horizontal property regime, in the case of any co-owner whose
apartment has an apartment above or below it. Notice shall be given by serving a
copy on the property owner, as shown on the current tax duplicate, or his or her
agent in charge of the property; or by mailing a copy thereof by certified mail to the
property owner at his or her address as shown on the current tax duplicate. It is not
required that a return receipt be obtained. Notice shall be deemed complete upon
mailing.
3. Notice to a partnership owner may be made by service upon any partner; notice to a
corporate owner may be made by service upon its president, vice president, secretary
or other person authorized by appointment or by law to accept service on behalf of
the corporation. Notice to a condominium association, horizontal property regime,
community trust or homeowner’s association, because of its ownership of common
elements or areas located within 200 feet of the property which is the subject of the
hearing, may be made in the same manner as to a corporation without further notice
to unit owners, co-owners, or homeowners on account of such common elements or
areas.
4. To the clerk of any adjoining municipality or municipalities when the property
involved is located within 200 feet of said adjoining municipality or municipalities,
which notice shall be given by personal service or certified mail.
5. To the Mercer County Planning Board by personal service or certified mail when the
application for development involves property adjacent to an existing county road or
proposed road shown on the county official map or the county master plan or adjoins
other county land, or is situated within 200 feet of a municipal boundary.
6. To the Commissioner of Transportation of the State of New Jersey by personal
service or certified mail when the property abuts a State highway.
7. To the State Planning Commission, by personal service or certified mail when the
hearing involves an application for development of property which exceeds 150
acres or 500 dwelling units, in which case the notice shall include a copy of any
maps or documents required to be on file with the Administrative Officer.
8. To public utilities, local utilities, and cable television companies when such entity
possesses a right-of-way or easement within the municipality and has registered with
the municipality pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-12.1 by personal service or certified
mail when the hearing involves a major subdivision or major site plan application.
9. Additionally, the applicant shall be responsible for giving proper notice to all
property owners who do not reside within the municipality.
D. Property List. Under the written request of an applicant, the Department of Engineering
shall, within 10 days, make and certify a list from current tax duplicates of names and
addresses of owners within the municipality to whom the applicant shall be charged in
accordance with §900.A of this Ordinance and shall be entitled to rely upon the information
contained in such list, and failure to give notice to any owner not on the list shall not
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §700 - 711
327
invalidate any hearing or proceeding.
E. Proof of Service. The applicant shall file an affidavit or proof of service with the Planning
Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be.
F. Contents of Notice. The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing and the
nature of the matters to be considered, and an identification of the property proposed for
development by street address, if any, or by reference to lot and block numbers as shown on
the current tax duplicate in the municipal tax assessor’s office, and the location and times at
which any maps or documents for which approval is sought are available for inspection.
§ 705 Standards for Review of Applications.
Development plans shall be so designed as to enhance the general appearance of the Township and to
promote the harmonious use of land; to lessen congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire,
panic, or other dangers; to promote the general health, safety, and welfare; to provide adequate light
and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land, buildings and roadways by an undue concentration of
population; to encourage development which would facilitate pedestrian access and the use of mass
transit; to encourage creative development and design consistent with the policies of the Master Plan
of the Township of Lawrence, and the regulations promulgated herein. Applications for development
shall be reviewed for meeting the standards for development contained within this Ordinance and
more particularly the following specific objectives:
A. Development Compatibility. All development shall permit and encourage only those uses of
the land which, through the standards adopted in this Ordinance, provide for flexibility in
planning and development and that respect the natural character of the land, the drainage
system, soil capabilities, groundwater and aquifer recharge quality, and to include only those
uses that are compatible with allowed uses in the zoning district and existing uses on
adjacent lands. Such compatibility shall be determined on the basis of inventories of the
natural features of the site, plans indicating the physical relationship among types of uses and
any natural or man-made barriers, existing or planned, between different uses both within
and adjacent to the proposed development, and sufficient information to determine the effect
of such development upon the quality of life of the Township of Lawrence.
B. Relationship to Lawrence Master Plan. All developments shall be planned and designed to
achieve the goals and objectives for land development as are or may be set forth in the
Lawrence Township Master Plan duly adopted by the Planning Board with regard to
conservation, historic preservation, community facilities, recreation, open space, recycling,
affordable housing, utility distribution, circulation, land use, fiscal impact, economic
development, and the goals for development of adjacent municipalities, Mercer County and
the State.
C. Relationship to Township Development Patterns. All development shall be planned and
designed to achieve the Township goals of permitting and encouraging a population density
and a development pattern in the municipality that facilitates the provision of public utilities
and services, including public water and public sewerage, storm drainage systems, recreation
areas, public schools, state, county, and local roads, in an orderly, functional and economical
manner.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §700 - 711
328
D. Conservation of Open Space. Common open space and adequate recreation areas shall be set
aside in suitable locations to provide for the recreation needs of the residents and the owners
of the development and those portions of the project that, because of their natural features,
constitute important visual amenities and environmental resources. Development is intended
to create after completion a continuity of open space resulting from the integration of upland,
wetland, floodplain and surface water areas in accordance with the goals and objectives of
the Master Plan.
E. Appearance and Aesthetic Control. All development shall be planned and designed to
promote and achieve aesthetically pleasing views from and to various land uses. The
creation and promotion of such aesthetic conditions shall strengthen and preserve the
municipality's unique environmental heritage and promote the civic pride, prosperity, and
general welfare of the residents of the development, the municipality, and visitors thereto.
F. Review Guidelines. The following guidelines shall be used in the review of any application
for development or conditional use:
1. Regard for natural features. All residential and non-residential uses shall be
designed with regard to the topography and natural features of the site. The effects
of prevailing winds, seasonal temperatures and hours of sunlight on the physical
layout and form of the proposed buildings shall be taken into account. Special
consideration shall be given to the preservation of natural features, including large
trees, stands of specimen vegetation, groves, waterways, aquifer recharge areas,
scenic, paleontological, archaeological, cultural, and historic sites and other
community assets within the site area, and the reduction of impacts on wildlife. The
development shall be designed and programmed so as to minimize tree clearance
and the destruction of natural amenities associated with the same.
2. Siting of buildings. All housing and supporting uses shall be sited so as to enhance
privacy for residential uses, ensure natural light for all principal residential rooms,
and to the greatest extent possible be designed to promote passive solar energy
technology. Buildings layout shall be reviewed for arrangement, efficiency and
aesthetic quality.
3. Fiscal impact. The fiscal costs to the Township and Board of Education from
providing services to the development shall be considered in relation to the gain of
revenue and its impact upon the municipal and school board tax rates.
4. Relationship to community facilities. Housing shall be conveniently served by
community facilities and open space.
5. Circulation. The pedestrian and vehicular traffic movement within and adjacent to
the site with particular emphasis on the provision and layout of parking areas, offstreet
loading and unloading, the movement of people, goods and vehicles from
access roads within the site, between buildings and between buildings and vehicles.
In particular, the Board shall ensure compliance in site design with the Americans
with Disabilities Act, as it may be amended or superseded. The Board shall ensure
that all parking spaces are usable and are safely and conveniently arranged. Access
to the site from adjacent roads shall be designed so as to interfere as little as possible
with traffic flow on these roads and to permit vehicles a rapid and safe ingress and
egress to the site. The circulation shall be consistent with Township, county, and
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §700 - 711
329
state requirements.
6. Open space. Open space within all planned unit developments shall be planned and
designed to achieve the Township goal of insuring that adequate recreation areas are
set aside in suitable locations to provide for the recreation needs of the residents and
owners of the planned unit development; and that those portions of the Township
that, because of their natural features, constitute important visual amenities and
environmental resources are maintained in accordance with sound conservation
practice.
7. Landscaping. Landscaping shall be reviewed for the ability to integrate the site
elements of topography, water, buildings, parking and loading areas, and the
buffering of incompatible uses. Landscaping shall be reviewed for diversity,
including species, function, sculpture, fencing, walls, and other landscaping
elements.
8. Lighting. Adequate lighting for the function of the site shall be reviewed for the
safe movement and security of persons and vehicles. Particular attention shall be
made to the minimization of glare and impact upon adjacent property.
9. Signs. Signs shall be evaluated for the aesthetics of their design and their harmony
with other signs on- and off-site, the architectural design of the building or buildings
to which they relate and the type of development or pattern of the built environment
surrounding the location of the sign or signs. The location of signs shall be reviewed
for the purpose of removing any hazard to pedestrians or motorists.
10. Utilities, solid waste management and recycling. Storm drainage, sanitary and solid
waste disposal including recycling, water supply, electricity supply, telephone and
cable television service shall be reviewed and considered. Emphasis shall be given
on the adequacy of existing systems and the need for improvements, both on- and
off-site to adequately provide for the development's needs.
11. Compatibility of residential and non-residential development. Applications for
development and conditional uses shall be designed to assure the compatibility of
residential and non-residential uses by:
a. Providing commercial uses with appropriate space and, in particular,
sufficient depth from a street to satisfy the needs of contemporary uses
including the provision of adequately landscaped off-street parking, buffer
areas between commercial and residential use areas, pedestrian and bicycle
circulation systems connecting the commercial uses to office, residential
and open space uses;
b. Protecting non-residential development and nearby residences against fire,
explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation and other hazards, and
against offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust and other particulate matter,
odorous matter, heat, humidity, glare and other objectionable influences;
c. Protect residential and non-residential development from the noise, exhaust
emissions, and other negative aspects of congestion of vehicular traffic.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §700 - 711
330
§ 706 Standards for Grant of Variance.
A. No variance or other relief may be granted under the terms of this Article unless such
variance or other relief can be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and
will not substantially impair the intent and purpose of the zone plan and Land Use
Ordinance.
B. Any variance from the terms of this Article hereafter granted by the Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment, as the case may be, permitting the erection or alteration of any
structure or structures, or permitting a specified use of any premises, shall expire by
limitation unless such construction or alteration shall have been actually commenced on each
and every structure permitted by said variance, or unless such permitted use has actually
been commenced, within 12 months from the date of entry of the judgment or determination
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment; except, however, that the running of the period of
limitation herein provided shall be tolled from the date of filing an appeal from the decision
of the Zoning Board of Adjustment to the Township Council, or to a court of competent
jurisdiction, until the termination in any manner of such appeal or proceeding. (See also
§108).
§ 707 Appeals and Applications to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment.
A. Appeals to the Zoning Board of Adjustment may be taken by an interested party affected by
any decision of the Administrative Officer of the municipality based on or made in the
enforcement of the zoning provisions of this Ordinance or a duly adopted official map. Such
appeal shall be taken within 20 days by filing a notice of appeal with the official from whom
the appeal was taken, specifying the grounds of such appeal. The official from whom the
appeal is taken shall immediately transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from was taken.
B. A developer may file an application for development with the Zoning Board of Adjustment
for action under any of its powers without prior application to the Administrative Officer.
C. Whenever an application for development requests relief pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d,
the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall grant or deny approval of the application within 120
days after submission by an applicant of a complete application to the Administrative Officer
or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant. In the event that the
applicant elects to submit separate consecutive applications, the aforesaid provision shall
apply to the application for approval of the variance. The period for granting or denying any
subsequent approval shall be as otherwise provided in this Ordinance. Failure of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment to act within the period prescribed shall constitute approval of the
application and a certificate of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the Zoning
Board of Adjustment to act shall be issued on request of the applicant, and it shall be
sufficient in lieu of the written endorsement or other evidence of approval, herein required,
and shall be so accepted by the county recording officer for purposes of filing subdivision
plats.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §700 - 711
331
§ 708 Appeal of a Zoning Board Decision.
A. Right of Appeal. Any interested party may appeal to the Township Council any final
decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment approving an application for a use variance
(N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d).
B. Time for Appeal. Such appeal shall be made within 10 days after the date of publication of
the decision pursuant to §710 by serving upon the municipal clerk personally or by certified
mail a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof and the name and address of the
appellant, and, if represented, his or her attorney. A copy of such notice shall also be filed
by the appellant with the Zoning Board of Adjustment. The notice served upon the
municipal clerk shall be accompanied by a payment to the municipality of a fee in
accordance with §900.A of this Ordinance.
C. Stay of Proceedings. An appeal to the Township Council shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action in respect of which the decision appealed from was made unless the
Zoning Board of Adjustment certifies to the Township Council after the notice of appeal has
been filed with such Board, that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate a stay would in
the Board’s opinion cause imminent peril to life or property; and in such a case, proceedings
shall not be stayed other than by order of the Superior Court on application upon notice to
such Board and on good cause shown.
D. Basis of Appeal. An appeal shall be decided by the Township Council only upon the record
established before the Zoning Board of Adjustment.
E. Appellant Requirements. The appellant shall:
1. Within 5 days of service of the notice of appeal pursuant to §708.B arrange for a
transcript for use by the Township Council and pay a deposit in accordance with
§900.A of this Ordinance; or
2. Within 35 days of service of the notice of appeal, submit a transcript as otherwise
arranged to the municipal clerk.
3. Upon failure to act by the appellant, the Township Council, on its own motion or on
motion of any person entitled to notice of the Zoning Board of Adjustment’s
decision pursuant to §710 may dismiss the appeal but only pursuant to a hearing
after giving at least 10 days written notice, by the moving party to the appellant.
F. Notice. Notice of the hearing to review the record below shall be given by the Township
Council by personal service or certified mail to the appellant, to those entitled to notice of
the Zoning Board of Adjustment’s decision pursuant to §710, and to the Zoning Board of
Adjustment, at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing.
G. Decision of the Governing Body. The Township Council may affirm with or without the
imposition of conditions, reverse or remand the final decision appealed from the Zoning
Board of Adjustment, and the affirmative vote of a majority of the full authorized
membership of the Township Council shall be necessary to reverse, remand, or affirm with
or without conditions the same.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §700 - 711
332
§ 709 Time Limits for Decisions.
A. Effect of Variance Request. Whenever an application to the Planning Board for approval of
a subdivision plat, site plan, or conditional use includes a request for a hardship variance or
special permit, the Planning Board shall grant or deny approval of the application within 120
days after the date of submission by a developer of the complete application to the
Administrative Officer or within such further time as may be consented to by the applicant.
B. Variance Bifurcation. In the event that an applicant elects to submit separate consecutive
applications, the 120 day limitation shall apply to the application for approval of the hardship
variance or special permit, and the period for granting or denying any subsequent approval
shall be as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.
§ 710 Notice of Decisions.
Any decision of the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment when acting upon an application
for development and any decisions of the Township Council when acting upon an appeal shall be
given notice in the following manner:
A. Mailing of Decision. A copy of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant and to the
appellant, if the appellant is a differing interested party, or, if either or both is represented,
then to the respective attorney(s) without charge, and for a reasonable charge to any other
interested person who has requested it, not later than 10 days after the date of the decision.
B. Newspaper Notice of Decision. A brief notice of every final decision shall be published in
the official newspaper of the municipality. Such publications shall be arranged by the
municipal clerk without separate charge to the applicant or to the appellant, if the appellant is
a differing interested party. The notice shall be sent to the official newspaper for publication
within 10 days of the date of any such decision.
C. Filing of Decision. A copy of the decision and all submitted documents of record shall be
filed with the Administrative Officer.
§ 711 Exceptions, Waivers, and Special Area Standards for the
Residential Site Improvement Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-3)
A. Exceptions (N.J.A.C. 5:21-3.1).
1. The Board of Jurisdiction may grant such de minimis exceptions from the
requirements of the site improvement standards as may be reasonable and within the
general purpose and intent of the Residential Site Improvement Standards (RSIS) if
the literal enforcement of one or more provisions of the standards is impracticable or
will exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
development in question.
2. An application for an exception pursuant to this section shall be filed in writing with
the Board of Jurisdiction and shall include:
a. A statement of the requirements of the standards from which an exception is
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §700 - 711
333
sought;
b. A statement of the manner by which strict compliance with said provisions
would result in practical difficulties; and
c. A statement of the nature and extent of such practical difficulties.
3. Exceptions shall become a part of the construction documents and shall be retained
by the Board of Jurisdiction.
4. Within 30 days of granting a de minimis exception request, a municipal approving
authority agreeing to an exception pursuant to this section shall send a copy of the
document(s) constituting the de minimis exception resolution and/or document to
the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs, Division of Codes and
Standards, 101 South Broad Street, CN 802, Trenton, NJ 08625-0802. Such notice
shall be clearly marked “Site Improvement Exception(s).”
5. An application for an exception may also be made by an officer or agency of the
municipality.
6. Examples of de minimis exceptions include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Reducing the minimum number of parking spaces and the minimum size of
parking stalls;
b. Reducing the minimum geometrics of street design, such as curb radii,
horizontal and vertical curves, intersection angles, centerline radii, and
others;
c. Reducing cartway width; and
d. Any changes in standards necessary to implement traffic calming devices.
7. The Board of Jurisdiction's granting of a request for a de minimis exception shall be
based on a finding that the requested exception meets the following criteria:
a. It is consistent with the intent of the Site Improvement Act;
b. It is reasonable, limited, and not unduly burdensome;
c. It meets the needs of public health and safety; and
d. It takes into account existing infrastructure and possible surrounding future
development.
B. Waiver Request (N.J.A.C. 5:21-3.2).
1. A municipality or developer may, in connection with a specific development,
request a waiver of any site improvement standard adopted under this section in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40.4(c). A waiver request may also be made
jointly by a municipality and a developer.
2. The Site Improvement Advisory Board may approve a request for a waiver based on
any danger to public health and safety that would be caused by adherence to a
standard specified in this section.
3. A waiver may be requested by a municipality or a developer, or the request may be
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §700 - 711
334
made jointly. The waiver request shall consist of the following:
a. A copy of the development application as submitted to the municipal
approving authority; and
b. A brief memorandum to the Commissioner of the Department of
Community Affairs containing sufficient information upon which to base a
determination, including:
(1) A short description of the project in narrative form;
(2) A citation to the particular site improvement standard from which
waiver is requested;
(3) A clear description of the condition(s) giving rise to the request;
(4) A clear description of the anticipated result if the standard were to
be followed;
(5) The name, address, and telephone number of a contact person for
the developer; and
(6) The name, address, and telephone number of a contact person for
the municipal approving authority.
c. The party requesting the waiver shall send the request to the New Jersey
Department of Community Affairs, Division of Codes and Standards, 101
South Broad Street, CN 802, Trenton, NJ 08625-0802.
d. Where a waiver is requested by the developer, the developer shall send a
copy of the request to the administrative officer of the municipality
concerned. Where a waiver is requested by the municipality, the
municipality shall send a copy of the request to the developer.
e. A waiver may be requested by the developer or the municipal approving
authority at any time during the pendency of a development application.
The Site Improvement Advisory Board recommends submission of a waiver
request early in the application process or prior to the submission of a
formal development application. If the applicant or the municipal approving
authority determines during the planning board review process that a waiver
request is appropriate, the municipal approving authority shall give
consideration whenever possible to the granting of an extension for the
purpose of pursuing a waiver. In some cases it may be impracticable for the
party requesting or appealing a waiver to complete the waiver process
within the time guidelines of the Municipal Land Use Law (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-1 et seq.; see, for example, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.3, 46(c), 46.1, 47,
48, and 50). In such cases, the municipal approving authority may provide
for the disposition of the waiver as a condition of its approval.
f. There is no fee for requesting a waiver.
C. Waiver Review (N.J.A.C. 5:21-3.3).
1. The Commissioner shall review the waiver request to determine whether it appears
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §700 - 711
335
on preliminary review that adherence to a particular standard would jeopardize the
public health and safety.
a. If the waiver request on its face does not meet the requirements of this
subsection, the Commissioner shall contact the requesting party within 20
days of receipt of the request and advise the requesting party of the waiver
request rejection. Grounds for rejection shall be indicated in writing.
2. Within 20 days of receipt of a waiver request, the Commissioner shall date and mark
as justified for review each waiver request accepted for review. The Commissioner
shall then direct each such waiver request to the Site Improvement Advisory Board's
Technical Committee which consists of Board members representative of,
respectively, the New Jersey Society of Professional Engineers; the New Jersey
Society of Municipal Engineers; and the New Jersey Builders Association (See
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40.4(c)).
3. The Commissioner shall send notice of the Commissioner's determination of
justification to designated contacts at the same time as the waiver request is sent to
the Technical Committee.
4. The Technical Committee shall render a decision by resolution within 30 days of the
Commissioner's determination that the waiver request is justified.
5. A waiver resolution adopted by the committee shall specify the grounds for granting
or denying the waiver request.
6. The Commissioner shall promptly notify the developer and the municipal approving
authority of the committee's decision, and shall provide a copy of the resolution
memorializing such decision to those parties and to the Site Improvement Advisory
Board.
D. Appeal of Waiver Decisions (N.J.A.C. 5:21-3.4).
1. Any decision of the technical committee may be appealed to the Site Improvement
Advisory Board, which shall hear appeals in public session at regularly scheduled or
special meetings announced in compliance with the Open Public Meetings Act (See
N.J.S.A. 10:4-6 et seq.).
2. For each hearing, the Site Improvement Advisory Board shall designate, by simple
majority of the members present, a voting member of the Board to serve as presiding
officer.
3. Any documents and materials constituting the appeal shall be available for public
inspection at the Department of Community Affairs, Division of Codes and
Standards during normal business hours at least 10 days before the date of the
hearing. Other documents, records, or testimony may be produced at the hearing to
clarify or supplement materials previously submitted.
4. The hearings shall be informal. Rules of evidence shall not apply, but the presiding
officer may exclude irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious evidence.
5. The testimony of all witnesses in a waiver appeal shall be under oath or affirmation
and shall be recorded verbatim either mechanically or stenographically. Transcripts
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §700 - 711
336
may be obtained at the expense of the requesting party and shall be certified by the
transcriber to be accurate.
6. The Site Improvement Advisory Board shall render a final decision within 10 days
of the hearing. The Board's decision shall be in writing, and shall contain findings
and conclusions. The Board shall mail a copy of the decision to the developer and
to the municipal approving authority.
E. Special Area Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-3.5).
1. The Commissioner and the Site Improvement Advisory Board as a matter of policy
recognize the need for preservation and/or enhancement of community character in
New Jersey municipalities. This subsection is intended to provide a procedure
whereby a municipal approving authority may develop and recommend to the Site
Improvement Advisory Board supplementary and/or alternative standards in the
form of municipal ordinances for review and amendment to the Residential Site
Improvement Standards. The Site Improvement Advisory Board shall solicit the
input of the Department of Environmental Protection, the Office of State Planning,
and the Department of Transportation and may solicit input from public or private
organizations and individuals as it deems appropriate during the process of review of
special area standards.
2. A special area designation may be applied by ordinance by a municipality or group
of municipalities to an area or areas of a municipality or municipalities exhibiting or
planned to exhibit a distinctive character or environmental feature that the
municipality or municipalities by ordinance have identified and expressed a desire to
preserve and enhance. Examples of a special area may include:
a. Designated redevelopment areas pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40A:12A-1 et seq.;
b. Designated special improvement districts pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:56-65 et
seq.;
c. Designated historic districts pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65.1;
d. Municipalities in the Metropolitan Planning Area (Planning Area 1), and
Regional Centers, villages, hamlets, or other Centers identified by the State
Development and Redevelopment Plan or designated by the State Planning
Commission;
e. Infill areas in urban settings;
f. Planned unit and planned unit residential developments, and residential
clusters pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-39;
g. Areas where environmental systems such as watersheds may require special
environmental controls;
h. Designated scenic corridors, pursuant to the Intermodal Surface
Transportation Efficiency Act or other similar State or local initiatives; and
i. Rural preservation areas including but not limited to designated Agricultural
Development Areas, pursuant to N.J.S.A. 4:1C, and in support of the rural
preservation policies of the State Development and Redevelopment Plan.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §700 - 711
337
3. The Site Improvement Advisory Board shall consider at its regular or speciallyscheduled
public meetings special area standards submitted for approval by a
municipality or municipalities. The Board's review of special area ordinances shall
take the form of an informal hearing. The Site Improvement Advisory Board shall
provide the opportunity for the submission of information, both oral and
documentary, by municipal government and any interested parties.
4. The Site Improvement Advisory Board will review special area standards submitted
for approval if:
a. The special area is delineated on the zoning map, adopted redevelopment
plan, special improvement district ordinance, Center designation petition, or
other duly authorized Ordinance of the municipality or municipalities;
b. The special area is incorporated into the municipality’s master plan;
c. Site improvement standards for use in the special area are consistent with
the purposes of Residential Site Improvement Standards, deviations from
the standards are identified, and a rationale is provided for each such
deviation; and
d. Site improvement standards for use in the special area are adopted by
ordinance. The municipality may submit its existing code(s) and plans to
satisfy these requirements.
5. The application of the municipality for Site Improvement Advisory Board approval
of its special area standards shall consist of:
a. The resolution required in -E.2 above;
b. The standards;
c. A copy of the ordinance adopting the standards;
d. An identification and narrative rationale for the deviations from the
standards of this section; and
e. Any maps, exhibits, or supporting documentation.
6. Developers, nonprofit groups, and other agencies may submit applications for
special area status on behalf of municipalities if duly authorized by the municipal
governing body.
7. The Site Improvement Advisory Board's decision on municipal special area
standards shall be rendered in writing.
8. The Site Improvement Advisory Board shall incorporate into its annual review of
N.J.A.C. 5:21-3 a review of approved municipal special area standards and shall
recommend to the Commissioner any appropriate changes in the rules (N.J.S.A.
40:55D-40.4(d)).
9. The Site Improvement Advisory Board may approve or deny, in whole or in part,
special area standards submitted for consideration by a municipality or
municipalities.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §700 - 711
338
10. The Site Improvement Advisory Board's review is limited in scope to those areas
within its purview pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-40.4, that is streets, off-street
parking, water supply, sanitary sewers, and stormwater management in the context
of residential development.
11. The Board's review of a municipal special area standards Ordinance shall be based
on the following criteria. Standards set forth in an Ordinance submitted for review
by the Board:
a. Shall be consistent with the intent of the Site Improvement Act;
b. Shall be reasonable and not unduly burdensome;
c. Shall meet the needs of public health and safety; and
d. Shall take into account existing infrastructure and surrounding development
possibility.
F. Agreement to Exceed Standards (N.J.A.C. 5:21-3.6).
1. A standard set forth in these rules may be exceeded when both the developer and the
municipal approving authority agree that such exceeding of a standard is desirable
under the specific circumstances of a proposed residential development.
2. Any agreement between developer and municipal approving authority to exceed a
standard set forth in these rules shall be placed in writing by the developer.
3. The developer shall transmit forthwith to the Department notification of each
agreement with a municipal approving authority to exceed any of the standards set
forth in these rules.
4. The Department shall review each agreement between a developer and a municipal
approving authority wherein they mutually agree to exceed a standard otherwise set
forth in the Residential Site Improvement Standards. Each such agreement shall be
reviewed for consistency with the intent and purpose of the Act and these rules.
5. The Department shall apprise the Site Improvement Advisory Board periodically of
all agreements to exceed the standards, together with a summary of the review
described in -F.4 above for each such agreement.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
339
ARTICLE VIII
APPLICATION SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS
§ 800 Conformity Required.
Whenever an application for development to the Board is permitted or required by this Article, it
shall be in such form, and accompanied by such maps, documents, and materials as are prescribed by
this Article, and shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer in such numbers as required in
Table 8.1. No development application shall be accepted for submittal unless it conforms to the
form, content, and data requirements of this Article. The standards for submission contained in this
Article shall be considered the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
and general welfare.
§ 801 Submission of Application Required.
A. Subdivision and Site Plan Approval Required. Except as otherwise permitted, no building
permit shall be issued for any building or use or enlargement of any building or use unless a
site plan is first submitted and approved by the Lawrence Township Planning Board or
Zoning Board of Adjustment as the law directs. No subdivision of land shall be valid unless
a plat is first submitted and approved by the Lawrence Township Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment.
B. Exemptions from Site Plan Review. Site plan review and approval shall not be required for:
1. Building permits for individual lot applications involving only a detached one- or
two-dwelling unit building.
2. Accessory buildings as otherwise permitted for §801.B.1 uses. Accessory buildings
for non-residential uses, with a maximum 500 square foot size limitation. [Ord. 1585-
99, 9/7/1999]
3. Other buildings or structures incidental to residential uses.
4. The alteration or repair of an existing building which is not either a detached one- or
two-dwelling unit building upon determination by the Administrative Officer that
the alterations or repair:
a. Will not result in additional lot coverage whether by buildings or site
improvements.
b. Will not increase the number of required off-street parking or loading
spaces.
c. Will conform to the maximum and minimum standards as set forth in
Article IV.
d. Is not proposed in conjunction with a use requiring a conditional use permit.
5. No exemption from site plan review shall be permitted for any use, building,
structure, or landscape either currently listed on the local, State or National Register
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
340
of Historic Places, or proposed for inclusion on such register or registers in the
Historic Preservation Element of the Master Plan.
6. Expansion of an existing conforming non-residential structure provided the
expansion will not result in more than ten percent (10%) of additional building
coverage and if, in the opinion of the Zoning Officer, this addition will not create a
nuisance to adjoining land uses. This exemption shall be limited to one expansion
every three (3) years, up to a maximum aggregate of 2,500 square feet. [Ord. 1585-
99, 9/7/1999]
C. Site Plan Review Waiver. The Board of Jurisdiction may waive the requirement of site plan
approval whenever it determines that the proposed development, alteration, repair, or change
of use or occupancy does not affect the existing conditions of the lot or premises, including:
topography; vegetation; drainage; floodplains; marshes and waterways; open space;
walkways, means of ingress and egress; utility services; landscaping; structures; signs;
lighting and screening devices; and other considerations of site plan review. Any applicant
desiring a waiver under this section shall present sufficient credible evidence to allow the
Board to reach such conclusions as would permit a waiver. Such evidence may consist of
sketches, property descriptions, methods of operation, photographs, testimony, or other
documentation or information as the Board may require. The reviewing Board shall render a
decision based on such evidence and may attach conditions to any waiver so granted.
§ 802 Submissions Required for All Applications.
All applications for development shall contain the following information in addition to the
submission checklist information contained in Table 8.2 (located at the end of this Article) specific to
the type of submission:
A. A completed and signed application form, containing the following information:
1. Applicant's name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address
(if applicable);
2. Owner's name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address (if
applicable);
3. Interest of applicant in property;
4. Name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, e-mail address (if applicable)
of applicant's attorney (if represented) and professional representatives;
5. Street address of property;
6. Tax lot and block number(s) of property;
7. Zoning district in which the property is situated;
8. Description of property;
9. Description of proposed development;
10. Type of application and submission level.
B. The application fee and applicable escrow fee in accordance with Article IX.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
341
C. A list of all variances or waivers requested, citing the applicable section of this Ordinance,
excepting concept and general development plans.
D. A certification from the Tax Collector's office that no taxes or assessments are due or
delinquent on the subject property.
E. Affidavit of ownership and the consent of the owner for the filing of an application for
development, excepting concept plans.
F. A certification of corporation or partnership interest pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-48.1 et seq.,
if applicable, excepting concept plans.
G. A copy of any protective covenants or deed restrictions applying or to be applied to the
subject land, excepting concept plans.
H. Any existing or proposed easement or land dedicated or reserved for public use.
I. A list of all required regulatory approvals at the municipal, county, state, and federal level of
government and their status, excepting concept plans. Applicant is responsible to make
submission to all other reviewing agencies and submit proof of same. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
J. Plans shall be legibly drawn at a scale appropriate for the proposed development. All sheets
in the submission shall be the same size.
K. Details to be placed on all plans.
1. The names and addresses of the owner(s) and applicant(s). [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
2. The name, signature, license or certification number, seal, and address of architect,
engineer, planner, land surveyor or landscape architect, as applicable, involved in
the preparation of the plat or plan.
3. Title block denoting the type and level of submission, name of applicant(s), tax map
sheet, block and lot number(s), name of county and municipality, and street location.
[Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
4. A key map drawn at a scale no less than 1"=2,000' showing the location of the tract
with reference to the surrounding properties, streets, municipal boundaries, and
water courses within 500 feet of the subject parcel.
5. A schedule of the required and proposed zoning district regulations including, but
not limited to the lot size, lot width, street frontage, yard setbacks, open space
requirements, parking requirements, and lot coverages.
6. A north arrow, scale and graphic scale.
7. A copy of the current zoning map depicting the subject tract and the surrounding
properties within 500 feet of said parcel.
8. Date of plan and/or survey and any revision date.
L. Subdivision plats shall be required to list:
1. Those lots whose buildable areas do not meet the solar orientation standard of
§523.B; and,
2. Those lots whose buildable areas do not meet the lot arrangement standard of §540.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
342
M. Site plans shall be required to list:
1. Those principal structures which do not meet the solar orientation standard of
§523.B; and
2. For an application for development which requests a hardship variance, a use
variance, a special permit, or a decision on a special question, and which is not
accompanied by a site plan or subdivision, the required information shall be in a
checklist included in the application form.
§ 803 Permissible Division of Responsibility for Plan
Preparation.
All plans and documents submitted shall be signed and sealed by the appropriate licensed or certified
professional, as follows:
A. Depiction of Existing Conditions on a Site Plan.
1. Survey of property and exact location of existing conditions: Land Surveyor.
2. The existing location of vegetation, general flood plain determination, or general
location of buildings, utilities, or structures: Architect, Engineer, Land Surveyor,
Landscape Architect, or Planner.
B. Preparation of a Site Plan.
1. The location of proposed buildings and their relationship to the site and the
immediate environs: Architect or Engineer.
2. The location of drives, parking layout, pedestrian circulation and the means of
ingress and egress: Architect, Engineer, Planner or Landscape Architect.
3. Drainage facilities for site plans of 10 acres or more; or, involving stormwater
detention facilities; or, traversed by a water course: Engineer.
4. Other drainage facilities: Architect or Engineer.
5. Connections with utilities and their on-tract extension: Engineer.
6. Off tract utility extensions: Engineer.
7. On site sanitary sewage disposal or flow equalization facilities: Engineer.
8. Preliminary floor plans and elevation views of buildings illustrating the architectural
design of a project: Architect, except where the building is part of an engineering or
industrial project, in which case an Engineer.
9. Landscaping, signs, lighting, screening material or other information not specified
above: Architect, Planner, Engineer, or Landscape Architect.
10. The general layout of a preliminary site plan or general development plan for a
multiple building project, showing the development elements including their
relationship to the site and the immediate environs: Architect, Engineer, Planner, or
Landscape Architect.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
343
C. Preparation of a Major Subdivision Plat.
1. The general location of facilities, site improvements, and lot layouts: Architect,
Engineer, Land Surveyor, Planner, or Landscape Architect.
2. The design and construction details of all public improvements, including street
pavements, sidewalks, curbs, sanitary sewage, and storm drainage facilities:
Engineer.
3. Final subdivision plat with metes and bounds: Land Surveyor.
D. Environmental Impact Statement: Engineer, Planner or Landscape Architect.
E. Community Impact Statement: Planner.
F. Circulation Impact Study: Transportation Engineer or Planner.
G. Other Submissions: As qualified by the Board.
§ 804 Completeness of Applications.
A. Certification of Completeness. An application for development shall be complete for the
purposes of commencing the applicable time period for action by the Board when so certified
by the Board or its authorized committee or designee, the Administrative Officer. In the
event that the Board, committee, or designee does not certify the application to be complete
within 45 days of the date of its submission, the application shall be deemed complete upon
expiration of the 45 day period for the purposes of commencing the applicable time period
unless:
1. The application lacks information required in §802 and Table 8.2 (Submission
Checklist); and
2. The Board or its authorized committee or designee has notified the applicant, in
writing of the deficiencies in the application within 45 days of submission of the
application.
B. Submission Requirement Waivers. The applicant may request that one or more of the
submission requirements be waived, in which event the Board or its designee shall grant or
deny the request within 45 days. Nothing herein shall be construed as diminishing the
applicant’s obligation to offer sufficient proof during the application process that he or she is
entitled to approval of the application.
C. Correction of Erroneous Information. The Board may subsequently require correction of any
information found to be in error, and the submission of additional information not specified
in this Ordinance, or any revisions in the accompanying documents, as are reasonably
necessary to make an informed decision as to whether the requirements necessary for
approval of the application for development have been met. The application shall not be
deemed incomplete for lack of any such additional information or any revision in the
accompanying documents so required by the Board.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
344
§ 805 Application for Informal (Concept) Review.
A. An applicant may request and the Planning Board shall grant, an informal review of a
concept design plan for which an applicant intends to prepare and submit an application for
development.
B. A concept design plan shall be submitted to the Administrative Officer at least 10 days prior
to a regularly scheduled meeting in form, content, and number as required by §802, Table
8.1 and Table 8.2. All persons having an interest in the proposed development shall be given
an opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The concept design plan and its documentation
shall show a general design of the development and its public improvements sufficient for
the Board to consider the concept. Acceptance of the concept design plan does not constitute
an approval, nor shall it be considered a valid basis for the construction of improvements or
other commitments which depend upon the concept plan's design characteristics. Neither the
applicant nor the Board shall be bound by the plan or its review. [Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999]
C. In no event shall the concept design review be considered a preliminary plat submission or
preliminary site plan submission for the purpose of deeming an application complete nor
shall it constitute a general development plan, preliminary plat or preliminary site plan
approval by the Board.
§ 806 Application for Minor Subdivision and Minor Site Plan.
A. Submission Required. When an applicant proposes development that meets the definition
and criteria for a minor subdivision or minor site plan, an application in form, content, and
number as required by §802, Table 8.1 and Table 8.2 shall be submitted.
B. Criteria for Minor Classification. Applications shall be classified either as minor
subdivisions or minor site plans only upon meeting the definitional requirements in Article II
and the following criteria:
1. Minor Subdivision.
a. The subdivision shall consist of no more than 3 lots in total including the
remainder lot; and
b. The tract was not the subject of a minor subdivision approval within two
years of the date of the resolution of memorialization.
2. Minor Site Plan.
a. The proposed development contains less than 1,000 square feet of floor
area; and
b. The proposed development contains less than 4,000 square feet of
impervious surface; and
c. The tract was not the subject of a minor subdivision approval within two
years of the date of the resolution of memorialization.
C. Minimum Review Time Period. The applicant shall submit an application and associated
documentation to the Administrative Officer at least 21 days prior to a regularly scheduled
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
345
hearing.
D. Review by Professionals. The Municipal Engineer, Planner, and/or other professional shall
review all aspects of the application and shall expeditiously report their findings to the
Board.
E. Determination of Completeness. The Board or its designee shall determine the completeness
of the application in accordance with §804. No application shall be scheduled for a public
hearing unless it is determined to be complete.
F. Time Period for Consideration. Once the application is deemed complete the Board shall
have 45 days to grant or deny the application, with or without conditions.
G. Remainder of Tract. Where the remaining portion of the original tract that is to be
subdivided is of sufficient size to be developed further, the applicant may be required to
submit a concept plan of the entire remaining portion of the tract to indicate a feasible plan
whereby the site plan applied for, together with subsequent site plan(s) that may be
submitted, shall not create, impose, aggravate, or lead to any adverse condition.
H. Board Action on Applications.
1. The Board shall act upon the application after it has sufficiently reviewed the
application, that the Board professionals have adequately reviewed the application,
that the applicant has had sufficient opportunity to present its request for
development approval to the Board, and that the concerns of other interested persons
have been considered. In any event, the Board shall grant or deny the application
for a minor site plan within 45 days of the date of determination that a complete
application has been submitted to the Board or within such time as may be
consented to by the applicant. The decision and resolution of the Board shall be in
writing in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10g through -10i.
2. Minor subdivision and site plan approval shall be deemed final approval by the
Board.
3. The Board may condition approval on terms ensuring the completion of
improvements and performance in accordance with this Ordinance and N.J.S.A.
40:55D-38, -39, -40, and -53.
4. Whenever review or approval of an application for development by the Mercer
County Planning Board is required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, the Board shall
condition any approval upon the timely receipt of favorable action on the application
by the Mercer County Planning Board or approval by the Mercer County Planning
Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
5. Failure of the Board to act within the time period prescribed shall constitute
approval, and a certificate of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the
Board to act shall be issued on the request of the applicant.
I. Effect of Approval: Minor Subdivision. The zoning requirements and general terms and
conditions, whether conditional of otherwise, upon which minor subdivision approval was
granted, shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of approval; provided
that the approved minor subdivision shall have been duly recorded pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-47.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
346
Extensions may be requested and may be granted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47f
and -g.
J. Effect of Approval: Minor Site Plans. The zoning requirements and general terms and
conditions whether conditional or otherwise, upon which minor site plan approval was
granted shall not be changed for a period of two years after the date of approval.
Extensions may be requested and may be granted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-46.1c.
K. Expiration of Approval. In the granting of an application for minor site plan, the applicant
shall secure a building permit, or when no building permit is required, a certificate of
occupancy, within three years of the date of approval, otherwise the approval shall be
considered null and void.
L. Distribution. Upon the granting of site plan approval by the Board and the fulfillment of any
conditions, the approved plan, including the resolution of approval, shall be sent to:
1. Applicant.
2. Planning Board file.
3. Municipal Engineer.
4. Municipal Planner.
5. Construction Code Official.
6. Township Clerk.
7. Tax Assessor.
8. Municipal Health Officer, if applicable.
9. Such other municipal, county or State agencies or officials as directed by the Board
or in the resolution of approval.
§ 807 Application for General Development Plan Approval.
A. Submission Required. When an applicant proposes an application that meets the definition
and criteria for planned development, a general development plan application in form,
content, and number as required by §802 and Tables 8.1 and 8.2 may be submitted.
B. Minimum Tract Area. The minimum land area for the submittal of a general development
plan application shall be greater than 100 acres.
C. Minimum Review Time Period. The applicant shall submit to the Administrative Officer an
application and associated documentation at least 30 days prior to a regularly scheduled
meeting.
D. Review by Professionals. The Municipal Engineer, Planner, and/or other professional shall
review all aspects of the application and shall expeditiously report their findings to the
Board.
E. Determination of Completeness. The Board or its designee shall determine the completeness
of the application in accordance with §804. No application shall be scheduled for a public
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
347
hearing unless it is determined to be complete.
F. Public notice and hearing. If the application is found to conform to the definition of a
general development plan and is complete, the Board shall formally determine that a
complete application has been submitted, and shall set a time and date for public notice and
hearing and shall so advise the applicant. The Board may delegate the setting of the time
and date for public notice and hearing to the Administrative Officer. Public notice shall be
given in accordance with §704. All persons having an interest in the proposed development
shall be given an opportunity to be heard at the hearing.
G. Substantial Amendment. If during the hearing on the submission, the Board requires any
substantial amendment in the layout of the tract or its improvements, as proposed by the
applicant, that has been the subject of said hearing, an amended application shall be
submitted and acted upon as an original submission.
H. Remainder of tract. Any lands contemplated for development under the provisions of the
general development plan shall be included in the application.
I. Board Action on Applications.
1. Review of plan. The Board shall act upon the application after it has sufficiently
reviewed the application, that the Board professionals have adequately reviewed the
application, that the applicant has had sufficient opportunity to present its request for
development approval to the Board, and that the concerns of other interested persons
have been considered.
2. The Board shall grant, grant with conditions, or deny the application for a general
development plan within 95 days of the date of determination that a complete
application has been submitted to the Board or within such time as may be
consented to by the applicant. Upon failure of the Board to act within the
aforementioned time periods, the Board shall be deemed to have granted general
development approval to the site plan.
3. Findings for planned unit developments. Prior to the approval by written resolution
of a general development plan for the initial approval of a planned unit development,
the Planning Board shall find the following facts and conclusions:
a. That departures by the proposed development from zoning regulations
otherwise applicable to the subject property conform to zoning Ordinance
standards adopted pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65c of the Municipal Land
Use Law;
b. That the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common open
space are reliable, and the amount, location and purpose of the common
open space are adequate;
c. That provisions through the physical design of the proposed planned unit
development for public services, control over vehicular and pedestrian
traffic, and the amenities of light and air, recreation and visual enjoyment
are adequate;
d. That the proposed planned unit development shall not have an unreasonably
adverse impact upon the area in which it is proposed to be established;
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
348
e. In the case of a proposed planned unit development which contemplates
construction over a period of years, that the terms and conditions intended
to protect the interests of the public and the residents, occupants, and
owners of the proposed development in the total completion of the
development are adequate.
4. Contents of written hearing resolution. The decision and resolution of the Board
shall be in writing in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10g through -10i and shall
include not only conclusions, but also findings of fact related to the specific
proposal; shall set forth the reasons for the grant, with or without conditions, or for
the denial; and shall set particularly in what respects the plan would or would not be
in the public interest, including but not limited to findings of fact and conclusions on
the following:
a. Whether the plan is in general conformity with the provisions of the Master
Plan of the Township of Lawrence.
b. In what respects the plan is or is not consistent with the statement of
objectives for planned unit development as set forth in Article I.
c. The extent to which the plan departs from zoning and subdivision
regulations otherwise applicable to the subject property, including but not
limited to density, bulk and use, and the reason why such departures are or
are not deemed to be in the public interest.
d. The purpose, location and amount of the common open space, the reliability
of the proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common open
space, and the adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and purpose of the
common open space as related to the proposed density and type of
development.
e. The physical design of the plan and the manner in which said design does or
does not make adequate provisions for public services, provide adequate
control over vehicular traffic and further the amenities of light and air,
recreation, landscaping, and visual enjoyment.
f. The relationship, beneficial or adverse, of the proposed planned unit
development to the neighboring area in which it is proposed to be
established.
g. In the case of a plan that proposes development over a period of 5 or more
years, the sufficiency of the terms and conditions intended to protect the
interests of the public and of the residents and owners of the planned unit
development in the integrity of the plan, including the performance
guarantees.
5. Conditions of general development plan approval. The Board may condition
approval on terms ensuring the applicant's conformance to this Ordinance.
6. Failure of the Board to so act within the required period(s) of time shall be deemed
to be a grant of the general development plan approval of the plan as submitted. In
the event that the general development plan approval is granted, other than by lapse
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
349
of time, either of the plan as submitted or of the plan with conditions, the Township
Planning Board, as part of its resolution, shall specify the drawings, specifications,
and form of performance guarantee as provided by statute that shall accompany
subsequent applications for site plan or subdivision approval. In the event that the
general development plan approval is granted subject to conditions, the applicant
shall within 45 days after receiving a copy of the written approval of the Township
Planning Board, notify the Township Planning Board of the acceptance or refusal of
all conditions.
a. In the event the applicant agrees to all modifications and conditions made a
part of the approval of a general development plan, the applicant and the
Township shall enter into a Municipal Development Agreement pursuant to
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-45.2.l, which shall specify the terms and conditions to be
honored by both parties to assure the implementation of the approved
planned development.
b. If the applicant refuses to accept all conditions, the Board shall be deemed
to have denied general development plan approval.
c. In the event the applicant does not within the required time period notify the
Board of the acceptance or refusal to of the conditions of the general
development plan approval, and in the event such lack of notice shall
prevent the Board and the applicant from mutually agreeing to a change in
such conditions, the Board, at the request of the applicant, may extend the
time during which the applicant shall notify the Board.
d. The Board may set forth those conditions which it deems necessary to
protect the interests of the general public, and the residents and occupants of
the planned unit development. Such conditions may include, but are not
limited to, the sequence and distribution of uses and densities, limitations of
land areas to be developed within a given period, or provision of physical
means to address critical or unique environmental conditions. Such
conditions shall be predicated on the following criteria:
(1) That each stage of a planned unit development shall contain, within
reasonable limits, a balance of commercial and residential uses,
open space, and community facilities to assure that the planned unit
development is a viable self-sustaining community unit at any
given stage in its growth.
(2) That each stage of development shall include required open space
in proportion to that part of the total commercial and residential
development units in the planned unit development that are to be
developed in that stage. Such open space shall include both
recreation and conservation uses accessible to the general public
and open space which shall be physically proximate and accessible
to the resident population within the planned unit development.
(3) That the size and timing of successive stages of a planned unit
development shall be conditioned upon the availability and
provision of suitable capacity of facilities such as arterial highways,
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
350
primary roadways of Mercer County, primary roadways of
Lawrence Township, sewer, water, storm water drainage, and other
services whose capacities must be expanded as a result of the
development of the planned development.
7. Whenever review or approval of an application for development by the Mercer
County Planning Board is required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, the Board shall
condition any approval upon the timely receipt of favorable action on the application
by the Mercer County Planning Board or approval by the Mercer County Planning
Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
8. Failure of the Board to act within the time period prescribed shall constitute
approval, and a certificate of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the
Board to act shall be issued on the request of the applicant. Such certificate shall be
sufficient in lieu of a resolution of approval and written endorsements and shall be
accepted by the county recording officer for the purpose of filing.
J. Effect of approval.
1. A plan that has been given general development plan approval with conditions
accepted by the applicant (and provided that the applicant has not defaulted under
nor violated any of the conditions of the general development plan approval) shall
not be modified, revoked or otherwise impaired by action of the Township or any of
its present or future agencies or officers pending an application or applications for
subdivision or site plan approvals for each section without the consent of the
applicant provided that an application for subdivision or site plan approval is filed
within 5 years of the date upon which the general development plan has been
approved.
2. In the event the developer has not applied for preliminary approval of a section or
sections of an approved general development plan within 5 years of the date upon
which the general development plan was approved such approval may be terminated
by the Planning Board upon written notice to the applicant.
3. The Planning Board may grant these rights for a period of time longer than 5 years
but not longer than 20 years as shall be reasonable taking into consideration:
a. The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under the general development plan approval;
b. Economic conditions; and
c. The comprehensiveness of the development.
4. The applicant may petition the Planning Board thereafter and the Planning Board
may grant an extension of general development plan approval for such additional
time period as shall be determined by the Planning Board to be reasonable taking
into consideration:
a. The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under the preliminary approval;
b. The potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
351
section or sections awaiting final approval;
c. Economic conditions; and
d. The comprehensiveness of the development, provided that, if the design
standards have been revised, such standards may govern.
K. Distribution. Upon the granting of general development plan approval by the Board, copies
of the approved documents, including the resolution of approval, shall be sent to:
1. Applicant.
2. Planning Board file.
3. Municipal Engineer.
4. Township Planner.
5. Construction Code Official.
6. Township Clerk.
7. Tax Assessor.
8. Municipal health officer, if applicable.
9. Such other municipal, county or State agencies or officials as directed by the Board
or in the resolution of approval.
§ 808 Application for Preliminary Major Subdivision and Site
Plan.
A. Submission Required. When an applicant proposes an application that meets the definition
of a preliminary major subdivision or site plan, an application in form, content, and number
as required by §802 and Tables 8.1 and 8.2 shall be submitted.
B. Minimum Review Time Period. The applicant shall submit to the Administrative Officer an
application and associated documentation at least 30 days prior to a regularly scheduled
meeting.
C. Review by Professionals. The Municipal Engineer, Planner, and/or other professional shall
review all aspects of the application and shall expeditiously report their findings to the
Board.
D. Determination of Completeness. The Board or its designee shall determine the completeness
of the application in accordance with §804. No application shall be scheduled for a public
hearing unless it is determined to be complete.
E. Public Notice and Hearing. If the application is found to conform to the definition of a
general development plan and is complete, the Board shall formally determine that a
complete application has been submitted, and shall set a time and date for public notice and
hearing and shall so advise the applicant. The Board may delegate the setting of the time
and date for public notice and hearing to the Administrative Officer. Public notice shall be
given in accordance with §704. All persons having an interest in the proposed development
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
352
shall be given an opportunity to be heard at the hearing.
F. Substantial Amendment. If during the hearing on the submission, the Board requires any
substantial amendment in the layout of the site or its improvements, as proposed by the
applicant, that has been the subject of said hearing, an amended application shall be
submitted and acted upon as an original submission.
G. Remainder of Tract. Where the remaining portion of the original tract is of sufficient size to
be developed further, the applicant may be required to submit a conceptual plan of the entire
remaining portion of the tract to indicate a feasible plan whereby the site plan applied for,
together with subsequent site plan(s) that may be submitted, shall not create, impose, aggravate,
or lead to any adverse condition.
H. Board Action on Applications.
1. The Board shall act upon the application after it has sufficiently reviewed the
application, that the Board professionals have adequately reviewed the application,
that the applicant has had sufficient opportunity to present its request for
development approval to the Board, and that the concerns of other interested persons
have been considered.
2. The Board shall grant, grant with conditions, or deny the application for a
preliminary site plan in accordance with:
a. A site plan of 10 acres or less or 10 dwelling units or less within 45 days of
the date of determination that a complete application has been submitted to
the Board or within such time as may be consented to by the applicant, or
b. A site plan of more than 10 acres or more than 10 dwelling units within 95
days of the date of determination that a complete application has been
submitted to the Board or within such time as may be consented to by the
applicant.
c. Upon failure of the Board to act within the aforementioned time periods, the
Board shall be deemed to have granted preliminary approval to the site plan.
3. The decision and resolution of the Board shall be in writing in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10g through -10i.
4. The Board may condition approval on terms ensuring the applicant's conformance to
this Ordinance and any other applicable Ordinance.
5. Whenever review or approval of an application for development by the Mercer
County Planning Board is required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, the Board shall
condition any approval upon the timely receipt of favorable action on the application
by the Mercer County Planning Board or approval by the Mercer County Planning
Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
6. Failure of the Board to act within the time period prescribed shall constitute
approval, and a certificate of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the
Board to act shall be issued on the request of the applicant. Such certificate shall be
sufficient in lieu of a resolution of approval.
I. Effect of approval. The approval of a preliminary major site plan shall confer upon the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
353
applicant the following rights for a 3 year period from the date of a preliminary approval:
1. That the general terms and conditions on which preliminary approval have been
granted shall not be changed, including but not limited to, use requirements; layout
and design standards for streets, curbs, and sidewalks; lot sizes, dimensions, yards,
and improvements, whether on-tract or off.
2. That the applicant may submit for final approval on or before the expiration date of
preliminary approval the whole or a section or sections of the preliminary site plan.
3. That the applicant may apply for and the Board may grant extensions on such
preliminary approval for additional periods of time of at least one year and not to
exceed two years, provided that if the design standards have been revised by
Ordinance, such revised standards may govern at the discretion of the Board.
4. In the case of a site plan of 50 acres or larger, the Board may grant these rights for a
period of time longer than 3 years as shall be reasonable taking into consideration:
a. The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under the preliminary approval;
b. Economic conditions; and
c. The comprehensiveness of the development.
5. The applicant may petition the Board thereafter and the Board may grant an
extension of preliminary approval for such additional time period as shall be
determined by the Board to be reasonable taking into consideration:
a. The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under the preliminary approval;
b. The potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the
section or sections awaiting final approval;
c. Economic conditions; and
d. The comprehensiveness of the development provided that, if the design
standards have been revised, such standards may govern.
6. Whenever the Board grants an extension of preliminary approval pursuant to this
subsection and preliminary approval has expired before the date on which the
extension is granted, the extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the
expiration date. The applicant may apply for the extension either before or after
what would otherwise be the expiration date.
7. The Board shall grant an extension of preliminary approval for a period determined
by the Board but not exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the
expiration date, if the applicant proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board
that the applicant was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding
with the development because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from
other governmental entities and that the applicant applied promptly for and
diligently pursued the required approvals. An applicant shall apply for the extension
before, 1), what would otherwise be the expiration date of preliminary approval, or
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
354
2), the ninety-first (91st) day after the applicant receives the last legally required
approval from other governmental entities, whichever occurs later. An extension
granted pursuant to this subsection shall not preclude the Board from granting an
extension otherwise permitted by this section.
J. Expiration of Approval. After the granting of an application for preliminary subdivision or
preliminary site plan, the applicant shall file an application for final approval within five
years of the date of approval, otherwise the approval shall be considered null and void.
K. Distribution. Upon the granting of site plan approval by the Board, copies of the approved
documents, including the resolution of approval, shall be sent to:
1. Applicant.
2. Board file.
3. Municipal Engineer.
4. Municipal Planner.
5. Administrative Officer.
6. Township Clerk.
7. Tax Assessor.
8. Municipal health officer, if applicable.
9. Such other municipal, county or State agencies or officials as directed by the Board
or in the resolution of approval.
§ 809 Application for Final Major Subdivision and Site Plan.
A. Submission Required. When an applicant proposes an application that meets the definitional
requirement for a major site plan and prior to the expiration of preliminary approval for the
subject tract, final plans, application forms and other required documentation shall be
submitted. The applicant may submit for final approval of the whole, or a section, or
sections of the preliminary development plan. Final plans shall conform substantially to
preliminary plans.
B. Minimum Review Time Period. The applicant shall submit to the Administrative Officer an
application and associated documentation at least 30 days prior to a regularly scheduled
meeting.
C. Review by Professionals. The Municipal Engineer, Planner, and/or other professional shall
review all aspects of the application and shall expeditiously report their findings to the
Board.
D. Determination of Completeness. The Board or its designee shall determine the completeness
of the application in accordance with §804. No application shall be scheduled for a public
hearing unless it is determined to be complete.
E. Hearing. If the application is found to conform to the definition of a final site plan or
subdivision and is complete, the Board shall formally determine that a complete application
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
355
has been submitted, and shall set a time and date for public notice and hearing and shall so
advise the applicant. The Board may delegate the setting of the time and date for public
notice and hearing to the Administrative Officer.
F. Board Action on Applications.
1. The Board shall act upon the application after it has sufficiently reviewed the
application, that the Board professionals have adequately reviewed the application,
that the applicant has had sufficient opportunity to present its request for
development approval to the Board, and that the concerns of other interested persons
have been considered. Final approval shall be granted if the detailed drawings,
specifications, plans, estimates, and other documentation of the application
conforms to the standards established by this Ordinance and any other applicable
Ordinance for final approval and the conditions of preliminary approval.
2. The Board shall grant, grant with conditions, or deny the application for a final
major subdivision or site plan within 45 days of the determination of completeness
or within such time as may be consented to by the applicant.
3. The Board shall not act upon an application until it has determined that it is
complete.
4. The decision and resolution of the Board shall be in writing in accordance with
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-10g through -10i.
5. The Board may condition approval on terms ensuring the applicant's conformance to
this Ordinance and any other applicable Ordinance and shall condition approval on
the approval of other agencies with development review powers over the subdivision
or site plan application.
6. Whenever review or approval of an application for development by the Mercer
County Planning Board is required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:27-6.3, the Board shall
condition any approval upon the timely receipt of favorable action on the application
by the Mercer County Planning Board or approval by the Mercer County Planning
Board by its failure to report thereon within the required time period.
7. Failure of the Board to act within the time period prescribed shall constitute
approval, and a certificate of the Administrative Officer as to the failure of the
Board to act shall be issued on the request of the applicant.
G. Effect of Approval.
1. The zoning requirements applicable to the preliminary approval first granted and all
other rights conferred upon the developer, whether conditionally or not, shall not be
changed for a period of 2 years after the date of final approval.
2. If the developer has followed the standards prescribed for final approval, the Board
may extend such period of protection of rights for extensions of one year but not to
exceed three such extensions. The granting of final approval terminates the time
period of preliminary approval for the section granted final approval.
3. In the case of a subdivision or site plan for a planned unit development of 50 acres
or more; or, a conventional subdivision or site plan of 150 acres or more; or, of a
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
356
nonresidential development of 200,000 square feet or more, the Board may grant
these rights for a period of time longer than two years as shall be reasonable taking
into consideration:
a. The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under the final approval;
b. Economic conditions; and
c. The comprehensiveness of the development.
4. The applicant may petition the Board thereafter and the Board may grant an
extension of final approval for such additional time period as shall be determined by
the Board to be reasonable taking into consideration:
a. The number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area permissible
under the final approval;
b. The potential number of dwelling units and nonresidential floor area of the
section or sections awaiting final approval;
c. Economic conditions; and
d. The comprehensiveness of the development.
5. Whenever the Board grants an extension of final approval pursuant to this
subsection and final approval has expired before the date on which the extension is
granted, the extension shall begin on what would otherwise be the expiration date.
The applicant may apply for the extension either before or after what would
otherwise be the expiration date.
6. The Board shall grant an extension of final approval for a period determined by the
Board but not exceeding one year from what would otherwise be the expiration date,
if the applicant proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board that the applicant
was barred or prevented, directly or indirectly, from proceeding with the
development because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other
governmental entities and that the applicant applied promptly for and diligently
pursued the required approvals. An applicant shall apply for the extension before,
1), what would otherwise be the expiration date of final approval, or 2), the ninetyfirst
(91st) day after the applicant receives the last legally required approval from
other governmental entities, whichever occurs later. An extension granted pursuant
to this subsection shall not preclude the Board from otherwise granting an extension
pursuant to this section.
H. Expiration of Approval. After the granting of an application for final subdivision or final site
plan, the applicant shall obtain a building permit or soil disturbance permit within five years
of the date of approval, otherwise the approval shall be considered null and void.
I. Distribution. Upon the granting of site plan approval by the Board, copies of the approved
documents, including the resolution of approval, shall be sent to:
1. Applicant.
2. Board file.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
357
3. Municipal Engineer.
4. Municipal Planner.
5. Administrative Officer.
6. Township Clerk.
7. Tax Assessor.
8. Municipal health officer, if applicable.
9. Such other municipal, county or State agencies or officials as directed by the Board
or in the resolution of approval.
§ 810 Affordable Housing Restrictions.
Proposed deed restrictions and all other documentation required by this Ordinance with respect to
low and moderate income housing shall be submitted by any applicant for approval of a development
in which there is a requirement that dwelling units be set aside for such housing.
§ 811 Recording of Final Plat After Approval.
A. Within the time period established by statute or by condition of the resolution of approval,
the developer shall submit three prints for review for compliance with the conditions of
approval to the Department of Community Development. Once it has been determined that
the plat meets the conditions of approval, the developer shall submit two mylars and one plat
in digital form for the permanent records of the municipality and any other instruments to be
recorded with the Mercer County Register of Deeds. The format of the digitized plat shall be
as directed by the Municipal Engineer. The Municipal Engineer may waive the requirement
for the submission of the digitized plat under special circumstances. No plat shall be signed
by the Township Clerk, Board Chair, Board Secretary or Municipal Engineer without first
complying with §902 of this Ordinance.
B. Final approval of a major subdivision shall expire 95 days from the date of signing the plat
unless within such period the plat shall have been duly filed by the developer with the county
recording officer. The Board of Jurisdiction for good cause shown extend the period for
recording for an additional period not to exceed 190 days from the date of the signing of the
plat. The Board of Jurisdiction may extend the 95-day or 190-day period if the developer
proves to the reasonable satisfaction of the Board of Jurisdiction that:
1. The developer was barred or prevented, either directly or indirectly, from filing
because of delays in obtaining legally required approvals from other government or
quasi-governmental entities; and
2. The developer applied promptly for and diligently pursued the required approvals.
The length of the extension shall be equal to the period of delay caused by the wait for the
required approvals, as determined by the Board of Jurisdiction. The developer may then
apply for an extension either before or after the original expiration date.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
358
C. No subdivision plat shall be accepted for filing by the county recording officer until it has
been approved by the Board of Jurisdiction as indicated on the instrument by the signature of
the Chairman or Chairwoman and Secretary of the Board of Jurisdiction or a certificate
issued in lieu of action by the Board in accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-47, -50, -56, -61, -
67 or -76. If the County Recording Officer records any plat without such approval, such
recording shall be deemed null and void, and upon request of the municipality, the plat shall
be expunged from the official records.
D. It shall be the duty of the County Recording Officer to notify the Planning Board in writing
within 7 days of the filing of any plat, identifying such instrument by its title, date of filing,
and official number.
§ 812 Environmental Impact Statement.
Environmental Impact Statements, when required, shall include the following information:
A. When Required. The impact on the environment generated by land development projects
necessitate a comprehensive analysis of the variety of problems that may result and the
actions that can be taken to minimize these problems. It is further recognized that the level
of detail required for various types of applications will vary depending on the size of the
project, the nature of the site and the location of the project. Therefore, having determined
that flexibility is needed in preparing the environment impact statement, the requirements for
such a document pertaining to different types of development applications are listed below:
1. All agricultural operations conducted in accordance with a plan approved by the soil
conservation district and all silviculture operations conducted in accordance with a
plan prepared by a professional forester are specifically exempt from the submission
of an environmental impact statement.
2. Any variance application to the Zoning Board of Adjustment not involving a site
plan or subdivision application shall not require an environmental impact statement
unless specifically requested by the Board. The Board may request an
environmental impact statement where there exist significant critical areas or
suspected environmental hazard on the site in question. The Zoning Board of
Adjustment or its designee shall inform the applicant regarding the scope of the
information that may be required.
3. Any minor subdivision and/or minor site plan applications to the Board shall not
require an environmental impact statement unless specifically requested by the
Board. The Board may request an environmental impact statement where there exist
significant critical areas or suspected environmental hazard on the site in question.
The Board or its designee shall inform the applicant regarding any information that
may be required.
4. All preliminary major subdivision and preliminary major site plan applications shall
be accompanied by an environmental impact statement.
5. Notwithstanding the categories of development that are excluded from the
requirement to submit an Environmental Impact Statement, the Board of Jurisdiction
may require the submission of information that may be included in the document
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
359
that is reasonably necessary to make an informed decision.
B. Submission Format. When an environmental impact statement is required, the applicant
shall retain one or more competent professionals to perform the necessary work. All
applicable material on file in the Department of Community Development pertinent to local
conditions shall be consulted. Any additional material pertinent to the evaluation of regional
impacts shall also be considered. Furthermore, as much original research as necessary shall
be conducted to develop the environmental impact statement. All environmental impact
statements shall consist of written and graphic materials which clearly present the required
information addressing the following areas and utilizing the following format:
1. Project description. A description of the proposed project shall be presented to
indicate the extent to which the site must be altered, the kinds of facilities to be
constructed, how they are to be considered and the uses intended.
2. Demographics. The resident population, working population, and visitor population
shall be estimated.
3. Master plan compatibility. The compatibility or incompatibility of the proposed
project shall be described in relation to the following documents:
a. Municipal master plan, especially the land use and open space elements.
b. Master plan of adjacent municipalities.
c. Mercer County master plan.
d. Mercer/Somerset/Middlesex or other regional planning guides.
e. State Development and Redevelopment Plan.
f. Other pertinent planning documents.
C. Site description and inventory. An inventory shall be provided of environmental
conditions on the site which shall include the following items: Types of Soils. When
septic effluent disposal or private well, whether individual or community, is
proposed, a description of each soil type located on the site from the Soil
Survey of Mercer County - Soil Conservation Service shall be provided. If
available, percolation data shall be submitted. Where proposed land
improvements would involve severe limitations for the development of
buildings or roads, then soil information shall be submitted for the entire
site.
b. Topography. Describe the topographic conditions of the site, with specific
delineation of any lands with slopes exceeding 12%.
c. Geology. When septic effluent disposal or private well, whether individual
or community, is proposed, a description of each geologic formation shall
be provided. Depth to bedrock shall be delineated where it would interfere
with proposed land improvements.
d. Vegetation. A description of the existing vegetation on the site. The
location of tree masses shall be depicted. Where woodlands are delineated,
the forest type shall be indicated.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
360
e. Wildlife. Unique or rare wildlife habitats shall be identified. Where
applicable, other data assembled regarding wildlife activity on the site shall
also be mapped or described.
f. Surface water. When the natural drainage pattern will be significantly
altered, an analysis shall be conducted which will investigate flow, depth,
capacity and water quality of the receiving waters. Flood plains and
wetlands shall be delineated.
g. Subsurface water. Where private or community wells are proposed, a
description of subsurface water conditions shall be provided on the depth to
ground water and the water supply capabilities of the site. Where existing
conditions warrant, detailed information regarding existing wells within 500
feet of the site relative to depth, capacity and water quality shall be
described.
h. Cultural resources. A Stage 1A cultural resources survey shall be
undertaken pursuant to State of New Jersey Executive Order No. 53, as it
may be amended or superseded. A Stage 1B cultural resource survey shall
be conducted should the Stage 1A review provide any indication of the
presence of cultural resources.
i. Historic resources. The historic resources that would be affected by the
proposed development shall be discussed in accordance with the criteria in
Article XI.
j. Existing development features. A description of any existing improvements
shall be provided.
k. Miscellaneous. When warranted, an analysis shall be conducted of existing
air quality and noise levels as prescribed by the New Jersey Department of
Environmental Protection.
1. Area and regional description. Provide a description of the surrounding environs.
Describe the existing land use pattern. When required, describe in detail the existing
infrastructure with respect to the drainage and transportation network as well as any
central sewerage and water supply facilities. Include an appropriate regional
analysis relative to the proposed project.
2. Environmental performance controls. Describe in detail the measures to be
employed during the construction and operation phases which will minimize or
eliminate negative impacts on and off site that could result from the proposed
project. Of specific interest are:
a. Sewage disposal techniques.
b. Water supply and water conservation proposals.
c. Energy conservation measures.
d. Noise reduction techniques.
3. Impact. Discuss both the negative and positive and off-tract impacts. Indicate those
negative impacts that are unavoidable. The specific concerns that shall be
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
361
considered include, but are not limited to, the following:
a. Flooding and flood plain impact.
b. Impact on surface water and groundwater quality.
c. Impact on the capacity to supply groundwater.
d. Sewage disposal impacts.
e. Alteration to existing vegetation and its impact on wildlife and wildlife
habitats.
f. Destruction or disturbance of cultural resources.
g. Noise level impacts.
h. Energy utilization.
i. Blighting or improving effects on neighborhoods.
8. Alternatives. Alternatives to the arrangement of the proposed development shall be
discussed. The board of jurisdiction shall reserve the right to require alternative
arrangements of land, buildings, and infrastructure to determine a design of lesser
impact.
9. Licenses, permits and other approvals required by law. The applicant shall list all
known licenses, permits and other forms of approval required by law for the
construction and operation of the proposed project. This list shall include, but will
not be limited to, approvals required by the municipality, as well as agencies of the
county, State and Federal governments. Where approvals have been granted, copies
of said approvals shall be attached. Where approvals are pending, a note shall be
made to that effect.
10. Documentation. All publications, file reports, manuscripts or other written sources
of information related to the project, the project site and the municipality which
were consulted and employed in compilation of the environmental impact statement
shall be listed. A list of all agencies and individuals from whom pertinent
information was obtained orally or by letter shall be listed separately. Dates and
locations of all meetings shall be specified.
11. Disposition. The Board shall not approve a submission unless it determines and
finds that the proposed development:
a. Will not result in appreciable harmful effects to the environment;
b. Has been designed and conceived with a view toward the protection of
regional sources; and
c. Will not place a disproportionate or excessive demand upon the total
resources available for such proposal and for any future proposals.
§ 813 Community Impact Statement.
Community Impact Statements, when required, shall conform to the following provisions:
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
362
A. When Required. All applications for preliminary major subdivision approval where more
than 10 lots are proposed and all applications for preliminary major site plan approval in
excess of 50,000 gross square feet of floor area shall be accompanied by a community
impact statement analyzing the proposed development and its expected impacts upon
existing municipal facilities and services. General development plan applications shall be
submitted with an abbreviated community impact statement consisting of items -B.1 and -
B.5, below. The community impact statement shall indicate why, in the applicant’s opinion,
the proposed development is in the public interest as well as providing data and opinions
concerning the impacts in subsection -B.
B. Submission Format. When a community impact statement is required, the applicant shall
retain one or more competent professionals to perform the necessary work as required under
§802. All applicable material on file in the Department of Community Development
pertinent to local conditions may be consulted. Any additional material pertinent to the
evaluation of regional impacts shall also be considered. All community impact statements
shall consist of written and graphic materials which clearly present the required information
addressing the following areas:
1. Population impact. An analysis of the number of people expected to be added to the
municipal population as a result of the proposed development, including those
attracted to the Township for the number of projected jobs in non-residential
development, according to the following age cohorts:
a. 0-4 years
b. 5-17 years
c. 17-24 years
d. 25-44 years
e. 45-64 years
f. 65 years and older
2. Schools impact. An analysis of the anticipated number of public school students
projected to be added and the ability of the existing public school facilities to absorb
the additional population projected ten years into the future. The overall anticipated
cost of facilities necessitated and the development's share of the cost on a pro rata
basis by the increase in student population shall be provided.
3. Community facilities impact. An analysis of the existing community facilities and
infrastructure available to serve the proposed development and its impact on the
adequacy of existing public water facilities, public sewerage facilities; recreational
facilities; library facilities, and senior services. Should such facilities be determined
inadequate to serve the proposed development, the remedies, either expected or
proposed by the applicant, shall be indicated along with the estimated costs for such
additional facilities.
4. Services impact. An analysis of the existing services provided by the municipality
to serve the proposed development and the impact of the development upon police
protection, fire protection, solid waste disposal, and street maintenance services.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
363
5. Fiscal Impact. An analysis of the revenues expected to be generated from the
development compared to the anticipated costs which the proposed development is
expected to generate. Revenues and costs shall be shown for the municipality, the
municipal school system and the county library system.
§ 814 Circulation Impact Study.
Circulation Impact Studies, when required, shall conform to the following provisions:
A. When Required. A circulation impact study shall be submitted for all general development
plans, preliminary major subdivisions and preliminary major site plans.
B. Submission Format. Circulation impact studies shall consist of two components, a planning
report and a traffic impact report.
1. Planning report. The planning report component of the circulation impact study
shall include the following:
a. An introduction indicating the applicant, the location of the site in question,
and a description of the site from a land use and transportation perspective.
b. The extent to which any proposed street system meets requirements for
street hierarchy, right-of-way and cartway width, and sidewalks.
c. The extent to which the proposed circulation system conforms to the
Circulation Element of the Master Plan.
d. The extent to which internal circulation for vehicles, people and the
movement of goods is adequate.
e. The extent to which the safety of pedestrians, bicyclists and the traveling
public is protected.
f. The provisions made to provide connectivity to the street system, pedestrian
generators, and the local and regional greenway network.
2. Traffic impact report. The traffic impact report component of the circulation impact
study shall include the following:
a. A description of the project phasing, access points, and connection to other
existing or proposed developments.
b. An analysis of existing conditions, including:
(1) A description of the study area and the rationale behind choosing
this area;
(2) A description of the study area's roadway facilities, including
number of lanes, functional classification, condition, location and
type of traffic signals, and location of other traffic control devices
or signs;
(3) The location of transit routes and stops and any transit facilities,
including on-street, off-street, and private facilities, and
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800- 814
364
service frequency;
(4) The location of school bus routes and stops;
(5) The location of pedestrian crosswalks, sidewalks, and bicycle
pathways;
(6) Traffic volume data including turning movement counts at key
intersections during the peak periods of the day, truck movements,
pedestrian counts, and transit use;
(7) Volume/capacity analysis and an assessment of existing conditions.
c. Traffic characteristics of the site.
(1) Traffic generation of the proposed uses in the development;
(2) Traffic distribution.
d. Future demands on the transportation system.
(1) Projection of non-site related traffic to the build-out year or years
of the site (base conditions);
(2) Projection of all traffic, including site traffic, to the build-out year
or years of the site.
e. Impact analysis and recommendations.
(1) Levels of service shall be computed for each analysis year both
with and without the inclusion of site traffic;
(2) Comparison of levels of service conditions with site traffic, and,
with site traffic after recommended improvements are
constructed;
(3) Recommendations for automobile reduction techniques;
(4) Schematic plan of any recommended improvements.
f. Site plan analysis, if applicable.
(1) Location of access points;
(2) Demand for parking and loading;
(3) Sight distance analysis.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800-814
365
Table 8.1. Distribution of Submission Copies
Submission Distribution
Informal
Review/
Concept Plan
Minor Application Major Application
Subdivision
Site Plan
General
Development
Plan
Subdivision Site Plan
Preliminary Final Preliminary Final
Planning Board 13 13 13 13 13 (1) 13 13 (1) 13
Zoning Board - 11 11 11 11 (1) 11 11 (1) 11
Township Manager 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Construction Official 1 1 1
1 1 1 1
1
Municipal Planner 1 1 1
1 1 (1) 1 1 (1) 1
Municipal Engineer 1 1 1 1 1 (1) 1 1 (1) 1
Municipal Health Officer 1 1 1
1 1 1 1 1
Public Safety Coordinating
Committee 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
Historic Preservation
Advisory Committee (2) 1 1 1 1 1
-
1
-
Township Historian (2) 1 1 1 1 1 1 -
Environmental Resources
Committee 1 1 1 1 1 - 1 -
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800-814
366
Submission Distribution
Informal
Review/
Concept Plan
Minor Application Major Application
Subdivision
Site Plan
General
Development
Plan
Subdivision Site Plan
Preliminary Final Preliminary Final
Shade Tree Commission - - - - 1 - 1 -
Affordable Housing Board
(2) 1 - - 1 1 1 1 1
Public Works Director (3) 1 - - 1 1 1 1 1
TOTAL - Planning Board 25 23 23 25 26 22 26 22
TOTAL - Zoning Board - 21 21 23 24 20 24 20
(1) Plus covenants or deed restrictions. (2) If applicable. (3) Application only.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800-814
367
Table 8.2. Submission Checklist
Submission Item No.
and Description
Informal
Review/
Concept
Plan
Minor
Application Major Application
Subdivision
Site
Plan
General
Development
Plan
Subdivision Site Plan
Preliminary Final Preliminary Final
1. Submission of completed application
forms. Quantity as specified.
A. Planning Board
B. Zoning Board
24
23
21
23
21
24
22
24
22
24
22
24
22
24
22
2. Folded plot/plan submission.
Quantity as specified.
A. Planning Board
B. Zoning Board
24
23
21
23
21
24
22
24
22
24
22
24
22
24
22
3. Protective covenants/deed
restrictions. Quantity as specified.
A. Planning Board
B. Zoning Board
24
23
21
23
21
24
22
24
22
24
22
24
22
24
22
4. Name, signature license number,
seal, address & telephone phone
number of plan preparer, as
applicable, involved in preparation
of plat.
X X X X X X X X
5. Name, address and telephone
number of owner and applicant. X X X X X X X X
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800-814
368
Submission Item No.
and Description
Informal
Review/
Concept
Plan
Minor
Application Major Application
Subdivision
Site
Plan
General
Development
Plan
Subdivision Site Plan
Preliminary Final Preliminary Final
6. Title block denoting type of
application, tax map sheet number,
county, name of municipality, block
and lot, and street location.
X X X X X X X X
7. A key may not smaller than 1"=1,000
feet showing location of tract with
reference to surrounding properties,
streets, municipal boundaries, zoning,
etc., within 500'.
X X X X X X X X
8. A schedule of required and provided
zone district(s) requirements
including lot area, width, depth, yard
setbacks, building coverage, open
space, parking, etc.
X X X X X X X X
9. Tract boundary - a heavy solid line. X X X X X X X X
10. North arrow, graphic scale and
written scale. X X X X X X X X
11. Signature blocks for Chair,
Secretary, Administrative Officer and
Municipal Engineer.
X X X X X X X
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800-814
369
Submission Item No.
and Description
Informal
Review/
Concept
Plan
Minor
Application Major Application
Subdivision
Site
Plan
General
Development
Plan
Subdivision Site Plan
Preliminary Final Preliminary Final
12. Appropriate certification blocks as
required by Map Filing Law. X X
13. Monuments as specified by Map
Filing Law or Township Ordinance. X X X
14. Date of current property survey. X X X X X X X X
15. One (1) of three (3) standardized
sheets:
30" x 42"
24" x 36"
8.5" x 14"
X X X X X X X X
16. Subdivisions:
A. Less than 3 acre lot; scale no
smaller than 1"=50'
B. greater than 3.0 acre lots; scale
1"-100'
NOTE: If more than one sheet is needed
for development design, an
overall subdivision tract map will
be provided on one sheet.
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800-814
370
Submission Item No.
and Description
Informal
Review/
Concept
Plan
Minor
Application Major Application
Subdivision
Site
Plan
General
Development
Plan
Subdivision Site Plan
Preliminary Final Preliminary Final
17. Site Plans:
A. less than 1 acre; scale no smaller
than 1"=30'
B. 1 acre and large, scale 1"=50'
NOTE: If more than one sheet is needed
for development design, an
overall tract map will be provided
on one sheet.
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
18. Metes and bounds showing
dimensions, bearings, curve data,
length of tangents, radii, arcs, chords
and central angles as follows:
A. Outer boundaries of lot(s)
B. Proposed new interior lot(s) or
rights-of-way
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
19. Affidavit of ownership and owner’s
certification noted on plans. X X X X X X X X
20. Acreage of tract to nearest hundredth
of an acre. X X X X X X X X
21. Date of original and all revisions. X X X X X X X X
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800-814
371
Submission Item No.
and Description
Informal
Review/
Concept
Plan
Minor
Application Major Application
Subdivision
Site
Plan
General
Development
Plan
Subdivision Site Plan
Preliminary Final Preliminary Final
22. Size and location of any existing or
proposed structures with all setbacks
dimensioned (general location for
GDP and informal review/concept
plan).
X X X X X X X X
23. Location and dimensions of any
existing or proposed rights-of-way
and cartways (general location for
GDP and informal review/concept
plan).
X X X X X X X X
24. All proposed lot areas in square feet
(general information for GDP and
informal review/concept plan).
X X X X X X X X
25. Copy of and delineation of any
existing or proposed deed restrictions
or covenants.
X
(existing)
X
X
X
(existing)
X
X
X
X
26. Any existing or proposed easement
or land reserved for or dedicated to
public use.
A. Metes and bounds description.
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800-814
372
Submission Item No.
and Description
Informal
Review/
Concept
Plan
Minor
Application Major Application
Subdivision
Site
Plan
General
Development
Plan
Subdivision Site Plan
Preliminary Final Preliminary Final
27. Development stages or staging
plans (for GDP-general staging).
X
X
(general)
X
X
X
X
28. List of required regulatory approval
or permits.
X X X X X X X
29. List of variances required or
requested.
X X X X X X X
30. Requested or obtained design
waivers or exceptions.
X X X X X X
31. Payment of application/escrow fees.
(see §900) X X X X X X X X
32. Property owners, existing land use,
and lot lines of all parcels within
200' identified on most recent tax
map sheet.
X X X X X X X X
33. Survey of all existing streets, water
courses, flood plains, wooded areas
with trees measuring 8" or greater
caliper (at D.B.H.), wetlands or other
environmentally sensitive areas on
and within 100' of site.
X
(general)
X
X
X
(general)
X X
X
X
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800-814
373
Submission Item No.
and Description
Informal
Review/
Concept
Plan
Minor
Application Major Application
Subdivision
Site
Plan
General
Development
Plan
Subdivision Site Plan
Preliminary Final Preliminary Final
34. Map showing the Stream
Encroachment area at a scale being
used by the applicant in submission,
if applicable.
X X X X X X X
35. Map and report by a qualified
wetlands specialist showing wetlands
delineation at the same scale as the
development plan, if applicable.
X X X X X X X
36. Topographical features of subject
property from U.S.G.S. map. X
X
37. Existing and proposed contour
intervals based on identified datum.
Contours to extend at least 100'
beyond subject property as follows:
up to 3% grade=1', 3%+=2'.
Proposed grading shall overlay
existing topography.
X X
X X X X
38. Boundary, limits, nature and extent
of wooded areas, specimen trees, and
other significant physical features
(detail may vary).
X
(general)
X X
X
(general)
X X X X
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800-814
374
Submission Item No.
and Description
Informal
Review/
Concept
Plan
Minor
Application Major Application
Subdivision
Site
Plan
General
Development
Plan
Subdivision Site Plan
Preliminary Final Preliminary Final
39. Existing system of drainage of
subject site and of any larger tract or
basin of which it is a part.
X X X X
40. Drainage area map. X X X X
41. Drainage calculations.
X
(if
applicable)
X
(if
applicable)
X X X X
42. Storm water management plan and
profiles. X X
X
(general
availability)
X X X X
43. Soil permeability tests (if applicable),
as witnessed by the designated
Township official for such purposes.
[Ord. 2350, 12/17/19]
X X
X X X X
44. Proposed utility infrastructure plans
and supplier of resources, including
sanitary sewer, water, telephone,
electric and cable TV.
X
X
X
(general
availability)
X X X X
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800-814
375
Submission Item No.
and Description
Informal
Review/
Concept
Plan
Minor
Application Major Application
Subdivision
Site
Plan
General
Development
Plan
Subdivision Site Plan
Preliminary Final Preliminary Final
45. Finished elevations, corners of all
structures or dwellings, existing or
proposed first floor elevations.
X
X X X X X X
46. Construction details as required by
Ordinance. X X X X
47. Road profiles.
X
X
X
X
48. Proposed street names. X X X X
49. New block and lot numbers
confirmed with local assessor or
municipal designee.
X
X X
50. Lighting plan & details. X
X X X X
51. Landscape plan overlaid on grading
plan, plant list, planting details and
tree protection details. Plant list to
include: botanical name, common
name, quantity, size at time of
planting, root condition, and spacing.
X
X X X X
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800-814
376
Submission Item No.
and Description
Informal
Review/
Concept
Plan
Minor
Application Major Application
Subdivision
Site
Plan
General
Development
Plan
Subdivision Site Plan
Preliminary Final Preliminary Final
52. Solid waste management plan,
including recyclables.
X
X X
53. Site identification signs, traffic
control signs, and directional signs.
Submit elevations and details
including method of illumination.
X X X X X
54. Sight triangles
X X
X X X X
55. Vehicular and pedestrian circulation
patterns including handicap access
(less detail necessary for informal
review/concept plan & GDP stages.)
X
(general) X
X
(general)
X X X X
56. Parking plan showing spaces, size
and type, aisle width, curb cuts,
drives, driveways, and all ingress
and egress areas and dimensions.
X
(general) X X
X
(general) X X X X
57. Preliminary architectural plans,
front, rear, and side building
elevations. Calculation for SFLA for
single family development in R-3, R-
4 & R-5 zoning districts.
[Ord. 1934-07]
X X
X
X X
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §800-814
377
Submission Item No.
and Description
Informal
Review/
Concept
Plan
Minor
Application Major Application
Subdivision
Site
Plan
General
Development
Plan
Subdivision Site Plan
Preliminary Final Preliminary Final
58. Tree protection zones and tree save
areas (see §541.D)
X X X X X
59. Environmental Impact Statement
(see §812)
X
(general) X
X
60. Community Impact Statement
(see (§813)
X
(general) X
X
61. Circulation Impact Study
(see §814).
X
(general) X
X
62. Contribution Disclosure Statement
[Ord. 1949-07, 9/4/07;
Ord. 1951-07, 11/7/07]
X X X X X
X = Denotes Required Submission.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
378
ARTICLE IX
FEES, GUARANTEES, INSPECTIONS AND OFF-TRACT
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 900 Application and Escrow Fees.
A. Fee Schedule. Every application for development shall be accompanied by a check payable
to the municipality in accordance with the following schedule:
Subdivisions
Application Type
Application
Fee Escrow Fee
Minor Plat
[Ord. 2177-14, 4/1/14] $400.00 $2,000.00
Preliminary Plat $500.00 Up to 20 lots-$200.00 per lot; 20 or
more lots - $150.00 per lot
Final Plat $500.00 $100.00 per lot
Concept Plan
(All fees for concept shall be a
credit toward fees for review
of the same application for
development.)
$250.00 A minimum of $500.00 shall be
deposited. Calculation of escrow fee
shall be as follows: $25.00 per acre
or part thereof. In addition, for
residential: $2.50 per dwelling; for
commercial: $.05 per square foot or
part thereof of total proposed
building area up to and including
20,000 square feet, and $.03 per
square foot or part thereof for every
additional square foot over 20,000
square feet.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
379
Site Plans
Application Type
Application
Fee Escrow Fee
Minor Plan
[Ord. 2177-14, 4/1/14] $400.00 $2,000.00
Preliminary Plan $500.00 A minimum of $750.00 shall be deposited.
Calculation of escrow fee shall be as
follows: $75.00 per acre or part thereof. In
addition, for residential: $5.00 per
dwelling; for commercial: $.10 per square
foot or part thereof of total proposed
building area up to and including 20,000
square feet, and $.07 per square foot for
every additional square foot or part thereof
over 20,000 square feet.
Final Plan $500.00 A minimum of $375.00 shall be deposited.
Calculation of escrow fee shall be as
follows: $35.00 per acre or part thereof. In
addition, for residential: $3.00 per
dwelling; for commercial: $.05 per square
foot or part thereof of total proposed
building area up to and including 20,000
square feet, and $.03 per square foot for
every additional square foot or part thereof
over 20,000 square feet.
Concept Plan
(All fees for concept shall be
a credit toward fee for review
of the same application for
development.)
$250.00 A minimum of $500.00 shall be deposited.
Calculation of escrow fee shall be as
follows: $25.00 per acre or part thereof. In
addition, for residential: $2.50 per
dwelling; for commercial: $.05 per square
foot or part thereof of total proposed
building area up to and including 20,000
square feet, and $.03 per square foot for
every additional square foot or part thereof
over 20,000 square feet.
General Development Plan $500.00 Same as Preliminary Plan.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
380
Other Application and Escrow Fees
Application Type Application Fee Escrow Fee
Variances Hardship (40:55D-70c)
- Residential
- Non-Residential
Use (40:55D-70d)
$100.00
$250.00
$250.00
$400.00
$4,000.00
$4,000.00
Other Actions by Board:
- Appeals (40:55D-70a)
- Interpretation (40:55D-70b)
$200.00
$200.00
None
$200.00
Issuance of Permit for a Building in
Certain Locations (40:55D-34b and 35)
$150.00 $200.00
minimum
Appeals to Township Council $250.00 None
Individual Grading Plan/ Certificate of
Compliance
$250.00
None
Site Plan Review Waiver
[Ord. 1585-99, 9/7/1999] None $2,000.00
Publication Charge
[Ord. 1833-05, 3/22/2005] $25.00 None
Soil Disturbance Permit $25.00 per acre or part acre None
Soil Removal Permit $100.00 None
Soil Test Witnessing None
$60.00 per
hour, $360.00
per lot min.
Sewage Disposal System Permit $750.00 new construction
$500.00 system alteration
None
Tree Removal Permit $50.00 for site < 10 acres;
$100.00 for site > 10 acres
None
Certified List of Property Owners $.25 per name or $10.00,
whichever is greater
Not
Applicable
Copy of Transcripts (See §708.E.1
[N.J.S.A. 2A:11-15])
$1.50 per page for first copy of
plus $.50 per copy for each
additional copy.
Not
Applicable
Copy of Minutes or Decisions
1-10 copies -$.50 per page; 11-
20 copies - $.25 per page; 21+
copies - $.10 per page
Not
Applicable
Facsimile Transmission $3.50 for first page, $1.50 per
page thereafter
Not
Applicable
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
381
B. Purpose of Fees. The application charge is a flat fee to cover direct administrative expenses
and is non-refundable. The escrow account is established to cover the costs of professional
services including engineering, legal, planning and other expenses connected with the review
of the submitted materials. In accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53 and N.J.S.A. 40:55D-
53.1, sums not utilized in the review process shall be returned to the applicant upon written
request. If additional sums are deemed necessary, the applicant shall be notified by certified
mail or personal service of the required additional amount and shall add such sum to the
escrow. Payment shall be due from the applicant within 15 days of receipt of the notice. If
payment is not received within 15 days, the applicant shall be considered to be in default,
and such default may be grounds for denial of the application.
C. More Than One Request. Where one application for development includes several approval
requests, the sum of the individual required fees shall be paid.
D. Costs of Review and Inspection. Each applicant for subdivision or site plan approval shall
agree in writing to pay all reasonable costs for professional review of the application,
including costs incurred with any informal review of a concept plan which may have
preceded the submission of a preliminary application. Additionally, each applicant shall
agree in writing to pay all reasonable costs for the municipal inspection of the constructed
improvements. All such costs for review and inspection must be paid before any
construction permit is issued and all remaining costs must be paid in full before any
occupancy issued or bonding is released.
E. Court Reporter. If an applicant desires a court reporter, the cost of taking testimony and
transcribing it and providing a copy of the transcript to the municipality shall be at the
expense of the applicant who shall arrange for the reporter's attendance. The municipality
provides for the tape recording of the proceedings before the Board.
F. Waiver of Fees for Affordable Housing. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Ordinance, a waiver of all municipal subdivision and site plan escrow fees and building
permit and certificate of occupancy fees shall be granted by the approving municipal agency
for all housing units being provided by the applicant for low and moderate income families.
§ 901 Affordable Housing Contribution
[Ord. 2302-18, 8/28/18]
A. Purpose.
1. In Holmdel Builder’s Association V. Holmdel Township, 121 N.J. 550 (1990),
the New Jersey Supreme Court determined that mandatory development fees
are authorized by the Fair Housing Act of 1985 (“the Act”), N.J.S.A. 52:27d-
301, et seq., and the State Constitution, subject to the Council on Affordable
Housing’s (“COAH”) adoption of rules for the establishment, implementation,
review, monitoring and enforcement of municipal affordable housing trust funds
and spending plans.
2. According to P.L. 2008, c. 46 section 8 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.2), and the Statewide
Non-Residential Development Fee Act (N.J.S.A. 40:55D-8.1 through 8.7),
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
382
municipalities under the jurisdiction of COAH or a court of competent jurisdiction
that had an approved spending plan w e r e p e r m i t t e d t o retain fees
collected from non-residential development.
3. In In Re Adoption of N.J.A.C. 5:96 and 5:97 by the New Jersey Council on
Affordable Housing, 221 N.J. 1 (2015), also known as the Mount Laurel IV decision,
the Supreme Court remanded COAH’s duties to the Superior Court. As a result,
affordable housing development fee collections and expenditures from the
municipal affordable housing trust funds to implement municipal Third Round Fair
Share Plans through July 1, 2025 are under the Court’s jurisdiction and are subject
to approval by the Court.
4. This Section establishes standards for the collection, maintenance, and expenditure
of development fees consistent with COAH’s regulations and in accordance with
P.L. 2008, c. 46, Sections 8 and 32-38. Fees collected pursuant to this Ordinance
shall be used for the sole purpose of providing low- and moderate- income
housing. This Ordinance shall be interpreted within the framework of applicable
COAH rules on development fees.
B. Basic Requirements.
1. This Ordinance shall not become effective until the Court approves the
Township’s a m e n d e d development fee ordinance and shall remain effective
pursuant to the Superior Court’s jurisdiction through July 1, 2025.
2. COAH approved the Township’s initial Spending Plan on or about October 19,
1987, and subsequently approved a Third Round Spending Plan on or about April 2,
2009. Upon the Court's approval of Lawrence Township's 2018 Spending Plan,
Lawrence Township may continue to spend development fees consistent with the
approved Spending Plan.
C. Definitions.
The following te rms, as used in this ordinance, shall have the following meanings (see
also §201):
1. “Affordable housing development” means a development included in the Housing
Element and Fair Share Plan, and includes, but is not limited to, an
inclusionary development, a municipal construction project or a 100 percent
affordable development.
2. “COAH” or the “Council” means the New Jersey Council on Affordable Housing
established under the Act.
3. “Developer” means the legal or beneficial owner or owners of a lot or of any land
proposed to be included in a proposed development, including the holder of an
option or contract to purchase, or other person having an enforceable proprietary
interest in such land.
4. “Development fee” means money paid by a developer for the improvement of
property as permitted in N.J.A.C. 5:93-8.
5. “Equalized assessed value” means the assessed value of a property divided by the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
383
current average ratio of assessed to true value for the municipality in which the
property is situated, as determined in accordance with sections 1, 5, and 6 of P.L.
1973, c. 123 (N.J.S.A. 54:1-35a through 54:1-35c).
6. “Green building strategies” means those strategies that minimize the impact of
development on the environment, and enhance the health, safety and well-being of
residents by producing durable, low-maintenance, resource-efficient housing
while making optimum use of existing infrastructure and community services.
D. Residential Development Fees.
1. Imposed fees.
a. Within the all district(s), residential developers, except for developers of the
types of development specifically exempted below, shall pay a fee of one
and a half percent (1.5%) of the equalized assessed value for residential
development provided no increased density is permitted.
b. When an increase in residential density pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-70d(5)
(known as a “d” variance) has been permitted, developers may be required
to pay a development fee of six percent (6%) of the equalized assessed
value for each additional unit that may be realized. However, if the zoning
on a site has changed during the two-year period preceding the filing of
such a variance application, the base density for the purposes of calculating
the bonus development fee shall be the highest density permitted by right
during the two-year period preceding the filing of the variance application.
2. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for residential development.
a. Affordable housing developments and developments where the developer
has made a payment in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units shall
be exempt from development fees.
b. Developments that have received preliminary or final site plan approval
prior to the adoption of a municipal development fee ordinance shall be
exempt from development fees, unless the developer seeks a substantial
change in the approval. Where a site plan approval does not apply, a
zoning and/or building permit shall be synonymous with preliminary or
final site plan approval for this purpose. The fee percentage shall be
vested on the date that the building permit is issued. Development fees
shall be imposed and collected when an existing structure is demolished
and replaced if the expansion is not otherwise exempt from the
development fee requirement. The development fee shall be calculated on
the increase in the equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
c. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing
structure undergoes a change to a more intense use, is demolished and
replaced, or is expanded, if the expansion is not otherwise exempt from the
development fee requirement. The development fee shall be calculated on
the increase in the equalized assessed value of the improved structure.
d. Developers of one or two-owner occupied dwelling units, residential
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
384
structures demolished and replaced as a result of a natural disaster, green
buildings, etc., shall be exempt from paying a development fee.
E. Non-Residential Development Fees.
1. Imposed fees.
a. Within all zoning districts, non-residential developers, except for developers
of the types of development specifically exempted, shall pay a fee equal to
two and one-half (2.5) percent of the equalized assessed value of the land
and improvements, for all new non-residential construction on an
unimproved lot or lots.
b. Non-residential developers, except for developers of the types of
development specifically exempted, shall also pay a fee equal to two and
one-half (2.5) percent of the increase in equalized assessed value resulting
from any additions to existing structures to be used for non-residential
purposes.
c. Development fees shall be imposed and collected when an existing structure
is demolished and replaced. The development fee of two and a half percent
(2.5%) shall be calculated on the difference between the equalized assessed
value of the pre-existing land and improvement and the equalized assessed
value of the newly improved structure, i.e. land and improvement, at the
time final certificate of occupancy is issued. If the calculation required
under this section results in a negative number, the non-residential
development fee shall be zero.
2. Eligible exactions, ineligible exactions and exemptions for non-residential
development.
a. The non-residential portion of a mixed-use inclusionary or market rate
development shall be subject to the two and a half (2.5) percent
development fee, unless otherwise exempted below.
b. The 2.5 percent fee shall not apply to an increase in equalized assessed
value resulting from alterations, change in use within existing footprint,
reconstruction, renovations and repairs.
c. Non-residential developments shall be exempt from the payment of nonresidential
development fees in accordance with the exemptions required
pursuant to P.L.2008, c.46, as specified in the Form N-RDF “State of New
Jersey Non-Residential Development Certification/Exemption” Form. Any
exemption claimed by a developer shall be substantiated by that developer.
d. A developer of a non-residential development exempted from the nonresidential
development fee pursuant to P.L.2008, c.46 shall be subject to it
at such time the basis for the exemption no longer applies, and shall make
the payment of the non-residential development fee, in that event, within
three years after that event or after the issuance of the final certificate of
occupancy of the non-residential development, whichever is later.
e. If a property which was exempted from the collection of a non-residential
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
385
development fee thereafter ceases to be exempt from property taxation, the
owner of the property shall remit the fees required pursuant to this section
within 45 days of the termination of the property tax exemption. Unpaid
non-residential development fees under these circumstances may be
enforceable by Lawrence Township as a lien against the real property of the
owner.
F. Collection Procedures.
1. Upon the granting of a preliminary, final or other applicable approval, for a
development, the applicable approving authority shall direct its staff to notify the
construction official responsible for the issuance of a building permit.
2. For non-residential developments only, the developer shall also be provided with a
copy of Form N-RDF “State of New Jersey Non-Residential Development
Certification/Exemption” to be completed as per the instructions provided. The
Developer of a non-residential development shall complete Form N-RDF as per the
instructions provided. The construction official shall verify the information
submitted by the non-residential developer as per the instructions provided in the
Form N-RDF. The Tax assessor shall verify exemptions and prepare estimated and
final assessments as per the instructions provided in Form N-RDF.
3. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a building permit shall
notify the local tax assessor of the issuance of the first building permit for a
development which is subject to a development fee.
4. Within 90 days of receipt of that notice, the municipal tax assessor, based on the
plans filed, shall provide an estimate of the equalized assessed value of the
development.
5. The construction official responsible for the issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy notifies the local assessor of any and all requests for the scheduling of a
final inspection on property which is subject to a development fee.
6. Within 10 business days of a request for the scheduling of a final inspection, the
municipal assessor shall confirm or modify the previously estimated equalized
assessed value of the improvements of the development; calculate the development
fee; and thereafter notify the developer of the amount of the fee.
7. Should Lawrence Township fail to determine or notify the developer of the amount
of the development fee within 10 business days of the request for final inspection,
the developer may estimate the amount due and pay that estimated amount
consistent with the dispute process set forth in subsection b. of section 37 of
P.L.2008, c.46 (C.40:55D-8.6).
8. Fifty percent of the development fee shall be collected at the time of issuance of the
building permit. The remaining portion shall be collected at the issuance of the
certificate of occupancy. The developer shall be responsible for paying the
difference between the fee calculated at building permit and that determined at
issuance of certificate of occupancy.
9. Appeal of development fees.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
386
a. A developer may challenge residential development fees imposed by filing
a challenge with the County Board of Taxation. Pending a review and
determination by the Board, collected fees shall be placed in an interest
bearing escrow account by Lawrence Township. Appeals from a
determination of the Board may be made to the tax court in accordance with
the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, R.S.54:48-1 et
seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination. Interest earned on
amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
b. A developer may challenge non-residential development fees imposed by
filing a challenge with the Director of the Division of Taxation. Pending a
review and determination by the Director, which shall be made within 45
days of receipt of the challenge, collected fees shall be placed in an interest
bearing escrow account by Lawrence Township. Appeals from a
determination of the Director may be made to the tax court in accordance
with the provisions of the State Tax Uniform Procedure Law, N.J.S.A.
54:48-1 et seq., within 90 days after the date of such determination. Interest
earned on amounts escrowed shall be credited to the prevailing party.
G. Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
1. The Township has created a separate, interest-bearing housing trust fund to be
maintained by the chief financial officer for the purpose of depositing development
fees collected from residential and non-residential developers and proceeds from the
sale of units with extinguished controls.
2. The following additional funds shall be deposited in the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund and shall at all times be identifiable by source and amount:
a. Payments in lieu of on-site construction of affordable units;
b. Developer contributed funds to make ten percent (10%) of the adaptable
entrances in a townhouse or other multistory attached development
accessible;
c. Rental income from municipally operated units;
d. Repayments from affordable housing program loans;
e. Recapture funds;
f. Proceeds from the sale of affordable units; and
g. Any other funds collected in connection with Lawrence Township’s
affordable housing program.
3. The Township had previously provided COAH with written authorization, in the
form of a three-party escrow agreement between the municipality, the bank and
COAH to permit COAH to direct the disbursement of the funds as provided for in
N.J.A.C. 5:93-8. The Superior Court shall now have the jurisdiction to direct the
disbursement of the Township’s trust funds as originally provided to COAH.
4. All interest accrued in the housing trust fund shall only be used on eligible
affordable housing activities approved by the Court.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
387
H. Use of Funds.
1. The expenditure of all funds shall conform to a spending plan approved by the
Superior Court. Funds deposited in the housing trust fund may be used for any
activity approved by the Superior Court to address the Township’s fair share
obligation and may be set up as a grant or revolving loan program. Such activities
include, but are not limited to: preservation or purchase of housing for the purpose
of maintaining or implementing affordability controls, rehabilitation, new
construction of affordable housing units and related costs, accessory apartment,
market to affordable, or regional housing partnership programs, conversion of
existing non-residential buildings to create new affordable units, green building
strategies designed to be cost saving and in accordance with accepted national or
state standards, purchase of land for affordable housing, improvement of land to
be used for affordable housing, extensions or improvements of roads and
infrastructure to affordable housing sites, financial assistance designed to increase
affordability, administration necessary for implementation of the Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan, or any other activity as permitted pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:93-
8.16 and specified in the approved spending plan.
2. Funds shall not be expended to reimburse Lawrence Township for past housing
activities.
3. At least 30 percent of all development fees collected and interest earned shall be
used to provide affordability assistance to low- and moderate-income households in
affordable units included in the municipal Fair Share Plan. One-third of the
affordability assistance portion of development fees collected shall be used to
provide affordability assistance to those households earning 30 percent or less of
median income by region.
a. Affordability assistance programs may include down payment assistance,
security deposit assistance, low interest loans, rental assistance, assistance
with homeowners’ association or condominium fees and special
assessments, and assistance with emergency repairs.
b. Affordability assistance to households earning 30 percent or less of median
income may include buying down the cost of low or moderate income units
in the municipal Fair Share Plan to make them affordable to households
earning 30 percent or less of median income. The use of development fees
in this manner may entitle Lawrence Township to bonus credits pursuant to
N.J.A.C. 5:97-3.7.
c. Payments in lieu of constructing affordable units on site and funds from the
sale of units with extinguished controls shall be exempt from the
affordability assistance requirement.
4. The Township may contract with a private or public entity to administer any part of
its Housing Element and Fair Share Plan, including the requirement for affordability
assistance.
5. No more than twenty percent (20%) of all revenues collected from development
fees may be expended on administration, including, but not limited to, salaries and
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
388
benefits for municipal employees or consultant fees necessary to develop or
implement a new construction program, a Housing Element and Fair Share Plan,
and/or an affirmative marketing program. In the case of a rehabilitation program, no
more than twenty percent (20%) of the revenues collected from development fees
shall be expended for such administrative expenses. Administrative funds may be
used for income qualification of households, monitoring the turnover of sale and
rental units, and compliance with the monitoring requirements set forth in the
Court-approved April 28, 2017 executed Settlement Agreement with Fair Share
Housing Center. Legal or other fees related to litigation opposing affordable housing
sites or objecting to the Court's rulings are not eligible uses of the affordable housing
trust fund.
I. Monitoring.
1. On or about June 30 of each year through 2025, the Township shall provide annual
reporting of trust fund activity to the New Jersey Department of Community Affairs
(“DCA”), COAH, or Local Government Services (“LGS”), or other entity designated
by the State of New Jersey, with a copy provided to Fair Share Housing Center
and Intervenors and posted on the municipal website, using forms developed for
this purpose by DCA, COAH, or LGS. This reporting shall include an accounting
of all housing trust fund activity, including the collection of development fees from
residential and non-residential developers, payments in lieu of constructing
affordable units on site, funds from the sale of units with extinguished controls,
barrier free escrow funds, rental income, repayments from affordable housing
program loans, and any other funds collected in connection with the Township’s
housing program, as well as to the expenditure of revenues and implementation of the
plan approved by the Superior Court.
J. Ongoing Collection of Fees.
1. The ability for the Township to impose, collect and expend development fees shall
expire with its Court-issued Judgment of Compliance and Repose unless the
Township of Lawrence has f i r s t filed an adopted Housing Element and Fair
Share Plan with the Superior Court or other appropriate jurisdiction, has filed a
petition for certification or a Declaratory Judgment Action, and has received
approval of its development fee ordinance from the appropriate jurisdiction.
2. If the Township fails to renew its ability to impose and collect development fees
prior to the expiration of its Judgment of Compliance and Repose, it may be
subject to forfeiture of any or all funds remaining within its municipal trust fund.
Any funds so forfeited shall be deposited into the "New Jersey Affordable Housing
Trust Fund" established pursuant to section 20 of P.L. 1985, c.222 (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-
320).
3. The Township shall not impose a residential development fee on a development
that receives preliminary or final site plan approval after the expiration of its
Judgment of Compliance and Repose, nor shall the Township retroactively impose a
development fee on such a development. The Township shall not expend
development fees after the expiration of its Judgment of Compliance and Repose
unless the Township has first sought and obtained approval to do so from the entity
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
389
that will be reviewing and approving its 2025 Housing Element and Fair Share Plan
§ 902 Guarantees Required for On- and Off-tract Improvements.
[Ord. 2304-18, 8/28/18]
A. Guarantee Required. Before recording final subdivision plats or recording of minor
subdivision deeds or as a condition of final site plan approval or as a condition to the
issuance of a zoning permit pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-65d, the Township or approving
Board, for the purposes of assuring the installation and maintenance of on-and off-tract
(pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-42) improvements, shall require and accept in accordance with
the standards adopted by this Ordinance, the following:
1. The furnishing of a performance guaranteed in favor of the Township of Lawrence
in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of only those improvements required
by an approval or developer’s agreement, ordinance, or regulation to be dedicated to
a public entity, and that have not yet been installed, which cost shall be determined
by the developer and approved by the Municipal Engineer, according to the method
of calculation set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4, for the following improvements as
shown on the approved plans or plat: streets, pavement, gutters, curbs, sidewalks,
street lighting, street trees, surveyor's monuments, as shown on the final map and
required by the Map Filing Law (N.J.S.A. 46:23-9.9 et seq.), water mains, sanitary
sewers, community septic systems, drainage structures, public improvements of
open space, and any grading necessitated by the preceding improvements. The
performance guarantee may also be required to include, at the discretion of the
Township or approving Board, a guarantee for the installation of privately-owned
perimeter buffer landscaping. At the developer’s option, a separate performance
guarantee may be posted for the privately-owned perimeter buffer landscaping. The
developer shall prepare an itemized cost estimate of the improvements covered by
the performance guarantee for review and approval by the Municipal Engineer,
which improvements shall be appended to each performance guarantee posted by the
obligor.
2. The developer shall post with the Township, prior to the release of the performance
guarantee, a maintenance guarantee in an amount equal to 15% of the cost of the
installation of the improvements covered under the performance guarantee, along
with the following private site improvements: stormwater management basins, inflow
and water quality structures within the basins, and the out-flow pipes and
structures of the stormwater management system, if any, which itemized cost shall
be determined by the developer and approved by the municipal engineer according
to the method of calculation set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4. The term of the
maintenance guarantee shall be for a period not to exceed two years and shall
automatically expire at the end of the established term.
3. The furnishing of a “safety and stabilization guarantee” in favor of the Township of
Lawrence to ensure that the Township has an adequate guarantee to return the
property that has been disturbed to a safe and stable condition or otherwise
implement measures to protect the public from access to an unsafe or unstable
condition. The Township shall be permitted to access the guarantee when (i) site
disturbance has commenced and, thereafter, all work on the development has ceased
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
390
for a period of at least 60 consecutive days following such commencement for
reasons other than force majeure; and (ii) work has not recommenced within 30 days
following the provision of written notice by the municipality to the developer of the
municipality’s intent to claim payment under the guarantee. At the developer’s
option, the “safety and stabilization guarantee” may be included as a line item for
safety and stabilization in the performance guarantee rather than in the form of a
separate guarantee. The amount of the safety and stabilization guarantee shall be
calculated pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 as follows:
a. $5,000 for the first $100,000 of bonded improvement costs, plus
b. Two and a half percent (2.5%) of bonded improvement costs in excess of
$100,000 up to $1,000,000; plus
c. One percent (1%) of bonded improvement costs in excess of $1,000,000.
B. Time Period for Installation. All public improvements shall be completed within six (6)
months of issuance of the last Certificate of Occupancy or five (5) years of issuance of a Soil
Disturbance Permit whichever comes first. The time allowed for installation of the bonded
improvements for which the performance guarantee has been provided may be extended by
the Township Council by resolution. As a condition or part of any such extension, the
amount of any performance guarantee shall be increased or reduced, as the case may be, to
an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of the installation, as determined by the developer
and approved by the municipal engineer according to the method of calculation set forth in
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4 as of the time of the passage of the resolution.
C. Developer Liability. If the required bonded improvements are not completed or corrected in
accordance with the performance guarantee, the developer and surety, if any, shall be liable
thereon to the Township for the reasonable cost of the improvements not completed or
corrected and the Township may either prior to or after the receipt of the proceeds thereof
complete such improvements. Such completion or correction of improvements shall be
subject to the public bidding requirements of the Local Public Contracts Law (N.J.S.A.
40A:11-1 et seq.).
§ 903 Certification or Guarantee required; Estimate of
Guarantee.
A. Improvements to be Installed. No final plan shall be approved unconditionally by the Board
until the satisfactory completion and performance of all such required improvements have
been certified to the Board by the Municipal Engineer, unless the owner shall have filed with
the municipality a performance guarantee sufficient in amount to cover the cost of all such
improvements in uncompleted portions thereof as estimated by the Municipal Engineer, and
assuring the installation of such uncompleted improvements on or before an agreed upon
date.
B. [Repealed. Ord. 2304-18, 8/28/18]
C. [Repealed. Ord. 2304-18, 8/28/18]
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
391
D. Determination of Maintenance Guarantee Estimate. The approved performance guarantee
estimate shall fix the requirements of maintenance of the utilities and improvements to be
installed and completed by the developer. A surety company or cash bond meeting the
requirements herein above set forth may be furnished to secure the maintenance guarantee,
or the performance bond may be styled or amended to provide such security in reduced
amount in keeping with the requirements.
§ 904 Approval by Township Attorney.
A. The applicant shall present two (2) copies of the performance guarantee in an amount equal
to the amount of the approved performance guarantee estimate for approval as to form and
execution by the Department of Finance with assistance by the Township Attorney, if
necessary.
B. The Department of Finance shall forward its approval of the form of the performance
guarantee for consideration for adoption by the governing body.
§ 905 Bonding and Cash Requirements.
A. The performance guarantee shall be the approved performance guarantee estimate and as
surety a performance bond in which the applicant shall be principal, the bond to be provided
by an acceptable surety company licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey, an
irrevocable letter of credit drawn on a banking or savings and loan institution located in and
licensed to do business in the State of New Jersey or such other form of security as may be
approved by the Township Attorney, or cash, or a certified check shall be deposited with the
Township of Lawrence by payment to the Township Treasurer. The performance guarantee
in favor of the Township shall be in an amount not to exceed 120% of the cost of the
installation and improvements. The Township Treasurer shall issue its receipt for such cash
deposits and shall cause the same to be deposited in a bank named by the Township for this
purpose to be retained as security for completion of all requirements and to be returned to the
developer on completion of all required work and expiration of the period of maintenance
guarantee or, in the event of default on the part of the subdivider, to be used by the Township
of Lawrence to pay the cost and expense of obtaining completion of all requirements. Every
bond, whether cash or surety, shall contain a clause to the effect that the obligation shall
remain in full force and effect until such time as certification is received from the Municipal
Engineer that the principal has met and complied with all specifications and requirements for
which said cash or surety bond has been posted.
B. Ten percent (10%) of the amount of the approved performance guarantee estimates shall be
deposited with the Township by the applicant in cash. The remaining 90% may be in cash,
surety bond or other securities or guaranties approved by the Township Attorney. In the
event of default, the ten-percent fund herein mentioned shall be first applied to the
completion of the requirements and the cash or the surety shall thereafter be resorted to, if
necessary, for the completion of the requirements. The cash or surety may recite the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
392
foregoing provisions. The Municipal Engineer's determination that the principal has
defaulted in his obligation shall be binding and conclusive upon the principal.
C. Irrevocable letters of credit shall include, but not be limited to, the following provisions:
1. An unconditional payment obligation of the issuer running solely to the Township
for an express initial period of time in the amount determined pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-53 (see §903.B).
2. Is for a period of time of at least two years; and
3. Permits the Township to draw upon the letter of credit if the developer fails to
furnish another letter of credit which complies with the provisions of this subsection
30 days or more in advance of the expiration date of the letter of credit or such
longer period in advance thereof as is stated in the letter of credit.
§ 906 Inspections and Tests.
A. All improvements and utility installations shall be inspected during the time of their
installation under the supervision of the Municipal Engineer to ensure satisfactory
completion. The cost of said inspection shall be the responsibility of the applicant, and he
shall deposit with the Township Treasurer for placement in a trust fund account a sum equal
to 5% of the amount of the performance guarantee estimate of the cost of public
improvements to be built in the subdivision or site development to be applied to the payment
of inspection costs. If inspection costs exceed such fund, the developer shall deposit with the
Township Treasurer additional sums upon notice from the Municipal Engineer. The
inspection fee shall in no case be less than $500.00. The Township Treasurer shall return
any balance of the inspection deposit to the developer upon expiration of the maintenance
bond, together with the paid invoices for all expenses charged.
B. In no case shall any paving work be done without permission from the Municipal Engineer's
office. At least two days' notice shall be given to the Municipal Engineer's office prior to
any such construction so that he or a qualified representative may be present at the time the
work is to be done.
C. The Municipal Engineer's office shall be notified after each of the following phases of the
work has been completed so that he or a qualified representative may inspect the:
1. Soil disturbance activities;
2. Road subgrade;
3. Curb and gutter forms;
4. Curbs and gutters;
5. Road paving;
6. Sidewalk forms;
7. Sidewalks;
8. Drainage pipes and other drainage structures before backfilling;
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
393
9. Street name signs;
10. Survey monuments; and
11. Street trees;
and in the case of site plan inspection:
12. Parking lots;
13. Lighting;
14. Landscaping; and
15. Signage.
D. A final inspection of all improvements and utilities will be done by the Municipal Engineer
within 10 days of notification by the developer to determine whether the work is satisfactory
and in agreement with the approved final plat drawings and the Township specifications.
The general condition of the site shall also be considered. Upon a satisfactory final
inspection report, action will be taken to release or declare in default the performance
guarantee covering such improvements and utilities.
E. Inspection by the Township of the installation of improvements and utilities by the applicant
shall not subject the Township to liability for claims, suits or any other liability of any kind
that may at any time arise because of defects or negligence during construction or at any time
thereafter; it is recognized that the responsibility to maintain safe conditions at all times
during construction and to provide proper utilities and improvements is upon the applicant
and his contractors, if any.
F. Improvements installed without notice for inspection shall constitute a valid cause for any of
the following actions:
1. The issuance of a stop work order;
2. The removal of any improvements not so inspected;
3. The payment by the developer of any costs of materials testing by the municipal for
the improvements not so inspected;
4. The restoration of the site from disturbance caused by the materials testing process.
G. Improvements installed contrary to the approved plat shall be a rebuttable presumptive that
such approval is null and void.
§ 907 Reduction of Guarantee.
[Ord. 2304-18, 8/28/18]
A. Upon substantial completion of all required street improvements (except for the top course)
and appurtenant utility improvements, and the connection of same to the public system, the
developer may request of the Township Council in writing, by certified mail addressed in
care of the Township Clerk, that the Municipal Engineer prepare, in accordance with the
itemized cost estimate §902.A, a list of all uncompleted or unsatisfactory completed
improvements. If such a request is made, the developer shall send a copy of the request to
the Municipal Engineer. As-built plans, pursuant to §910.B, shall be submitted prior to the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
394
request for a reduction in the guarantee. The request shall indicate which improvements
have been completed and which bonded improvements remain uncompleted in the judgment
of the developer. Thereupon the Municipal Engineer shall inspect all improvements covered
by the developer's request and shall file a detailed list and report, in writing, with the
Township Council, and shall simultaneously send a copy thereof to the developer not later
than 45 days after receipt of the developer's request.
B. The list prepared by the Municipal Engineer shall state, in detail, with respect to each bonded
improvement determined to be incomplete or unsatisfactory, the nature and extent of the
incompleteness of each incomplete bonded improvement or the nature and extent of, and
remedy for, the unsatisfactory state of each completed bonded improvement determined to be
unsatisfactory. The report prepared by the Municipal Engineer shall identify each bonded
improvement determined to be complete and satisfactory together with a recommendation as
to the amount of reduction to be made in the performance guarantee relating to the completed
and satisfactory bonded improvement, in accordance with the itemized cost estimate
provided to the Municipal Engineer in accordance with §902.A.
C. The Township Council, by resolution, shall either approve the bonded improvements
determined to be complete and satisfactory by the Municipal Engineer, or reject any or all of
these bonded improvements upon the establishment in the resolution of cause for rejection,
and shall approve and authorize the amount of reduction to be made in the performance
guarantee relating to the improvements accepted, in accordance with the itemized cost
estimate provided to the Municipal Engineer in accordance with § 902.A. This resolution
shall be adopted not later than 45 days after receipt of the list and report prepared by the
Municipal Engineer. Upon adoption of the resolution by the Township Council, the
developer shall be released from all liability pursuant to its performance guarantee, with
respect to those approved bonded improvements, except for that portion adequately sufficient
to secure completion or correction of the improvements not yet approved; provided that 30%
of the amount of the total performance guarantee and “safety and stabilization guarantee”
posted may be retained to ensure completion and acceptability of all bonded improvements.
The “safety and stabilization guarantee” shall be reduced by the same percentage as the
performance guarantee is being reduced at the time of each performance guarantee reduction.
For the purpose of releasing the developer from liability pursuant to its performance
guarantee, the amount of the performance guarantee attributable to each approved bonded
improvement shall be reduced by the total amount for each such improvement, in accordance
with the itemized cost estimate which formed the basis of the performance guaranty and
appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to § 902.A, including any contingency
factor applied to the cost of installation. If the sum of the approved bonded improvements
would exceed 70% of the total amount of the performance guarantee, then the municipality
may retain 30% of the amount of the total performance guarantee and “safety and
stabilization guarantee” to ensure completion and acceptability of bonded improvements, as
provided above, except that any amount of the performance guarantee attributable to bonded
improvements for which a “temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee” has been posted
shall be released from the performance guarantee even if such release would reduce the
amount held by the municipality below 30%.
D. If the Municipal Engineer fails to send or provide the list and report as requested by the
developer pursuant to §907.A. within 45 days from receipt of the request, the developer may
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
395
apply to the court in a summary manner for an order compelling the Municipal Engineer to
provide the list and report within a stated time and the cost of applying to the court, including
reasonable attorney's fees, may be awarded to the prevailing party.
E. If the Township Council fails to approve or reject the improvements determined by the
Municipal Engineer to be complete and satisfactory or reduce the performance guarantee for
the complete and satisfactory improvements within 45 days from the receipt of the Municipal
Engineer's list and report, the developer may apply to the court in a summary manner for an
order compelling, within a stated time, approval of the complete and satisfactory
improvements and approval of a reduction in the performance guarantee for the approvable
complete and satisfactory improvements in accordance with the itemized cost estimate
prepared by the Municipal Engineer and appended to the performance guarantee pursuant to
§902.A; and the cost of applying to the court, including reasonable attorney's fees, may be
awarded to the prevailing party.
F. In the event that the developer has made a cash deposit with the Township or approving
authority as part of the performance guarantee, then any partial reduction granted in the
performance guarantee pursuant to this subsection shall be applied to the cash deposit in the
same proportion as the original cash deposit bears to the full amount of the performance
guarantee.
G. If any portion of the required improvements is rejected, the approving authority may require
the developer to complete or correct such improvements and, upon completion or correction,
the same procedure of notification, as set forth in this section shall be followed.
H. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed to limit the right of the developer to contest by
legal proceedings any determination of the Township Council or the Municipal Engineer.
I. The developer shall reimburse the municipality for all reasonable inspection fees paid to the
Municipal Engineer for the foregoing inspection of improvements, which fees shall not
exceed the sum of the amount set forth in N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53. The municipality may require
the developer to post the inspection fees in escrow in an amount calculated as follows: (a)
except for extraordinary circumstances, the greater of $500 or 5% of the cost of the
improvement subject to a performance guarantee; plus (b) an amount not to exceed 5% of the
cost of the private site improvements not subject to a performance guarantee, which cost
shall be determined pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-53.4.
If the Township determines that the amount in escrow for the payment of inspection fees, as
calculated herein, is insufficient to cover the cost of additional required inspections, the
Township may require the developer to deposit additional funds in escrow provided that the
Township delivers to the developer a written inspection escrow deposit request which
informs the developer of the need for additional inspections, details the items or undertakings
that require inspection, estimates the time required for those inspections, and estimates the
cost of performing those inspections.
J. In the event that final approval is by stages or sections of development pursuant to N.J.S.A.
40:55D-38, the provisions of this section shall be applied by stage or section.
K. In the event that the developer shall seek a temporary certificate of occupancy for a
development, unit, lot, building, or phase of development, as a condition of the issuance
thereof, the developer shall furnish a separate guarantee, referred to herein as a “temporary
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
396
certificate of occupancy guarantee” in favor of the Township of Lawrence in an amount
equal to 120% of the cost of installation of only those improvements or items which remain
to be completed or installed under the terms of the temporary certificate of occupancy and
which are required to be installed or completed as a condition precedent to the issuance of
the permanent certificate of occupancy for the development, unit, lot, building or phase of
development and which are not covered by an existing performance guarantee. Upon posting
of a “temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee,” all sums remaining under a performance
guarantee, required pursuant to this Chapter, that relate to the development, unit, lot,
building, or phase of development for which the temporary certificate of occupancy is
sought, shall be released.
The scope and amount of the “temporary certificate of occupancy guarantee” shall be
determined by the Municipal Engineer, and shall include any incomplete improvements as
required by the approval of the Board of jurisdiction. The “temporary certificate of
occupancy guarantee” shall be released by the Municipal Engineer upon the issuance of a
permanent certificate of occupancy with regard to the development, unit, lot, building, or
phase as to which the temporary certificate of occupancy relates.
L. If the property or any part of same is sold, or otherwise conveyed to a successor developer
prior to the completion and acceptance of all improvements, an Assignment of Developer’s
Agreement, and new performance, maintenance or other guarantees shall be required from
the new owner or successor developer. Upon the transfer of ownership of property that is the
subject of a construction permit, and prior to beginning or continuing work authorized by the
construction permit, the new owner or successor developer shall file with the building
department an application for a permit update to notify the building department of the name
and address of the new owner or successor developer and of all other changes to information
previously submitted to the building department. The building department shall not approve
the application for a permit update until it receives notification from the governing body or
its designee that the new owner or successor developer has furnished adequate replacement
performance, maintenance or other guarantees and Assignment of Developer’s Agreement.
§ 908 Conditions for Acceptance of Improvements;
Maintenance Guarantee.
The approval of any plat under this Article by the approving Board or Township Council, or both,
shall in no way be construed as acceptance of any street or drainage system or any other improvement
required by this Ordinance, nor shall such plat approval obligate the Township in any way to
maintain or exercise jurisdiction over such street or drainage system or other improvement. No
improvement shall be accepted by the Township Council unless and until all of the following
conditions have been met.
A. The Municipal Engineer shall have certified in writing that the improvements are complete
and that they comply with the requirements of this Ordinance.
B. The final plat shall have been approved by the Board.
C. Maintenance Guarantee.
1. After final acceptance of all improvements, the developer shall have filed with the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
397
Township Council a maintenance guarantee in an amount equal to not more than
15% of the original estimate of the cost of installing the improvements and shall run
for a period not exceeding two years. The procedures and requirements governing
such maintenance guarantee shall be identical with the procedures and requirements
for a performance guarantee set forth in this Article. The requirements for a
maintenance guarantee may be waived by the Township Council only if the
Township Engineer has certified that the improvements have been in continuous use
for not less than two years from the date the Township Engineer certified
completion of such improvements and that during this period the developer has
maintained the improvements in a satisfactory manner.
2. In the event that any other Township or governmental agencies or public utilities
automatically will own the utilities to be installed, or the improvements are covered
by a performance or maintenance guarantee to another municipal or governmental
agency, no performance or maintenance guarantee, as the case may be, shall be
required by the Township for such utilities or improvements.
D. Acceptance of Publicly Dedicated Streets. A publicly dedicated street shall be deemed
accepted by the municipality when the governing body grants full release of the performance
guarantee and acceptance of the maintenance guarantee.
E. Acceptance of Street Lighting on Publicly Dedicated Streets. The Township shall accept
responsibility for the costs of street lighting on publicly dedicated streets within 30 days
upon written notice when the following conditions have been fulfilled by the developer:
1. The street lights have been connected to a public utility;
2. The street lights have been installed and accepted for service by the public utility;
and
3. Certificates of occupancy have been issued for at least 50% of the dwelling units and
50% of the floor area of the non-residential uses by section or phase of development.
Compliance by the municipality with the provisions of this subsection shall not be deemed to
constitute acceptance of the street by the Township.
§ 909 Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy.
A. Occupancy permits for any buildings will be issued only when the installation of any curbs,
all utilities, all functioning water supply and sewage treatment facilities, all necessary storm
drainage to ensure proper drainage of the lot and surrounding land, rough grading of lots,
final course for the driveway and base course for the streets, unless formally waived by the
Municipal Engineer, are installed to serve the lot and structure for which the permit is
requested.
B. Streets, if installed prior to final approval, shall not be paved until all heavy construction is
complete; shade trees shall not be planted until all grading and earthmoving is completed;
and seeding of grass areas shall be the last operation.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
398
§ 910 As-Built Plan Requirements.
A. As-built plans shall be presented to the Municipal Engineer before improvements may be
inspected. No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued unless an as-built plan is submitted
and approved by the Municipal Engineer.
B. An as-built plan shall be submitted which indicates the constructed conditions and/or
location of:
1. Final grading;
2. Roads including curbing and sidewalks;
3. Utilities;
4. Building location;
5. Driveways and parking lots;
6. Stormwater management facilities, including as-built topographic contours and
volume calculations;
7. Walls and fences; and
8. Other structures deemed pertinent by the Municipal Engineer.
C. As-built plans shall be submitted by a New Jersey licensed land surveyor in the form of three
prints.
§ 911 Off-Tract Improvements.
A. Payment of Pro Rata Share. The Board of Jurisdiction shall require as a condition of final
subdivision or final site plan approval that the applicant pay for his or her pro rata share of
providing off-tract improvements, including the acquisition of land and easements,
necessitated or required by the approved development. The applicant shall either install the
necessary off-tract improvements or pay the pro rata share to the municipality at the option
of Lawrence Township. Such off-tract improvements shall be clearly, directly and
substantially related to the approved development.
B. Improvements to be Constructed at the Sole Expense of the Applicant. In cases where the
need for an off-tract improvement is created by the proposed subdivision or site plan and
where no other property owners receive a special benefit thereby or where no planned capital
improvement by a governmental entity is contemplated, the applicant shall be solely
responsible for the cost and installation of the required improvements.
C. Other Improvements.
1. In cases where the need for any off-tract improvement is created by the proposed
subdivision or site plan and where the Board of Jurisdiction determines that
properties outside the subdivision or tract will also be benefited by the improvement,
the Board shall forward to the Township Council a list and description of all such
improvements together with its request that the Township Council determine and
advise the Board of the procedure to be followed in its construction or installation.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
399
The Board shall defer final action upon the subdivision or site plan until receipt of
the Township Council's determination or until the expiration of 30 days after the
forwarding of such list and description to the Township Council without such
determination having been made, whichever occurs sooner.
2. The Township Council, within 30 days after receipt of said list and description, shall
determine and advise the Board whether:
a. The improvement or improvements are to be constructed or installed by the
municipality:
(1) As a general improvement, the cost of which is to be borne at
general capital improvement (except as otherwise provided as a
contribution by the applicant); or
(2) As a local improvement, all or part of the cost of which is to be
specially assessed against properties benefited thereby in
proportion to benefits conferred by the improvements in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:56 (except as otherwise provided as a
contribution by the applicant); or
b. The improvement or improvements are to be constructed or installed by the
applicant under a formula for partial reimbursement as hereinafter set forth.
3. If the Township Council determines that the improvement or improvements shall be
constructed or installed as a general capital improvement, the Municipal Engineer
shall estimate the amount, if any, by which the total cost thereof will exceed the total
amount by which all properties, including the subject tract, will be specially
benefited thereby, and the applicant shall be liable to the municipality for such
excess. The Township Council shall adopt an ordinance authorizing and providing
for the financing of the capital improvement or improvements in a manner consistent
with the obligation of the applicant for any difference in the total cost over total
benefits conferred.
4. If the Township Council determines that the improvement or improvements shall be
constructed or installed as a benefit assessment, the Municipal Engineer shall
estimate the difference between the total costs to be incurred and the total amount by
which all properties, including the subject tract, will be specifically benefited by the
improvement. The applicant shall be liable to the municipality for the difference in
total cost over total benefits occurred as well as for the amount of any special
assessments against the subdivision property or tract for benefits conferred by the
improvement or improvements. The Township Council shall adopt an ordinance
authorizing and providing for the financing of the improvement or improvements
and the assessment of benefits arising in a manner consistent with the obligation of
the applicant. The Township Council shall proceed in accordance with N.J.S.A.
40:56, except to the extent modified by the obligation of the applicant for any excess
of total costs over total benefits conferred.
D. Cost Allocation. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the municipality and
applicant from agreeing to use a different method of allocating cost.
E. Costs Included. The cost of an improvement shall be construed to encompass all costs
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §900-911
400
related to such improvement, including, but not limited to, planning, feasibility studies,
surveying, permit acquisition, property and easement acquisition, design, construction, and
inspection of a project.
F. Performance Guarantee. The applicant shall be required to provide, as a condition for final
approval a performance guarantee for the off-tract improvements in accordance with §902.
G. Refund of Deposit. In any case in which an applicant shall deposit money with the
municipality for the completion of an improvement that is to be constructed pursuant to this
Ordinance by the municipality, the applicant shall be entitled to full refund of such deposit if
the Township Council of the municipality shall not have enacted an ordinance authorizing
the improvement within 10 years after the date of all other improvements are completed.
H. Deposit of Funds. All monies paid an applicant pursuant to this section shall be deposited
with the municipality in a trust fund account. Such funds shall be used only for the
improvements for which they are deposited or improvements serving the same purpose.
I. Redetermination of Assessment Upon Completion of Improvements. Upon completion of
off-tract improvements required pursuant to this section, the applicant's liability, shall be
recalculated in accordance with the actual, as compared with the estimated, cost of the
improvements. To the extent that it shall decrease the amount of the cost estimate, the
Township shall refund the amount of such difference to the applicant. In cases where
improvements are specially assessed against all benefited properties, recalculation shall be
made by the municipal assessing authority in the course of the special assessment
proceedings. In other cases, it shall be made by the Municipal Engineer.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
401
ARTICLE X
AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROCEDURAL
AND ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS
[Ord. 2303-18, 8/28/18]
§ 1000 Purpose and General Provisions.
A. The purpose of this Article is to implement the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls
(N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.1 et seq., as they may be amended or superseded), the New Jersey
Fair Housing Act (N.J.S.A.52:27D-301, et seq.) and the Housing Element and Fair Share
Plan of Lawrence Township. This Article is designed to ensure that affordable housing
created under the Fair Housing Act is occupied by low- and moderate-income households
for the appropriate period of time. The words, phrases, and terms herein shall be
interpreted to have the same meanings and usages as in the Fair Housing Act and
related regulations. It is the further purpose of this Article to regulate the development
and management of low- and moderate- income housing units constructed in compliance
with these regulations.
B. All units, including those funded with Low Income Housing Tax Credits or other subsidy
programs, shall include the required bedroom distribution and income distribution, shall be
subject to affordability controls, and shall be affirmatively marketed in accordance with
UHAC, with the exception that instead of 10%of all rental affordable units being affordable to
households earning 35% of less of the regional median household income by household size,
13% of all rental affordable units shall be affordable to households earning 30% or less of the
regional median household income by household size, and all other applicable law.
C. All new construction units shall be adaptable in conformance with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a and -
311b and all other applicable law.
D. The Affordable Housing Board created pursuant to §607 of this Ordinance shall administer
the provisions of this Article in conjunction with the staff of the Lawrence Township
Department of Planning and Redevelopment, Municipal Housing Liaison and Municipal
Administrative Agent, as the case may be.
E. Definitions pertaining to affordable housing are incorporated into Article II.
§ 1001 Affordable Housing Required.
A. Any residential development approved after January 28, 1998, including those
developments consisting in whole or in part of beds counted as a residential dwelling, shall
set aside dwelling units for persons of low and moderate income as defined in this
Article. Unless otherwise stated or as may be required within specific zoning districts, the
minimum set aside shall be 15% for those units that are leased and 20% of the total
number of units for sale in the development. In assisted living residence developments,
the set aside shall be a minimum of 5% of the total number of units or beds. At least half
shall be affordable to persons of low income. Except on sites zoned to permit a
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
402
residential density of 6 units per acre or greater, developments consisting solely of single
family detached and/or duplex or two-family dwellings shall be exempt from these
inclusionary requirements but shall pay an affordable housing fee pursuant to Article IX.
Properties shall not be permitted to be subdivided to avoid compliance with the inclusionary
development requirements of this section.
B. All developers with sites identified for affordable housing pursuant to the most recent
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan adopted by the Planning Board and Township
Council of Lawrence, according to their respective duties, shall provide affordable housing
units in accordance with the plan. All development that falls within the time period of the
present round of affordable housing obligation shall construct units, pay a development
fee, or pay a fee in lieu of construction in accordance with this Article and Article IX.
§ 1002 Affordable Housing Administrator and Administrative
Agent
A. The Township Council shall yearly appoint an Affordable Housing Administrator (the
Administrator) to monitor sales and resales of affordable housing units. The Administrator
shall be the Municipal Housing Liaison and may, but is not required to be, the
Administrative Agent of the municipality pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14.
B. The Administrator shall monitor the designated Administrative Agent of the developer in
the initial sales and rental transactions for low- and moderate-income dwellings in
accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.14, as it may be amended or superseded. The developer's
administrative agent shall have all of responsibilities as put forth in this rule. After the initial
sales and rental transactions, the Administrator shall monitor, if such person is not the
municipality's Administrative Agent, the activities of the Administrative Agent for any resales
or re-rentals. If the Administrator is the Administrative Agent for the municipality,
then he or she shall assume all of the duties and responsibilities set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-
26.14 following the initial renting, sales and occupancy of low- and moderate-income
dwellings. The affordability controls set forth in this chapter shall be administered and
enforced by the Administrative Agent regardless of association. The primary responsibility
of the Administrative Agent shall be to ensure that the restricted units are sold or rented,
as applicable, only to low- and moderate-income households in accordance with the Fair
Housing Act.
C. The Township Council may establish a reasonable fee to program participants for the
administration of the affordability controls program.
D. The Administrative Agent, whether the Administrator, developer's agent, or a delegated
agent, shall have the responsibility to income qualify low and moderate-income households,
to place income eligible households in low- and moderate-income units upon initial
occupancy, to provide for the initial occupancy of low- and moderate-income units with
income qualified households, to continue to qualify households for re-occupancy of units as
they become vacant during the period of affordability controls, to assist with advertising
and outreach to low- and moderate-income households, and to enforce the terms of the
deed restriction and mortgage loan. The Administrative Agent shall provide counseling
services to low- and moderate-income applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit
issues, mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements and landlord/tenant law.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
403
E. The Administrator shall coordinate his or her activities with any outside Administrative Agent
to ensure the accurate tracking of the progress of affordable housing in the municipality,
answer inquiries regarding affordable housing from the public or direct same to the
appropriate official or agency, and comply with the affordable housing monitoring and
reporting requirements of the state.
F. In order to ensure an orderly transfer of control responsibility from a municipality to an
administrative agent, from one administrative agent to another administrative agent, or other
transfer, the requirements as set forth in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.17 shall apply as are necessary before
or during the transition. The Administrative Agent's enforcement responsibility for
implementing such practices and procedures shall not be delegated or otherwise
transferred to any other party, except to a successor administrative agent.
G. By accepting state funds for affordable housing purposes, or by submitting to the jurisdiction
of the NJ Department of Community Affairs or its successor agency, the Township of
Lawrence shall be deemed to have delegated to the Administrative Agent the day-to-day
responsibility for implementing practices and procedures designated to ensure effective
compliance with the controls set forth in this Article. The governing body of the municipality,
however, shall retain the ultimate responsibility for ensuring effective compliance with the
requirements as set forth in UHAC and any settlement agreements pertaining to affordable
housing matters, including the settlement agreement with Fair Share Housing Center in In the
Matter of the Application of the Township of Lawrence, Docket No. MER-L-1538-15.
H. The Township shall file monitoring and status reports with Fair Share Housing Center
(“FSHC”) and place the reports on its municipal website. Any plan evaluation report of the
Housing Element and Fair Share Plan and monitoring evaluation report prepared by the
Special Master in accordance with N.J.A.C.5:91 shall be available to the public at the
Lawrence Township Municipal Building, 2207 Lawrence Road, Lawrence Township, New
Jersey 08648.
1. On or about April 28 of each year through the end of the period of Third Round
Judgment of Repose, the Township will provide annual reporting of the status of all
affordable housing activity within the municipality through posting on the municipal
website with a copy of such posting provided to all parties to the Township’s Courtapproved
Settlement Agreements, using forms previously developed for this purpose
by the Council on Affordable Housing or any other forms endorsed by the Special
Master and FSHC.
2. The Fair Housing Act includes two provisions regarding action to be taken by the
Township during the ten-year period of protection provided in the Township’s Courtapproved
agreement with FSHC. The Township agrees to comply with those
provisions as follows:
a. By July 1, 2020, the Township must prepare a midpoint realistic opportunity
review, as required pursuant to N.J.S.A. 52:27D-313, which the Township
will post on its municipal website, with a copy provided to FSHC, a status
report as to its implementation of its Plan and an analysis of whether any
unbuilt sites or unfulfilled mechanisms continue to present a realistic
opportunity. Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
404
comments to the municipality, with a copy to FSHC, regarding whether any
sites no longer present a realistic opportunity and should be replaced and
whether any mechanisms to meet unmet need should be revised or
supplemented. Any interested party may by motion request a hearing before
the Court regarding these issues. In the event the Court determines that a site
or mechanism no longer presents a realistic opportunity and should be
replaced or supplemented, then the municipality shall have the opportunity
to supplement or revise its plan to correct any deficiency.
b. Within 30 days of April 28, 2020 and April 28, 2023the Township shall
prepare a review of compliance with the very-low income housing
requirements required by N.J.S.A. 52:27D-329.1 and its Court-approved
Settlement Agreement with FSHC. The Township will post on its municipal
website, with a copy provided to FSHC, a status report as to its satisfaction
of its very-low income requirements, including the family very-low income
requirements referenced herein and in the Township’s Settlement Agreement
with FSHC. Such posting shall invite any interested party to submit
comments to the municipality and FSHC on the issue of whether the
municipality has complied with its very-low income housing obligation.
I. The Administrator shall keep records of the affirmative marketing activities undertaken in
accordance with the affirmative marketing plan established by any developer’s
administrative agent. The records shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Electronic reporting of affordable housing activity; any required paper forms;
2. Copies of any press releases, brochures, flyers, print advertisements and application
forms used in the affirmative marketing program.
3. The income and demographic characteristics of each household applying for
and occupying income-restricted housing.
4. An evaluation of any necessary adjustments required to the affirmative
marketing program as communicated by the Administrative Agent.
§ 1003 Submission of Affordable Housing Plan.
A. The developer of low and moderate income housing units shall submit to the Affordable
Housing Board a description of the means to be used to insure that the required low and
moderate income units are sold or rented only to low and moderate income households for a
period of not less than 30 years, that such units meet bedroom distribution and phasing
requirements, and comports with the requirements of this Chapter pertaining to the
provisions, leasing, selling and transferring units among eligible low and moderate income
households. The Affordable Housing Board may delegate such plan review to the
Administrator.
B. The Affordable Housing Plan shall indicate how the developer will comply with the
procedures of this Article for selecting occupants of low and moderate- income housing
and the required affirmative marketing requirements. The requirements for affirmative
marketing are found in §1015. Whenever a developer proposes a third party operator or
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
405
manager of affordable housing units, the Affordable Housing Board shall specifically
approve such operator and manager.
C. The following information shall promptly be provided to the Administrator and/or
Administrative Agent by the developer or sponsor of any project containing any affordable
units subject to the requirements of this Article, upon the later of either final municipal
land use approval or issuance of a grant contract by a governmental authority:
1. The total number of units in the project, and number of restricted units, broken down
by bedroom size, identifying which are low and which are moderate income
dwellings, and including street addresses of restricted dwellings;
2. Floor plans of all affordable dwellings, including complete and accurate
identification of uses and dimensions of all rooms;
3. A project map identifying the locations of low and moderate income and
market dwellings;
4. A list of project principals or partners, together with a list of all other affordable
projects in which they have been involved over the previous five years;
5. Projected construction schedule;
6. Proposed pricing for all units, including any purchaser options and add-on items;
7. A list of all public funding sources and copies of grant or loan agreements for
those sources;
8. Condominium fees or homeowner association and any other maintenance or other
fees;
9. Estimated real property taxes for sale units;
10. Sewer, trash disposal and any other utility assessments;
11. Flood insurance requirement, if applicable;
12. A description of all HVAC systems;
13. Location of any common areas and elevators;
14. Proposed form of lease for any rental units;
15. The name of the person who will be responsible for official contact with the
Township Administrator for the duration of the project;
16. The name and qualifications of the developer’s administrative agent, if applicable;
and
17. The State-approved Planned Real Estate Development public offering statement
and/or master deed where available or applicable.
D. The developer shall submit the marketing plan to the Affordable Housing Board at least 45
days prior to the advertising of the availability of the units. The Affordable Housing
Board will approve or modify the plan within 30 working days of receipt of the plan or
within such time as additionally granted by the developer.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
406
§ 1004 Household Income Limitations.
A. The incomes of low and moderate-income households occupying affordable housing shall
not exceed the income limits as of January 1 of the current year.
B. Median Income Determination. Income limits for all units for which income limits are not
already established through a federal program exempted from the Uniform Housing
Affordability Controls pursuant to N.J.A.C.5:80-26.1 shall be updated by the Township
annually within 30 days of the publication of determinations of median income by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) as follows:
1. Regional income limits shall be established for the region based on the median
income by household size, which shall be established by a regional weighted
average of the uncapped Section 8 income limits published by HUD. To compute
this regional income limit, the HUD determination of median county income for a
family of four is multiplied by the estimated households within the county according
to the most recent decennial Census. The resulting product for each county within
the housing region is summed. The sum is divided by the estimated total households
from the most recent decennial Census in Region 4. This quotient represents the
regional weighted average of median income for a household of four. The income
limit for a moderate-income unit for a household of four shall be 80% of the
regional weighted average median income for a family of four. The income limit for
a low-income unit for a household of four shall be 50% of the HUD determination
of the regional weighted average median income for a family of four. The income
limit for a very low income unit for a household of four shall be 30% of the regional
weighted average median income for a family of four. These income limits shall be
adjusted by household size based on multipliers used by HUD to adjust median
income by household size. In no event shall the income limits be less than those for
the previous year.
2. The income limits calculated each year shall be the result of applying the
percentages set forth in subparagraph -1 above to HUD's determination of median
income for the relevant fiscal year, and shall be utilized until the Township updates
the income limits after HUD has published revised determinations of median income
for the next fiscal year.
3. The Regional Asset Limit used in determining an applicant's eligibility for
affordable housing pursuant to N.J.A.C.5:80-26.16(b)3 shall be calculated by the
Township annually by taking the percentage increase of the income limits calculated
pursuant to subparagraph -1 above over the previous year’s income limits, and
applying the same percentage increase to the Regional Asset Limit from the prior
year. In no event shall the Regional Asset Limit be less than that for the previous
year.
C. Affordable Housing Purchase or Rent. Very low income housing units shall be reserved
for households with a gross household income less than or equal to 30% of the median
regional income. Very low income households shall be considered a subset of low income
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
407
units. Of the number of very low income households, at least 50% shall be for family
households. Low income housing units shall be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than or equal to 50% of the median regional income. Moderate income
units shall be reserved for households with a gross household income more than 50% but
equal to or less than 80% of the median income.
D. Assisted Living Facilities. Income determination and eligibility for assisted living facilities
shall also comply with the New Jersey Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency's Assisted
Living Underwriting Guidelines and Financing Policy, dated May 28, 1996, as it may be
amended or superseded. The monthly fee for rent, meals, and basic services for the
affordable units in the assisted living facility shall not exceed 80% of household income.
For the purposes of this section, 62.5% of the fee shall be assumed to be for meals and
basic services and 37.5% of the fee for rent.
§ 1005 Household Income Verification.
A. The Administrative Agent shall secure all information from applicant households necessary
and appropriate to determine that restricted dwellings are occupied by properly sized
households with appropriate very low, low or moderate-income levels. No household may
be referred to a restricted dwelling, or may receive a commitment with respect to a
restricted dwelling, unless that household has received a signed and dated certification, as
set forth in this section, and has executed the certificate in the form provided.
B. The Administrative Agent shall use a random selection process to select occupants of very
low, low and moderate-income housing.
C. The Administrative Agent shall prepare a standard form of certification and shall sign and
date one for each household when certified. This certification shall be known as a Certificate
of Eligibility and shall be a prerequisite for the purchase or rental of an income-restricted
dwelling. An initial certification shall be valid for no more than 180 days unless a valid
contract for sale or lease has been executed within that time period. In this event, certifications
shall be valid until such time as the contract for sale or lease is ruled invalid and no occupancy
has occurred. Certifications may be renewed in writing at the request of a certified household
for an additional period of 180 days at the discretion of the Administrator or Administrative
Agent.
D. When reviewing an applicant household’s income to determine eligibility, the Administrator
or Administrative Agent shall compare the applicant household’s total gross annual income
to the regional very low, low and moderate income limits then in effect, as approved by
the court of competent jurisdiction. For the purposes of this subchapter, income includes, but
is not limited to, wages, salaries, tips, commissions, alimony, regularly scheduled overtime,
pensions, social security, unemployment compensation, Temporary Assistance for Needy
Families (TANF), verified regular child support, disability, net income from business or
real estate, and income from assets such as savings, certificates of deposit, money market
accounts, mutual funds, stocks, bonds and imputed income from non-income producing
assets, such as equity in real estate.
E. Except as otherwise specifically stated in this subchapter, the sources of income considered
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
408
by the Administrator or Administrative Agent shall be the types of regular income reported
to the Internal Revenue Service and which is eligible to be used for mortgage loan
approval. Household annual gross income shall be calculated by projecting current gross
income over a 12-month period.
F. Assets not earning a verifiable income shall have an annual imputed interest income using
a current average annual savings interest rate. Assets not earning income include, but are
not limited to, present real estate equity. Applicants owning real estate shall produce
documentation of a market value appraisal and outstanding mortgage debt. The difference
shall be treated as the monetary value of the asset and the imputed interest added to income. If
the applicant household owns a primary residence with no mortgage on the property valued
at or above the regional asset limit, a Certificate of Eligibility shall be denied by the
Administrator or Administrative Agent, unless the applicant’s existing monthly housing
costs (including principal, interest, taxes, homeowner and private mortgage insurance, and
condominium and homeowner association fees as applicable) exceed 33% of the
household’s eligible monthly income.
G. Rent from real estate shall be considered income, after deduction of any mortgage
payments, real estate taxes, property owner’s insurance and reasonable property
management expenses as reported to the Internal Revenue Service. Other expenses are not
deductible. If actual rent is less than fair market rent, the Administrator or Administrative
Agent shall impute a fair market rent.
H. Income does not include benefits, payments, rebates or credits received under any of
the following:
1. Federal or State low income energy assistance programs;
2. Food stamps, payments received for foster care, relocation assistance benefits;
3. Income of live-in attendants, scholarships, student loans, and personal property,
including but not limited to, automobiles; and
4. Lump-sum additions to assets such as inheritances, lottery winnings, gifts,
insurance settlements, and part-time income of persons enrolled as full-time students.
5. Income, however, does include interest and other earnings from the investment of
any of the foregoing benefits, payments, rebates, or credits.
I. The Administrative Agent shall require each member of an applicant household who is 18
years of age or older to provide documentation to verify the member’s income,
including income received by adults on behalf of minor children for their benefit. Household
members 18 years of age or older who do not receive income must produce documentation of
current status. Income verification documentation may include, but is not limited to, the
following for each and every member of a household who is 18 years of age or older:
1. Four consecutive pay stubs, not more than 120 days old, including bonuses, overtime
or tips, or a letter from the employer stating the present annual income figure;
2. Copies of Federal and State income tax returns for each of the preceding three
tax years;
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
409
3. A letter or appropriate reporting form verifying monthly benefits such as Social
Security, unemployment, TANF, disability or pension income (monthly or annually);
4. A letter or appropriate reporting form verifying any other sources of income claimed
by the applicant, such as alimony or child support;
5. Income reports from banks or other financial institutions holding or managing
trust funds, money market accounts, certificates of deposit, stocks or bonds; and
6. Evidence or reports of income from directly held assets such as real estate or
businesses.
7. Court ordered payments for alimony or child support to another household, whether
or not it is being paid regularly, shall be excluded from income for purposes of
determining income eligibility.
J. At the discretion of the Administrator or Administrative Agent, households may also be
required to produce documentation of household composition for determining the correct
dwelling size and applicable median income guide.
K. Tenant Income Eligibility. In addition to the foregoing requirements, tenant income
eligibility shall be in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.13 and the following determinations:
1. Median Income Limits:
a. Very low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than or equal to 30% of the regional median
household income by household size.
b. Low-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than or equal to 50% of the regional median
household income by household size.
c. Moderate-income rental units shall be reserved for households with a gross
household income less than 80% of the regional median household income
by household size.
2. The Administrative Agent shall certify a household as eligible for a restricted rental
unit when the household is a very low-income, low-income household or a
moderate-income household, as applicable to the unit, and the rent proposed for the
unit does not exceed 35% (40% for age-restricted units) of the household’s eligible
monthly income as determined pursuant to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.16, as may be amended
and supplemented; provided, however, that this limit may be exceeded if one or
more of the following circumstances exists:
a. The household currently pays more than 35% (40% for households eligible
for age-restricted units) of its gross household income for rent, and the
proposed rent will reduce its housing costs;
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
410
b. The household has consistently paid more than 35% (40% for households
eligible for age-restricted units) of eligible monthly income for rent in the
past and has proven its ability to pay;
c. The household is currently in substandard or overcrowded living conditions;
d. The household documents the existence of assets with which the household
proposes to supplement the rent payments; or
e. The household documents proposed third-party assistance from an outside
source such as a family member in a form acceptable to the Administrative
Agent and the owner of the unit.
3. The applicant shall file documentation sufficient to establish the existence of the
circumstances in -2.a through -2.e above with the Administrative Agent, who shall
counsel the household on budgeting.
§ 1006 Certificate of Eligibility, Waiting List and Selection
A. If the household is found to be eligible for low and moderate- income housing, they shall
be issued a Certificate of Eligibility and placed on the affordable housing waiting list, except
in the event that such a certificate is withheld or removed in accordance with this section.
Eligible persons that live or work within the East Central Housing Region (Region 4) shall
have preference over those that live or work in another housing region.
B. Applicants shall be selected in the order in which their applications are certified and in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
C. Households remaining on a waiting list shall update its application no later than April 30
each year, including the most recent federal income tax return of each member of the
proposed household and such other updated income and other information requested on the
application.
D. Households on the waiting list who have not submitted the required information by May 15
each year shall be notified by certified mail, mailed to the address on file that they have until
June 30 of that year to provide the information or they shall be removed from the waiting list.
E. Any household whose income or priority category has changed such that the household
has become eligible for a different category of housing or priority list shall be placed on the
appropriate list without penalty or favor as of the date of the original application.
F. Any household whose income has increased to the degree that it is no longer eligible for low
or moderate income housing shall be removed from the waiting list.
G. If the Administrator or Administrative Agent has reason to believe that the information on file
is erroneous or incomplete, he or she shall have the right to conduct an investigation and
request any additional information deemed necessary to obtain accurate household
information. If an applicant does not cooperate in such investigation or refuses to reply
with the requested additional information within 30 days of said request, the applicant shall
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
411
be removed from the list.
H. All applications shall be notarized and certified complete and accurate. Anyone
knowingly submitting incomplete, inaccurate, incorrect or false information may be
removed from eligibility for very low, low and moderate income dwellings. All
information submitted to the Administrator or Administrative Agent for the purposes of
determining applicant eligibility shall be strictly confidential and not considered a public
record.
I. Prior to the time of availability of a very low, low and moderate income dwelling, the
Administrator or Administrative Agent shall notify by certified mail the top three households
on the waiting list for the type of dwelling available, its location and the estimated date it
will be available. If a purchaser or tenant cannot be found from the top three
households on the waiting list, notice shall be sent to the fourth, fifth, etc., household until
a purchaser or tenant is found. The household shall, within 14 days of mailing, notify
the Administrator or Administrative Agent, in writing, of its intent to occupy the dwelling
and, if selected, its intent to comply with the requirements of paragraph –J, below, within
15 days. Any household which fails to respond to the notice or chooses to reject a specific
dwelling by informing the Administrative Agent in writing, shall retain its priority and shall
be notified of available dwellings in the future, except that if a household chooses to
reject a dwelling or fails to respond three times, it shall be removed from the list and
must reapply and re-qualify if it wishes to be placed on the list at a new qualified priority.
J. At the time of notice to a household of the availability of an appropriate type of dwelling
and if the household notifies the Administrative Agent of its intent to occupy the dwelling
and that household is selected for occupancy, each household member shall update the
records on file and recertify the accuracy of the information as required herein. Information
shall be reviewed and the eligibility status reconfirmed. The household selected shall only
at that point proceed to make the legal and financial arrangements to acquire or lease the
dwelling.
K. If a household selected for occupancy is unable to obtain financing, it shall lose its
eligibility for that dwelling, after notice, but shall retain its priority status for a similar
appropriate dwelling as other dwellings become available and as long as the household
remains eligible. When notified of the availability of another dwelling, updating and
recertifying data as outlined in Subsection –J above is required.
L. A certificate of eligibility may be withheld by the Administrator or Administrative Agent
as a result of an applicant’s inability to demonstrate sufficient present assets for down
payment or security deposit purposes.
M. A certificate of eligibility may be withheld by the Administrator or Administrative Agent
as a result of an applicant’s inability to verify funds claimed as assets, household
composition or other facts represented.
N. A certificate of eligibility shall be denied by the Administrator or Administrative Agent
as a result of any willful and material misstatement of fact made by the applicant in seeking
eligibility.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
412
§ 1007 Unit Standards and Requirements.
A. In each affordable development, at least 50 percent of the restricted units within each
bedroom distribution shall be low-income units and the remainder may be moderateincome
units.
B. Affordable developments that are not age-restricted shall be structured in conjunction
with realistic market demands such that:
1. The combined number of efficiency and one-bedroom units is no greater than 20
percent of the total low- and moderate-income units;
2. At least 30 percent of all low- and moderate-income units are two bedroom units;
3. At least 20 percent of all low- and moderate-income units are three bedroom units;
and
4. The remainder, if any, may be allocated at the discretion of the developer.
C. Age-restricted low- and moderate-income units may utilize a modified bedroom distribution.
At a minimum, the number of bedrooms shall equal the number of age-restricted low- and
moderate-income units within the affordable development. The standard may be met by
creating all one-bedroom units or by creating a two-bedroom unit for each efficiency unit.
D. In determining the initial rents and initial sales prices for compliance with the
affordable average requirements for restricted units other than assisted living facilities,
the following standards shall be used:
1. An efficiency shall be affordable to a one-person household;
2. A one-bedroom dwelling shall be affordable to a one and one-half person household;
3. A two-bedroom dwelling shall be affordable to a three-person household;
4. A three-bedroom dwelling shall be affordable to a four and one-half person
household;
5. A four-bedroom dwelling shall be affordable to a six-person household.
6. In referring certified households to specific income-restricted units, to the extent
feasible and without causing an undue delay in occupying the dwelling, the
Administrator shall strive to:
a. Provide an occupant for each unit’s bedroom;
b. Provide children of different sex with separate bedrooms; and
c. Prevent more than two persons from occupying a single bedroom.
E. Size of Units. The minimum size of affordable housing units, which is necessary to ensure
the public health safety and welfare of its occupants, shall be as indicated in Table 10.1.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
413
Table 10.1 Minimum Size of Affordable Housing Units.
Type of Unit
Minimum Size
(gross square feet)
Efficiency 500
One-bedroom 600
Two-bedroom 750
Three-bedroom 900
F. Certificates of Occupancy. The following additional requirements for the issuance of
certificates of occupancy shall apply to inclusionary developments:
1. The initial issuance of certificates of occupancy for market units shall be linked to the
issuance of certificates of occupancy for affordable units. Prior to the issuance of the
certificates of occupancy for market units, certificates of occupancy for affordable
units shall be required in the following minimum ratios:
Table 10.2 Required Percentage of Affordable to Market Units.
Percentage of Affordable
Housing Units Completed
Percentage of Market
Housing Units Completed
0% 25%
10% 25% + 1
50% 50%
75% 75%
100% 90%
2. Each unit of affordable housing shall require a certificate of occupancy, which
shall become void upon a change of owner or tenant.
3. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a low and moderate-income unit
unless the provisions of N.J.A.C. 5:93-9.3, or superseding administrative code, are
met.
G. Unit Type and Household Size. The following housing type shall be used in determining
affordability as it relates to household size:
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
414
Table 10.3 Unit Type and Household Size.
Unit Size
Household Size
(persons)
Efficiency 1
One-bedroom 1.5
Two-bedroom 3
Three-bedroom 4.5
Four-bedroom 6
H. Distribution of Low and Moderate Income Units. At least 50% of all units within each
inclusionary development shall be affordable to low income households. At least 50% of
all rental units shall be affordable to low income households. Of the total number of
affordable housing units, 13% of the total shall be earmarked as very low income units
and shall be counted towards the minimum low income requirement.
I. Utilities and Heating Source. Tenant-paid utilities that are included in the utility
allowance shall be so stated in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance
approved by the NJ Department of Community Affairs for its Section 8 program. Affordable
units shall utilize the same type of heating source as market units within the affordable
development.
J. Appearance and Location. The facade of an affordable housing dwelling shall be
indistinguishable from those of market units in terms of the use of exterior materials,
windows, doors, reveal, roof pitch, color, or other material. Affordable housing units shall
be fully integrated with market rate housing to the greatest extent feasible and shall have
access to open space and site amenities comparable to that of market rate units.
K. Tenure. For inclusionary developments with a single housing type, the affordable housing
units shall have the same tenure as the market housing units.
§ 1008 Initial Selling and Renting Determinations.
A. In establishing rents and sales prices of affordable housing units, the administrative agent
shall follow the procedures as set forth in the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls.
B. Required pricing stratification.
1. The maximum rent for affordable units within each affordable development shall
be affordable to households earning no more than 60% of median income and the
average rent for low and moderate-income units shall be affordable to households
earning no more than 52% of median income. The developers and/or municipal
sponsors of restricted rental units shall establish at least one rent for each bedroom
type for both low income and moderate income units, provided that at least 13%
of all low and moderate income units shall be affordable to households earning no
more than 30% of median income.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
415
2. The maximum sales price of restricted ownership units within each affordable
development shall be affordable to households earning no more than 70% of
median income. Each affordable development shall achieve an affordability average
of 55% for restricted ownership units. In achieving this affordability average,
moderate- income ownership units shall be available for at least three different
prices for each bedroom type, and low income ownership units shall be available
for at least two different prices for each bedroom type.
C. Initial Pricing and Annual Increases of Affordable Dwellings.
1. Owner-occupied dwellings initial pricing. The initial purchase price for all
restricted ownership units shall be calculated so that the monthly carrying cost of
the dwelling, including principal and interest (based on a mortgage loan equal to
95% of the purchase price and the Federal Reserve H.15 rate of interest), taxes,
homeowner and private mortgage insurance and condominium or homeowner
association fees do not exceed 28% of the eligible monthly income of the
appropriate size household as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4; provided,
however, that the price shall be subject to the affordability average requirement as
noted above.
2. Rental dwellings initial pricing. The initial rent for a restricted rental dwelling shall
be calculated so as not to exceed 30% of the eligible monthly income of the
appropriate household size as determined under N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.4, as may be
amended and supplemented; provided, however, that the rent shall be subject to
the affordability average requirement.
3. Owner-occupied dwellings annual increase. The price of owner-occupied low and
moderate income units may increase annually based on the percentage increase in
the regional median income limit for each housing region. In no event shall the
maximum resale price established by the administrative agent be lower than the
last recorded purchase price.
4. Rental dwellings annual increase. The rent of low and moderate income units may
be increased annually based on the percentage increase in the Housing Consumer
Price Index for the United States. This increase shall not exceed 9% in any one
year. Rents for units constructed pursuant to low income housing tax credit
regulations shall be indexed pursuant to the regulations governing low income
housing tax credits.
5. Utilities. Tenant-paid utilities that are included in the utility allowance shall be
so stated in the lease and shall be consistent with the utility allowance approved by
the NJ Department of Community Affairs for its Section 8 program.
D. Price Restrictions for Restricted Ownership Units, Homeowner Association Fees and Resale
Prices.
1. The initial purchase price for a restricted ownership dwelling shall be approved by
the Administrator.
2. The Administrator shall approve all resale prices, in writing and in advance of the
resale, to assure compliance with the foregoing standards.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
416
3. The method used to determine the condominium association fee amounts and special
assessments shall be indistinguishable between the low and moderate-income
homeowners and the market homeowners.
E. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the Administrator to increase the
maximum sales price for the dwelling on the basis of eligible capital improvements. Eligible
capital improvements shall be those that render the dwelling suitable for a larger household or
the addition of a bathroom.
§ 1009 Affordability Controls for Ownership Units.
A. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership dwelling shall commence on the
date the initial certified household takes title to the dwelling.
B. Each restricted ownership dwelling shall remain subject to the requirements of the UHAC
until the Township of Lawrence elects to release the dwelling from such requirements
pursuant to action taken in compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5(g). Prior to such municipal
election, a restricted ownership dwelling shall remain subject to the requirements of
N.J.A.C. 5-80-26.5, for a period of at least thirty (30) years, and for a period of at least 10
years or the sale and repayment of any loan proceeds for owner-occupied units that were
rehabilitated.
C. The affordability control period for a restricted ownership dwelling shall commence on the
date the initial certified household takes title to the dwelling.
D. Each restricted ownership dwelling shall remain in compliance with and subject to the
requirements of the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.5 for control
periods, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6 for price restrictions, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.7 for buyer income
eligibility, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.8 for limitations on indebtedness and subordination, N.J.A.C.
5:80-26.9 for capital improvements, and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.10 for maintenance.
E. Limitations on Indebtedness Secured by Ownership Dwelling; Subordination.
1. Prior to incurring any indebtedness to be secured by a restricted ownership
dwelling, the Administrator shall determine in writing that the proposed
indebtedness complies with the provisions of this section.
2. With the exception of original purchase money mortgages, during a control period
neither an owner nor a lender shall at any time cause or permit the total
indebtedness secured by a restricted ownership dwelling to exceed 95% of the
maximum allowable resale price of that dwelling, as such price is determined by the
Administrator in accordance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.6(b).
F. Capital Improvements to Ownership Units.
1. The owners of restricted ownership units may apply to the Administrator to increase
the maximum sales price for the dwelling on the basis of capital improvements
made since the purchase of the dwelling. Eligible capital improvements shall be
those that render the dwelling suitable for a larger household or that adds an
additional bathroom. In no event shall the maximum sales price of an improved
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
417
housing dwelling exceed the limits of affordability for the larger household.
2. Upon the resale of a restricted ownership dwelling, all items of property that are
permanently affixed to the dwelling or were included when the dwelling was
initially restricted (for example, refrigerator, range, washer, dryer, dishwasher, wallto-
wall carpeting) shall be included in the maximum allowable resale price. Other
items may be sold to the purchaser at a reasonable price that has been approved
by the Administrator at the time of the signing of the agreement to purchase. The
purchase of central air conditioning installed subsequent to the initial sale of the
dwelling and not included in the base price may be made a condition of the
dwelling resale provided the price, which shall be subject to 10-year, straight-line
depreciation, has been approved by the Administrator. Unless otherwise approved
by the Administrator, the purchase of any property other than central air
conditioning shall not be made a condition of the dwelling resale. The owner and
the purchaser must personally certify at the time of closing that no unapproved
transfer of funds for the purpose of selling and receiving property has taken place
at the time of or as a condition of resale.
G. Notice of Resale, Recapture Covenant and 95/5 Purchase Options.
1. The owner of the property is required to notify the Administrator by certified mail of
any intent to sell the property 90 days prior to entering into an agreement for the
first non- exempt sale of the Property after the conclusion of the period of
affordability controls on restricted units in effect at the time the Property was first
restricted as part of the Affordable Housing Program.
2. The municipal housing inspector shall inspect the available affordable resale unit
for construction and property maintenance code violation(s). The housing inspector
shall submit in writing to the owner and the Administrator a listing of the
violation(s). The estimated cost of the repairs not completed by the owner prior to
resale shall be deducted from the resale price. The cost of repairs not undertaken by
the owner will be determined by estimator(s) and/or contractor(s) supplied by the
Administrator and charged back to the seller.
3. Upon the first such non-exempt sale of the Property, 95% of the difference between,
(i), the actual sale price; and (ii), the regulated maximum sales price that would be
applicable were the period of affordability controls on restricted units still in
effect, shall be paid at closing to the Township of Lawrence; or, to the NJ
Department of Community Affairs or NJ Housing and Mortgage Finance Agency,
when acting as receiving agent for the municipality. Exempt sales shall be as listed
in §1012.
4. Such non-exempt sale is subject to the options provided for in N.J.A.C. 5:80-
26.20 (Option to buy 95/5 units), N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.21 (Municipal Option on
95/5 units), N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.22 (State Option on 95/5 Units), N.J.A.C. 5:80-
26.23 (Non-Profit Option on 95/5 Units), N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.24 (Seller Option on
95/5 Units), N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.25 (Municipal Rejection of Repayment Option on
95/5 Units) and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.26 (Continued Application of Options to Create,
Rehabilitate or Maintain 95/5 Units) of UHAC.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
418
§ 1010 Affordability Controls on Rental Dwellings.
A. Each restricted rental dwelling shall remain subject to the requirements of the Uniform
Housing Affordability Controls until the Township of Lawrence elects to release the
dwelling from such requirement pursuant to action taken in compliance with N.J.A.C. 5:80-
26.11(e). Prior to such a municipal election, a restricted rental dwelling shall remain
subject to the requirements of N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11, for a minimum of 30 years, and for a
period of at least 10 years or the sale and repayment of any loan proceeds for renter-occupied
units that were rehabilitated.
B. Each restricted rental dwelling shall remain in compliance with and subject to the
requirements of the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.11 for
control periods, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.12 for restrictions on rents, and N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.13 for
tenant income eligibility.
C. Deeds of all real property that include restricted rental units shall contain deed restriction
language. The deed restriction shall have priority over all mortgages on the property, and
the deed restriction shall be filed by the developer or seller with the records office of the
County of Mercer. A copy of the filed document shall be provided to the Administrator
within 30 days of the receipt of a Certificate of Occupancy.
D. A restricted rental dwelling shall remain subject to the affordability controls of this
Article, despite the occurrence of any of the following events:
1. Sublease or assignment of the lease of the dwelling;
2. Sale or other voluntary transfer of the ownership of the dwelling; or
3. The entry and enforcement of any judgment of foreclosure.
E. Rent Restrictions for Rental Units; Leases.
1. A written lease shall be required for all restricted rental units, and tenants shall
be responsible for security deposits and the full amount of the rent as stated on the
lease. A copy of the current lease for each restricted rental dwelling shall be
provided to the Administrator.
2. No additional fees or charges shall be added to the approved rent without the
express written approval of the Administrator.
3. Application fees (including the charge for any credit check) shall not exceed 5% of
the monthly rent of the applicable restricted dwelling and shall be payable to the
Administrator to be applied to the costs of administering the controls applicable to
the dwelling as set forth in this Article.
§ 1011 Accessibility Requirements.
The following barrier free accessibility and adaptability requirements shall apply to all new
construction:
A. The first floor of all restricted townhouse dwelling units and all restricted units in all
other multistory buildings shall be subject to the technical design standards of the Barrier
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
419
Free Sub-code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
B. All restricted townhouse dwellings and all restricted units in other multistory buildings in
which a restricted dwelling is attached to at least one other dwelling shall have the following
features:
1. An adaptable toilet and bathing facility on the first floor;
2. An adaptable kitchen on the first floor;
3. An interior accessible route of travel on the first floor;
4. An interior accessible route of travel shall not be required between stories within
an individual dwelling;
5. An adaptable room that can be used as a bedroom, with a door or the casing for
the installation of a door, on the first floor; and
6. An accessible entranceway in accordance with N.J.S.A. 52:27D-311a, et seq. and
the Barrier Free Sub-code, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, or evidence that the municipality has
collected funds from the developer sufficient to make 10% of the adaptable
entrances in the development accessible:
a. Where a dwelling has been constructed with an adaptable entrance, upon
the request of a disabled person who is purchasing or will reside in the
dwelling, an accessible entrance shall be installed.
b. To this end, the developer of restricted units shall deposit funds within
the affordable housing trust fund of the Township of Lawrence sufficient
to install accessible entrances in 10% of the affordable units that have been
constructed with adaptable entrances.
c. The funds deposited under sub-paragraph –(b) above shall be used by the
Township for the sole purpose of making the adaptable entrance of any
affordable dwelling accessible when requested to do so by a person
with a disability who occupies or intends to occupy the dwelling and
requires an accessible entrance.
7. The developer of the restricted units shall submit a design plan and cost estimate
for the conversion from an adaptable to an accessible entrance to the Construction
Code Official.
8. Once the Construction Code Official has determined that the design plan to convert
the unit entrances from adaptable to accessible meet the requirements of the Barrier
Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7, and that the cost estimate of such conversion is
reasonable, payment shall be made into the municipality’s affordable housing
trust fund by the Chief Financial Officer who shall ensure that the funds are
deposited into the affordable housing trust fund and appropriately earmarked.
9. Full compliance with the foregoing provisions shall not be required where an entity
can demonstrate that physical or environmental conditions of the site render it
impracticable to meet the requirements. Determinations of site impracticability shall
be in compliance with the Barrier Free Subcode, N.J.A.C. 5:23-7.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
420
§ 1012 Exempt Transactions.
A. The following transactions shall be deemed "non-sales" for purposes of these regulations
and the owner receiving title by virtue of any of the following transactions shall be
entitled to a statement of exemption to the owner receiving title by virtue of any of
the following transactions:
1. Transfer of ownership of an affordable sales unit between husband and wife;
2. Transfer of ownership of an affordable sales unit between former spouses ordered
as a result of a judicial decree of divorce (and not including sales to third parties);
3. Transfer of ownership of an affordable unit between family members as a result
of inheritance;
4. Transfer of ownership of an affordable unit through an executor's deed to a Class
A beneficiary;
5. Transfer of ownership of an affordable unit through an order of the Superior
Court or other court, in a foreclosure proceeding or transfer in lieu of foreclosure
after a foreclosure proceeding has commenced.
B. Except for the income level of the family acquiring title by an exempt transaction, the
exempt transfer will not eliminate any restrictions set forth herein including, but not limited
to, the unit remaining the prime resident and the requirement for resale to low and
moderate income families as applicable and all such restrictions shall remain in effect
following the exempt transfer except as stated in subsection -A.5.
C. Should a mortgagee acquire title pursuant to subsection -A.5 it may re-sell the unit to
any family, regardless of income, with the municipality having the right of first refusal.
The sales price to the municipality is the amount necessary to cure the foreclosure. This
includes all principal and interest due to the mortgagee and other lien holders, repayment
of equity to the owner prior to foreclosure and the costs of foreclosure. If the municipality
does not purchase the unit, the mortgagee may sell the unit without any of the restrictions
set forth in this section. The amount of the sale above that which is necessary to cure the
foreclosure will be turned over to the municipality to be used for low and moderate-income
housing.
§ 1013 Leasing Restriction.
Initial and subsequent owners of affordable housing units shall occupy the dwelling as their
principal residence. RENTAL OR SUBLEASING OF THE AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT
IS EXPRESSLY FORBIDDEN.
§ 1014 Effect on Landlord and Tenant Relationship.
A. Nothing in these rules should be construed to limit the rights and duties of the owner
and tenant to maintain the dwelling in accordance with all appropriate New Jersey State or
municipal construction and property maintenance codes.
B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Article, any member of a household
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
421
occupying a dwelling under this Article and subject to the regulations of the Township
of Lawrence is subject to eviction for any reasons allowed under applicable New Jersey
law. The provisions of this Article are not intended to confer any additional rights or
obligations on property owners or tenants other than those mandated by statute or required
by the courts of the State of New Jersey or the duly adopted regulations of any of its
agencies.
§ 1015 Affirmative Marketing for Affordable Housing
A. Purpose. The purpose of this Section is to establish administrative procedures to ensure a
wide dissemination of knowledge of affordable housing units as they become available to
the low and moderate-income population, and that the selection of tenants or homeowners, as
the case may be, meets the requirements of the Uniform Housing Affordability Controls.
B. An Affirmative Marketing Plan is a regional marketing strategy designed to attract
buyers and/or renters of all majority and minority groups, regardless of race, creed, color,
national origin, ancestry, marital, or familial status, gender, affectional or sexual orientation,
disability, age or number of children to housing units which are being marketed by a
developer or sponsor of affordable housing. An Affirmative Marketing Plan is also
intended to target those potentially eligible persons who are least likely to apply for
affordable units in that region.
C. Affirmative Marketing Requirements. Within the overall framework of the municipality’s
affirmative marketing program, all affordable housing units in Lawrence Township shall
be marketed in accordance with the provisions in this Section unless otherwise provided
for in N.J.A.C. 5:80-26-1. An Affirmative Marketing Plan shall be created for each
development that contains or will contain low and moderate income units, including those
that are part of the Township’s prior round Housing Element and its current Housing
Element and those that may be constructed in future developments not yet anticipated. This
Affirmative Marketing Plan shall also apply to any rehabilitated units that are vacated
and re-rented during the applicable period of controls for rehabilitated rental units when
Lawrence is allocated a rehabilitation component.
D. Plan Preparation. The Administrator or Administrative Agent shall prepare an Affirmative
Marketing Plan for each affordable housing program, as applicable, comporting with
N.J.A.C. 5:80-26.15, for review and approval by the Affordable Housing Board. The
Administrator of the Township shall oversee the work of a developer’s Administrative Agent
provided that the person has been approved by the Affordable Housing Board.
Regardless of the drafting agent, the Affirmative Marketing Plan is intended to be used
by developers of affordable housing restricted to low and moderate income households
located within the municipality. The Administrative Agent responsible for specific
affordable housing programs or developments shall ensure that the affirmative marketing
of all affordable units is consistent with these provisions.
E. Affirmative Marketing Implementation. The Affirmative Marketing Plan includes regulations
for qualification of income eligibility, price and rent restrictions, bedroom distribution,
affordability control periods, and unit marketing in accordance to N.J.A.C. 5:80-26. All
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
422
newly created affordable units will comply with the thirty-year affordability control required
by UHAC, N.J.A.C. 5:80-26-5 and 5:80-26-11. This plan will be adhered to by all private,
non-profit or municipal developers of affordable housing units and will cover the period of
deed restriction or affordability controls on each affordable unit. The Affirmative
Marketing Plan for each affordable housing development shall meet the following minimum
requirements:
1. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall provide a regional preference for all
households that live and/or work in Housing Region 4, comprised of Mercer,
Monmouth and Ocean Counties.
2. Although the Township has the ultimate responsibility for implementing all
aspects of Lawrence’s affordable housing program, the Administrative Agent
designated by the Affordable Housing Board shall assure that the affirmative
marketing of all affordable units is consistent with the Affirmative Marketing Plan
for the municipality.
3. The Administrative Agent shall provide a list of counseling services to low and
moderate- income applicants on subjects such as budgeting, credit issues,
mortgage qualification, rental lease requirements, and landlord/tenant law.
4. The affirmative marketing process for available affordable units shall begin at
least four months prior to the expected date of occupancy. Advertising and
outreach shall take place during the first week of the marketing program and each
month thereafter until all of the affordable units have been leased or sold.
5. The costs of advertising and affirmative marketing of the affordable units shall be
the responsibility of the developer, sponsor or owner, unless otherwise determined
or agreed to by the Township of Lawrence.
6. The Affirmative Marketing Plan for each affordable housing development shall
describe the media to be used in advertising and publicizing the availability
of housing. In implementing the Affirmative Marketing Plan, the Administrative
Agent shall consider the use of language translations where appropriate.
7. Applications for affordable housing shall be available in several locations,
including, at a minimum, the County Administration Building and/or the
County Library for each county within the housing region; the municipal
administration building and the municipal library in Lawrence; and the
developer's rental office. Applications shall be mailed to prospective applicants
upon request.
8. The Administrator shall develop, maintain and update a list of community contact
person(s) and/or organizations(s) in the Region 4 Housing Area for the use of
the Township and other Administrative Agents. This list shall be updated
periodically. The list shall contain organizations that will aid in the affirmative
marketing program with particular emphasis on contacts with outreach to groups
and individuals that are least likely to apply for affordable housing within the
region. A representative sample of the organizations on the list shall be contacted
as part of the affirmative marketing effort as approved by the Administrator.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
423
9. The Affirmative Marketing Plan shall be approved by the Affordable Housing
Board pursuant to §1003 prior to implementation.
§ 1016 Violations of Article X Regulations.
A. Upon the occurrence of a breach of any of the regulations governing the affordable dwelling
by an owner, developer or tenant the municipality shall have all remedies provided at law or
equity, including but not limited to foreclosure, tenant eviction, municipal fines, a
requirement for household recertification, acceleration of all sums due under a mortgage,
recoupment of any funds from a sale in the violation of the regulations, injunctive relief to
prevent further violation of the regulations, entry on the premises, and specific performance.
B. After providing written notice of a violation to an owner, developer or tenant of a low or
moderate income dwelling and advising the owner, developer or tenant of the penalties for
such violations, the municipality may take the following action against the owner,
developer or tenant for any violation that remains uncured for a period of 60 days after
service of the written notice:
1. The municipality may file a court action pursuant to N.J.S.A. 2A:58-11 alleging a
violation, or violations, of the regulations governing the affordable housing unit. If
the owner, developer or tenant is found by the court to have violated any
provision of the regulations governing affordable housing units the owner,
developer or tenant shall be subject to one or more of the following penalties, at the
discretion of the court:
a. A fine of not more than $1,000.00 or imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 90 days, or both. Each and every day that the violation continues or
exists shall be considered a separate and specific violation of these
provisions and not as a continuing offense;
b. In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low or moderate income
dwelling in violation of the regulations governing affordable housing units,
payment into the Township of Lawrence’s Affordable Housing Trust Fund
of the gross amount of rent illegally collected;
c. In the case of an owner who has rented his or her low or moderate income
unit in violation of the regulations governing affordable housing units,
payment of an innocent tenant's reasonable relocation costs, as determined
by the court.
2. The municipality may file a court action in the Superior Court seeking a judgment,
which would result in the termination of the Owner's equity or other interest in the
dwelling, in the nature of a mortgage foreclosure. Any judgment shall be
enforceable as if the same were a judgment of default of the first purchase money
mortgage and shall constitute a lien against the low and moderate-income unit.
3. Such judgment shall be enforceable, at the option of the municipality, by means of
an execution sale by the County Sheriff, at which time the low and moderate
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
424
income unit of the violating owner shall be sold at a sale price which is not less
than the amount necessary to fully satisfy and pay off any first purchase money
mortgage and prior liens and the costs of the enforcement proceedings incurred by
the municipality, including attorney's fees. The violating owner shall have the right
to possession terminated as well as the title conveyed pursuant to the Sheriff's sale.
C. The proceeds of the Sheriff's sale shall first be applied to satisfy the first purchase money
mortgage lien upon the dwelling and any prior liens on the dwelling. The excess, if any,
shall be applied to reimburse the Township for any and all costs and expenses incurred in
connection with either the court action resulting in the judgment of violation or the sheriff's
sale. In the event that the proceeds from the Sheriff's sale are insufficient to reimburse the
Township in full as aforesaid, the violating owner shall be personally responsible for the
deficiency, in addition to any and all costs incurred by the Township in connection with
collecting said deficiency. The remainder, if any, up to a maximum of the amount the
owner would be entitled to if he or she were to sell the dwelling as permitted by N.J.S.A.
5:80-26.1 et seq., shall be placed in escrow by the Township for the owner and shall be held
in such escrow for a period of two years or until such time as the owner shall make a claim
with the Township for the same. Failure of the owner to claim said sum within the two-year
period shall automatically result in a forfeiture of said remainder to the municipality and
paid into the Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Any interest accrued or earned on the
remainder while being held in escrow shall belong to and shall be paid to the Lawrence
Township Affordable Housing Fund whether the remainder is paid to the owner or forfeited
to the Township. Any excess funds derived over and above the sum due the owner shall be
paid over to the Township's Affordable Housing Trust Fund.
D. Foreclosure by the municipality due to violation of the regulations governing affordable
housing units shall not extinguish the restrictions of the regulations governing affordable
housing units as the same apply to the low and moderate income unit. Title shall be
conveyed to the purchaser at the Sheriff's sale, subject to the restrictions and provisions of
the regulations governing the affordable housing dwelling. The owner determined to be in
violation of the provisions of this plan and from whom title and possession were taken by
means of the Sheriff's sale shall not be entitled to any right of redemption.
E. If there are no bidders at the Sheriff's sale, or if insufficient amounts are bid to satisfy the
first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens, the municipality may acquire title to the
low and moderate income unit by satisfying the first purchase money mortgage and any
prior liens and crediting the violating owner with an amount equal to the difference
between the first purchase money mortgage and any prior liens and costs of the
enforcement proceedings, including legal fees and the maximum resale price for which the
low and moderate income unit could have been sold under the terms of the regulations
governing affordable housing units. This excess shall be treated in the same manner as the
excess which would have been realized from an actual sale as previously described.
F. Failure of the low and moderate income unit to be either sold at the Sheriff's sale or
acquired by the municipality shall obligate the owner to accept an offer to purchase from
any qualified purchaser which may be referred to the owner by the municipality, with such
offer to purchase being equal to the maximum resale price of the low and moderate income
unit as permitted by the regulations governing affordable housing units.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
425
G. The owner shall remain fully obligated, responsible and liable for complying with the terms
and restrictions of governing affordable housing units until such time as title is conveyed
from the owner.
H. Right to Cure. The Township may, at its option, advance and pay all sums necessary to
protect, preserve and retain the dwelling as an affordable dwelling, subject to the terms of
this Article. All sums so advanced and paid by the Township shall become a lien against said
dwelling and shall have a higher priority than any lien except the first purchase money
mortgage lien and liens by duly authorized government agencies. Such sums may include but
are not limited to insurance premiums, taxes, assessments (public or private) and costs of
repair necessary to bring the dwelling up to any and all applicable local, state or federal
codes and liens which may be or become prior and senior to any first purchase money
mortgage as a lien on the dwelling or any part thereof. If, in the event of a default or
nonpayment by the owner of an affordable dwelling, any first mortgagee or other creditor of
an owner of an affordable dwelling exercises its contractual or legal remedies available, the
owner shall notify the Administrative Agent and the Township Solicitor of the Township, in
writing, within 10 days of notification by the first mortgagee or creditor and no later than 10
days after service of any summons and complaint, and the Township shall have the option to
purchase, redeem or cure any default upon such terms and conditions as may be agreeable to
all parties in interest and/or to acquire the first purchase money mortgage to the dwelling,
thereby replacing the first mortgagee as the first mortgagee of the dwelling. The Township
shall have the same priority of lien as was held by the first mortgagee at the time the
Township acquires such first purchase money mortgage and shall have the right of
subrogation with respect to any other claim or lien it satisfies or acquires.
I. Provisions for First Purchase Money Mortgagees.
1. The terms and restrictions of this section shall be subordinate only to a first purchase
money mortgage lien on any affordable dwelling and in no way shall impair the first
mortgagee's ability to exercise the contract remedies available to it in the event of
default as set forth in the first purchase money mortgage. The first mortgagee and/or
mortgage servicer shall serve written notice upon the Township within 10 days after
the first purchase money mortgage is two months in arrears and again within 10
calendar days of the filing of a complaint seeking foreclosure of the first purchase
money mortgage held on an affordable dwelling. However, a judgment of
foreclosure upon the property shall in no instance terminate the conditions and
requirements of this Article maintaining the dwelling as an affordable, incomerestricted
residence.
2. The obligation of the first mortgagee and servicer to notify the Township shall cease
automatically and immediately upon the sale of the first purchase money mortgage
to the Federal National Mortgage Association or in the secondary mortgage market,
unless the rules and regulations or guidelines of the Federal National Mortgage
Association are amended so as to not prohibit or exclude placing such obligation
upon the holder of the mortgage or its service representative, in which case, an
instrument duly evidencing the same shall be recorded with the Register of Deeds,
Mercer County, New Jersey, before any such obligation shall exist. Provided that the
first mortgagee is obligated to give the Township the above-mentioned notices, the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County 1000 -1012
426
first mortgagee shall also serve written notice of any proposed foreclosure sale upon
the Township at least 30 days prior to the first scheduled date of such sale. The first
mortgagee shall serve notice upon the Township within 30 days of the sale of the
first purchase money mortgage to the Federal National Mortgage Association or in
the secondary mortgage market.
3. The Township of Lawrence or any instrumentality designated by the Township shall
have the right to purchase any mortgage which is in default at any time prior to the
entry of a foreclosure judgment or within the redemption period thereafter.
Notification of a default and of the institution of a foreclosure action and of a
sheriff's sale shall be served, in writing, upon the Township Clerk and Municipal
Attorney. The Township of Lawrence shall at all times be considered a party in
interest and shall have the right to be joined as a party defendant and/or shall have
the right to intervene in any foreclosure action seeking foreclosure of a first
mortgage and/or shall have the right to redeem and acquire the owner's equity of
redemption or to acquire the dwelling from the owner upon such terms and
conditions as may be determined by the Township.
4. Surplus funds. In the event of a foreclosure sale by the holder of the first purchase
money mortgage, the owner shall be personally obligated to pay to the Township
any excess funds, but only to the extent that such excess funds exceed the difference
between what the owner could have resold his dwelling for under this Article at the
time of the foreclosure sale and the amount necessary to redeem and satisfy the first
purchase money mortgage debt, including costs of foreclosure and costs of repairs
necessary to bring the dwelling up to any and all applicable local, state or federal
codes. For the purposes of this subsection, excess funds shall be the total paid to the
sheriff in excess of the amount required to pay and satisfy the first purchase money
mortgage, including the costs of foreclosure, even if junior creditors actually receive
payment from said surplus funds to the exclusion of the owner. The Township is
hereby given a first priority lien, second only to the first mortgagee for any taxes or
public assessments by a duly authorized governmental body up to the full amount of
excess funds. This obligation of the owner to pay this full amount to the Township
shall be deemed to be a personal obligation of the owner of record at the time of the
foreclosure sale, and the Township is hereby empowered to enforce this obligation
in any appropriate court of law or equity as though the same were a personal
contractual obligation of the owner. Neither the first mortgagee nor the purchaser at
the foreclosure sale shall be responsible or liable to the Township for any portion of
this excess. The Township shall deposit any funds received in the Affordable
Housing Trust Fund and use it for the purposes as set forth in the Housing Element
and Fair Share Plan.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §1100 - 1116
427
ARTICLE XI
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
§ 1100 Purpose.
The purpose of this Article is to:
A. Safeguard the heritage of the Township of Lawrence by preserving the integrity of the
historic centers of Lawrenceville, Port Mercer, and the Delaware and Raritan Canal which
are listed on the State and Federal Registers of Historic Places, and other local landmarks
which reflect elements of its cultural, social, economic, and architectural history;
B. Preserve the integrity of the design of buildings, streetscapes and landscapes within the Main
Street Historic District and on those landmarks located outside of the districts;
C. Promote the Main Street Historic District, Delaware and Raritan Canal Historic District and
other landmarks as an essential element of municipal character and identity;
D. Foster civic beauty, and
E. Promote the use of the Historic Districts and on those landmarks located outside of the
districts for the education, pleasure, and general welfare of the citizens of the municipality
and visitors thereto.
§ 1101 Establishment of Historic Preservation Regulations.
The regulations established in this Article, while furthering the purposes of both the Municipal Land
Use Law, N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and the Uniform Construction Code Act, N.J.S.A. 54:27D-119 et
seq., should be viewed as having an independent basis under N.J.S.A. 40:48-2. This Article, in
conjunction with §604, is intended to meet the requirements of N.J.S.A. 40:55D-107 through -112.
§ 1102 Designation of Historic Landmarks.
A. Authority. The Historic Preservation Advisory Committee shall consider for inclusion in the
Main Street Historic District or as a landmark outside of a district, the designation of
buildings, structures, objects, sites and additional districts within the municipality which
merit landmark designation and protection of possessing integrity of location, design, setting,
materials, workmanship or association, as defined herein.
B. Criteria for Designation. Designation as an historic site or for inclusion in an historic district
shall be based upon the following criteria:
1. It is of particular historic significance to the Township of Lawrence by reflecting or
exemplifying the broad cultural, political, economic, or social history of the Nation,
State, or community; or
2. Associated with historic personages important in National, State, or local history; or
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §1100 - 1116
428
3. The site of a historic event which had a significant effect on the development of the
Nation, State, or Lawrence Township; or
4. An embodiment of the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of
architecture or engineering; or
5. Representative of the work of an important builder, designer, artist, or architect; or
6. Significant for containing elements of design, detail, materials or craftsmanship
which represent a significant innovation; or
7. Able or likely to yield information important in pre-history or history.
C. Compilation of Landmarks. Based on its review or upon the recommendation of other
municipal bodies, the Township Historian, or of concerned citizens, the Historic Preservation
Advisory Committee shall make a list of landmarks recommended for designation. For each
landmark, there shall be a brief description of the historic landmark, of the landmark's
significance pursuant to the criteria in subsection -B, a description of the landmark's location
and boundaries, and a map siting. The Historic Preservation Advisory Committee shall by
certified mail:
1. Notify each owner that his or her property is being considered for historic landmark
designation and the reasons therefore.
2. Advise each owner of the significance and consequences of such designation, and
advise him or her of his or her opportunities and rights to challenge or contest such
designation.
3. Notice each owner of the public meeting to be held in accordance with subsection -
D below.
4. Send the proposed list and recommendations to the Township Historian for advice
and comments.
D. Hearing Required. The list of potential landmarks as well as the description, significance,
location, boundaries and map siting of each, shall be subject to review at a Historic
Preservation Advisory Committee public hearing. At least 10 days before such a hearing, a
preliminary list and a map showing proposed landmarks shall be published together with
notice of the hearing, in an official newspaper of the municipality. At the hearing, interested
persons shall be entitled to present their opinions, suggestions, and objections on the
proposed recommendations for landmark designation. The Historic Preservation Advisory
Committee shall then vote on its recommendations to the Planning Board for resources to be
designated as local landmarks.
E. Report of Findings. The Historic Preservation Advisory Committee shall prepare a concise
report of its recommendations for sites to be designated as historic landmarks. Copies of the
report shall be delivered to the Planning Board, Township Historian and the municipal clerk
and a notice of the action published by the Historic Preservation Advisory Committee
secretary in an official newspaper of the municipality. The Township Historian may submit
a separate report on the proposed list of recommendations for designation of historic districts
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §1100 - 1116
429
or landmarks for consideration by the Planning Board. The published notice shall state the
Historic Preservation Advisory Committee's recommendations, that designation shall be
made by the Planning Board at a public hearing specified on a date not less than 15 nor more
than 45 days from the date of publication.
F. Planning Board Recommendation. Determination that landmark status exists shall be made
by the Planning Board in accordance with subsection -E above. Within 7 days of the
creation of landmark status, the Planning Board shall by certified mail notify the owner of
the property involved of the determination. The notice shall also indicate the process for
appeal to the Township Council. A member of the public may seek to appeal the status
directly to the Township Council upon giving notice to (1) the owners and persons of record
as objecting thereto, and (2) the Planning Board. Such appeal shall be made within 45 days
of the Planning Board's determination and the Township Council shall have the power to
either affirm, modify or vacate the decision of the Planning Board as it deems proper.
G. Establishment of Historic Designation. After Planning Board review and approval, the list of
designated landmarks and a map shall be submitted to the municipal clerk for review by the
Township Council. The Township Council shall then consider the designation list and map
and may approve, reject or modify same by ordinance. Once adopted, the designation list
and map may be amended in the same manner in which it was adopted. Upon adoption, the
designation list and map shall also be incorporated by reference into the municipal master
plan and zoning ordinance as required by the State enabling legislation.
H. Recording of Historic Status. Copies of the designation list and official map as adopted shall
be made public and distributed to all municipal agencies reviewing development applications
and building permits. A certificate of designation shall be sent by certified and regular mail
to each owner included in the list and filed with the county clerk for recording in the same
manner as a certificate of lien upon real property.
I. Historic Districts Map. The Main Street Historic District and Historic Landmarks not in the
district are depicted on the Community Facilities Map of the Master Plan dated June 14,
1995 as it may be amended or superseded. While not so identified on the municipal map, the
Delaware and Raritan Canal is an historic district administered through a state agency, the
Delaware and Raritan Canal Commission.
§ 1103 Actions Requiring Review by the Historic Preservation
Advisory Committee.
A. Review Required. All building permits and development applications that affect a historic
landmark or an improvement within a historic district, with the exception of the Delaware
and Raritan Canal district, shall be reviewed by the Historic Preservation Advisory
Committee. Review shall be required for, but not limited to, the following actions:
1. Demolition of a historic landmark or of an improvement within a historic district.
2. Relocation of any improvement within a historic district or of any historic landmark.
3. Change in the exterior appearance of any improvement within a historic district or of
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §1100 - 1116
430
any historic landmark by addition, alteration or replacement.
4. Any new construction of an improvement in a historic district.
5. Changes in, or addition of, signs or exterior lighting for a historic landmark or an
improvement within a historic district.
6. Site plans or subdivisions affecting a historic landmark or an improvement within a
historic district.
7. Zoning variances affecting a historic landmark or an improvement within a historic
district.
§ 1104 Emergency Actions.
Approval by the Historic Preservation Advisory Committee is not required when a historic landmark
requires immediate and emergency repair to preserve the continued habitability of the landmark
and/or the health and safety of its occupants or others. Emergency repairs may be performed in
accordance with municipal codes, without the necessity of first obtaining the Historic Preservation
Advisory Committee's review. Under such circumstances, the repairs performed shall be only such
as are necessary to protect the health and safety of the occupants of the historic landmark, or others,
and/or to maintain the habitability of the structure. A request for the Historic Preservation Advisory
Committee's approval shall be made as soon as possible and no further work shall be performed upon
the structure until an appropriate request for approval is made and obtained in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this Ordinance. All work done under this section shall conform to the criteria
set forth in §1111 and §1112 and the guidelines for review of applications as adopted by the Planning
Board in accordance with Article VIII of this Ordinance.
§ 1105 Referral of Development and Permit Applications to the
Historic Preservation Advisory Committee.
A. Development Application. For any development application affecting a historic landmark or
an improvement within a historic district which is submitted to the Planning Board or Zoning
Board of Adjustment, the Administrative Officer shall forward a copy of the application to
the Historic Preservation Advisory Committee and the Township Historian. The Historic
Preservation Advisory Committee may provide recommendations to the appropriate Board.
The Township Historian may provide separate recommendations and comments to the Board
or concur with the HPAC. Said recommendations shall be in the form of a written report
which is orally conveyed to the Board through the Historic Preservation Advisory
Committee's delegate at a hearing on the application.
B. Building Permit. For any building permit application affecting a historic landmark or an
improvement within a historic district, the construction official shall forward a copy of the
application for review of the proposed undertaking to the Historic Preservation Advisory
Committee in accordance with the procedures outlined in §1106. This includes, but is not
limited to, permits for new construction, demolition, alterations, additions, repairs or
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §1100 - 1116
431
replacements affecting a historic landmark or an improvement within a historic district. The
Historic Preservation Advisory Committee shall provide a directive to the construction
official in accordance with §1107.
§ 1106 Review of Development Applications.
A. Completeness. Copies of development applications shall be reviewed by the Historic
Preservation Advisory Committee for completeness of the information received. Where
there is insufficient information, the application shall be returned to the referring body within
30 days of submission with specific written comments as to what information is needed for
the Historic Preservation Advisory Committee to render an opinion on the effect of the
project on historic landmarks.
B. Report Issuance. Where the information in the development application is sufficient to
render an opinion, the Historic Preservation Advisory Committee shall provide advice
through the preparation of a written report and oral testimony on the application by its
delegate at the referring body's public hearing. The Historic Preservation Advisory
Committee's recommendations shall focus on how the proposed undertaking would affect a
landmark's historic or architectural significance in light of the review criteria outlines in
§1109, §1110 and §1111 of this Ordinance.
C. Review by Board of Jurisdiction. In considering the Historic Preservation Advisory
Committee's recommendations, the Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment shall
be guided by the review criteria established in §1109, §1110 and §1111.
§ 1107 Review of Permit Applications.
A. The Historic Preservation Advisory Committee shall devise all necessary forms for its
review and decision making actions.
B. The Historic Preservation Advisory Committee or its designee shall review the application
for technical completeness. Any application found to be incomplete shall be returned to the
applicant within 10 days of the receipt of the application.
C. When an application is found to be technically complete, the Historic Preservation Advisory
Committee shall schedule a review of the application at is next regularly scheduled meeting.
The applicant shall be notified of the meeting date and shall be allowed an opportunity to
speak at the meeting.
D. The Historic Preservation Advisory Committee shall report to the construction official within
45 days of the receipt of a complete application. The report shall include a directive to
approve, deny, or conditionally approve the requested building permit and shall explain in
writing the reasons for the recommendation.
E. If an application involves demolition or removal, the Historic Preservation Advisory
Committee's directive shall specifically include whether the permit is to be denied or
postponed. If a postponement is imposed, the Historic Preservation Advisory Committee
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §1100 - 1116
432
shall work with the applicant during the postponement period to undertake such investigation
and take such actions as are necessary to consider alternatives to demolition.
F. If within the 45 day period, the Historic Preservation Advisory Committee recommends to
the construction official against the issuance of a permit or recommends conditions to the
permit to be issued, the construction official shall deny issuance of the permit or include the
conditions in the permit, as the case may be. Failure to report within the 45 day period shall
be deemed to constitute a report in favor of issuance of the permit and without the
recommendations of conditions to the permit.
§ 1108 Effect of Project Approval, Denial, Appeal.
A. Approval. Action by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment for approval of a
development application or issuance by the construction official of a building permit shall be
deemed to be final approval pursuant to this Ordinance. Such approval shall neither cause
nor prevent the filing of any collateral application or other proceeding required by any other
municipal ordinance to be made prior to undertaking the action requested concerning the
landmark or improvement in a historic district.
B. Denial. Denial of approval for a development application or of a building permit shall be
deemed to bar the applicant from undertaking the activity which would affect the landmark
or improvement in a historic district which was the subject of the denied application.
C. Postponement of Demolition. The Planning Board, upon affirmative vote of two-thirds of its
full membership, may postpone demolition of a landmark for up to one year. No municipal
official shall issue a demolition permit for a landmark without approval from the Planning
Board. If the Planning Board determines to postpone demolitions, it shall promptly initiate
such actions as may lead to the preservation of the premises within the one year hiatus.
§ 1109 Demolitions.
The following conditions and criteria shall be considered in the review of any application for
demolition of structures under the purview of this Article:
A. Its historic, architectural, cultural or scenic significance in relation to the criteria established
in §1102.
B. If it is within a historic district, its significance to the district as a key, contributing, or
noncontributing resource and the probable impact of its removal on the district.
C. Its potential for use for those purposes currently permitted by the Land Use Ordinance.
D. Its structural condition and the economic feasibility of alternatives to the proposal.
E. Its importance to the municipality and the extent to which its historical or architectural value
is such that its removal would be detrimental to the public interest.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §1100 - 1116
433
F. The extent to which it is of such old, unusual or uncommon design, craftsmanship, texture or
material that could not be reproduced or could be reproduced only with great difficulty and
expense.
G. The extent to which its retention would promote the general welfare by maintaining and
increasing the real estate values, generating business, creating new jobs, attracting tourists,
students, writers, historians, artists and artisans; attracting new residents, encouraging study
and interest in American history, New Jersey history and the history of the municipality;
stimulating interest and study in architecture and design, educating citizens in American
culture and heritage, or making the municipality a more attractive and desirable place in
which to live.
H. Buildings that are approved for demolition shall be recorded by photographic and
videographic means prior to demolition or the removal of any artifacts from the building or
site. The interior of each space, the exterior of the building and the grounds shall be
documented. A report on the building and grounds explaining the visual documentation and
its significance shall be submitted by a qualified architectural historian as part of the
permanent historical record of the Township at the expense of the applicant.
§ 1110 Moving Structures.
The following conditions and criteria shall be considered in the review of any application for the
moving of structures under the purview of this Article:
A. The historic loss to the site of original location and the historic district as a whole.
B. The compelling reasons for not retaining the landmark or structure at its present site.
C. The compatibility, nature and character of the current and of the proposed surrounding areas
as they relate to the protection of interest and values referred to in this Ordinance.
D. The probability of significant damage to the landmark or structure itself.
E. If it is to be removed from the municipality, the proximity of the proposed new location to
the municipality, including the accessibility to the residents of the municipality and other
citizens.
F. If the proposed new location is within a district, visual compatibility factors as set forth in
§1113.B.
G. The historic site shall be documented as required in §1109.G.
§ 1111 Historic Criteria.
In regard to an application for any approval or proposed action as set forth herein, the following
matters shall be considered:
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §1100 - 1116
434
A. The impact of the proposed change on its historic and architectural significance as defined in
this Article.
B. Its importance to the municipality and the extent to which its historic or architectural interest
would be adversely affected to the detriment of the public interest.
C. The extent to which there would be the involvement of textures and materials that could not
be reproduced or could be reproduced only with great difficulty and expense.
D. The use of any structure involved.
E. The extent to which the proposed action would adversely affect the public's view of a
landmark or structure within a historic district from a public street.
F. If the application deals with a structure within a historic district, the impact the proposed
change would have on its character and ambiance and the structure's visual compatibility
with the buildings, places and structures to which it would be visually related in terms of the
visual compatibility factors set forth herein.
§ 1112 Standards for Rehabilitation and Adaptive Reuse.
A. A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires
minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and environment.
B. The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of historic
materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided.
C. Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes
that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or
architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken.
D. Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in
their own right shall be retained and preserved.
E. Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that
characterize a property shall be preserved.
F. Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of
deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the
old in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials.
Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical, or pictorial
evidence.
G. Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic
materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be
undertaken with the gentlest means possible.
H. Significant archaeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and preserved.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §1100 - 1116
435
If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
I. New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy historic
materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old
and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the
historic integrity of the property and its environment.
J. New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner
that if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its
environment would be unimpaired.
K. Some exterior and interior alterations to historic buildings are generally need to assure its
continued use, but it is most important that such alterations do not radically change, obscure,
or destroy character defining spaces, materials, features or finishes.
L. The construction of an exterior addition to an historic building for a new use should be
avoided and shall be considered only after it is determined that the space needs of the new
use cannot be met through altering secondary, non-character defining, interior spaces.
M. Where an application for extensive rehabilitation or adaptive reuse is proposed, the applicant
shall submit a report by an architectural historian whose qualifications are accepted by the
HPAC. The portions of the building(s) and grounds that are proposed for rehabilitation or
adaptive reuse shall be recorded by photographic and videographic means prior to the
alteration of any artifacts from the building or site. A report on the building and grounds
explaining the visual documentation and its significance shall be submitted by the qualified
architectural historian as part of the permanent historical record of the Township at the
expense of the applicant. The HPAC shall recommend to the Board of Jurisdiction any
portions of the building or areas of the grounds for historic preservation easements, including
but not limited to facade and interior easements. Such easement shall give the HPAC or
other person or agency as designated by Township Council the right of inspection of
easements to monitor compliance with the covenants of the easement.
§ 1113 Design Elements and Additional Criteria.
A. Minimum Consideration. The criteria considered in this section shall be the minimum basis
for action by the HPAC. Any other pertinent information related to the historic nature of the
building and site may be considered.
B. Buildings and Structures. The following guidelines shall be considered by the applicable
agency in the review of any matter concerning structures in the Main Street Historic District
or a Historic Landmark not in the district.
1. Height. The height of the proposed building shall be visually compatible with
adjacent buildings.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §1100 - 1116
436
2. Proportion of the building's front facade. The relationship of the width of the
building to the height of the front elevation shall be visually compatible with
buildings and places to which it is visually related.
3. Proportion of openings within the facility. The relationship of the width of windows
to the height of windows in a building shall be visually compatible with the
buildings and places to which it is visually related.
4. Rhythm of solids to voids on facades fronting on public places. The relationship of
solids to voids in such facades of a building shall be visually compatible with the
buildings and places to which it is visually related.
5. Rhythm of Spacing of Buildings on Streets. The relationship of the building to the
open space between it and adjoining buildings shall be visually compatible with the
buildings and places to which it is visually related.
6. Relationship of materials, textures, and color. The relationship of materials, texture
and color of the facade and roof of a building shall be visually compatible with the
predominant materials used in the building to which it is visually related.
7. Roof shape. The roof shape of a building shall be visually compatible with
buildings to which it is visually related.
8. Walls of continuity. Appurtenances of a building such as walls, open-type fencing,
evergreens, landscape masses, shall form cohesive walls of enclosure along a street,
to the extent necessary to maintain visual compatibility of the building with the
buildings and places to which it is visually related.
9. Scale of building. The size of a building, the mass of a building in relationship to
open spaces, the windows, door openings, porches and balconies shall be compatible
with the buildings and places to which it is visually related.
10. Directional expression of front elevation. The building shall be visually compatible
with the buildings and places to which it is visually related in its dimensional
character, whether this be vertical character, horizontal character or nondirectional
character.
C. Building Site. The landscape surrounding an historic building contributes to the overall
character of the building, and if within a district, to the whole area. The building site may be
significant in its own right or derive its significance from an historic building. The following
shall be considered in reviewing alterations to the historic building site:
1. Site elements. The site's related elements such as lighting, fences, signs, sidewalks
and furnishing; decorative elements such as statuary or monuments, shall be
compatible with the features of those structures which is visually related to and shall
be appropriate for the historic period for which the building is significant.
2. Vegetation. The type and nature of the landscape, plantings, materials, and forms.
If designed, the importance of the designer and the design in the integration of the
historic building and its site.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §1100 - 1116
437
3. Landforms. The terracing, berming, or grading of the site, including driveways,
walks, paths, and other circulatory elements.
4. Water features. The integration of natural and man-made water features such as
streams and water bodies, fountains, and reflecting pools.
§ 1114 Penalties.
A. Any person who shall undertake an activity which affects a historic landmark or an
improvement within a historic district, and which requires a building permit, without
obtaining the review of the Historic Preservation Advisory Committee, shall be deemed to be
in violation of this Ordinance.
B. Upon learning of the violation, the zoning officer shall personally serve notice or send by
certified mail a citation to the owner of the lot whereon the violations occurred describing the
violation in detail. The owner shall be given 10 days to abate the violation by restoring the
landmark or improvement to the condition it was in prior to the violation occurring. If the
owner cannot be personally served with the citation, a copy shall also be posted on the site.
C. In the event that the violation is not abated within 10 days of service or posting on site,
whichever is earlier, the zoning officer shall cause to be issued a summons and complaint,
returnable in the municipal court, charging violation of this Ordinance and specifying the
wrongful conduct of the violator. Each separate day the violation exists shall be deemed to
be a new and separate violation of this Ordinance.
D. The penalty for violation shall be as otherwise provided for in this Ordinance where each and
every day shall constitute a separate offense.
E. If any person shall undertake any activity requiring a building permit and affecting a historic
landmark of any improvement within a historic district without first having obtained
approval, he or she shall be required to immediately stop the activity, apply for approval, and
take any necessary measures to preserve the landmarks affected pending a decision. If the
project is denied, he or she shall immediately restore the landmark to its pre-activity status.
The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to seek injunctive relief regarding a stop action on
restoration in the Superior Court, Chancery Division, not less than 10 days after the delivery
of notice pursuant to subsection -B above. Such injunctive relief shall be in addition to the
penalties authorized under subsection -D above.
F. In the event that any action which would permanently affect a historic landmark or historic
district, or a demolition to remove the landmark is about to occur without approval having
been issued, the Zoning Officer is empowered to apply to the Superior Court of New Jersey
for injunctive relief as is necessary to prevent such actions.
§ 1115 Use of Detection Devices.
A. No persons shall use any electrical, mechanical or other detection-type device to locate
objects in or on any municipal owned historic landmark or improvement within a historic
district without giving written notice, as set forth below, to the municipal clerk and the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §1100 - 1116
438
Historic Preservation Advisory Committee.
B. The written notice of the intent to use such a detection device shall set forth the name and
address of the person giving notice as well as the names and addresses of all persons
involved in the on-site use and shall set forth the date each use will occur and whether any
business, club or other organization is involved.
C. The written notice of the intent to use such a detection device shall be delivered as least 5
days in advance of the use and no use shall occur, unless otherwise expressly permitted,
other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.
D. For each and every violation of any of the acts described in this section, the violator shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $500.00.
§ 1116 Notice of Historic Status in Contracts for Sale.
A copy of this Article shall be included in all contracts of sale for any designated landmarks.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §1200 - 1205
439
ARTICLE XII
ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT,
VIOLATIONS, AND PENALTIES
[Ord. 2143-13, 1/8/13]
§ 1200 Administration.
These rules, regulations and standards shall be considered the minimum requirements for the
protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the municipality. Any action
taken by the municipality under the terms of this Ordinance shall give primary consideration to the
abovementioned matters and to the welfare of the entire community.
§ 1201 Enforcement.
A. The Zoning Officer and Construction Official of the municipality, as established by the
Administrative Code of the Township of Lawrence, shall administer and enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance. The duties of the Zoning Officer shall include the following:
1. The issuance of zoning permits pursuant to §1202;
2. The issuance of non-conforming use certificates pursuant to the time limitation of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-68;
3. Receipt of an appeal of the decision by the Zoning Officer made in the enforcement
of the Ordinance and Zoning Map pursuant to N.J.S.A. 40:55D-72;
4. Investigate allegations of the use of property in contravention of this Ordinance,
whether by his or her own cognizance, referral by municipal office or outside
agency and/or complaint.
5. Cause citations to be issued alleging violations of this Ordinance and assist the
Municipal Prosecutor in bringing such complaints before Municipal Court.
6. Other matters of a similar nature as directed by the Township Manager.
B. When Required. Precedent to the issuance of a permit pursuant to the State Uniform
Construction Code (N.J.S.A. 52:27D-123, et seq.) for the erection, construction, alteration,
repair, remodeling, conversion, removal or destruction of any building or structure; and the
use or occupancy of any building, structure or land, the Zoning Officer shall determine that
their respective conditions comport with each of the following, as applicable:
1. The requirements of this Ordinance; or
2. Through the grant of a duly authorized variance by the Board of Jurisdiction; or
3. Through the grant of a duly authorized design or performance exception by the
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §1200 - 1205
440
Board of Jurisdiction; or
4. Through the approval or approval with conditions of a zoning permit in accordance
with §1202.
C. It shall be the duty of the Construction Official to keep a record of all applications and all
construction permits which are either issued or denied, with notations of any conditions
involved, which data shall form a part of the municipality’s public records. A monthly
report of construction permits issued shall be filed with the municipal tax assessor.
§ 1202 Zoning Permit.
A. Forms and Application. The Zoning Officer shall cause to be made the form and substance
of the zoning permit. Generally, the zoning permit shall require the disclosure of the
applicant’s name, address, telephone number, email address and the name, address,
telephone number and email address of the land owner, if different from the applicant.
Additionally, the zoning permit shall contain the street address of the property in question,
block and lot number from the Township of Lawrence tax assessment maps, zoning district
designation, dimensions of all principal and accessory buildings, structures of note, the
activities to be conducted in each of the buildings or upon the property, if such use of the
property is being conducted as a non-conforming use, and if the premises have been the
subject of any prior application to the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Adjustment. The
Zoning Officer may require additional information to be disclosed as required to fulfill his or
her duties. Specialized forms of the zoning permit, as described hereunder, may require
additional submittal of information.
B. Requirements Precedent to the Issuance of a Zoning Permit.
1. No zoning permit shall be issued for any use or structure until site plan, subdivision
and variance approvals and approvals with conditions, as may be necessary, have
been granted by the Board of Jurisdiction in accordance with the provisions of
N.J.S.A. 40:55D-1 et seq., and until all due and payable review and inspection fees
and all local taxes and assessments on the property have been paid.
2. No zoning permit shall be issued without the approval of any agency of any local,
county, state or federal government having jurisdiction over the proposed use or
structure, unless such agency approval is a function of the duties and responsibilities
of the Lawrence Township Construction Code Official.
3. No application for a zoning permit for any structure or for any addition, alteration,
demolition or change to an existing structure which is listed on the State Register of
Historic Places, National Register of Historic Places or any such local historic
district or historic landmark as designated in the Historic Preservation Element of
the Master Plan (or which is the subject of a pending application for such listing),
shall be approved unless the plans for the requested alteration are in conformance
with the procedures and regulations of Article XI, Historic Preservation, of this
Ordinance.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §1200 - 1205
441
4. Lot grading and elevation plan. As a condition precedent to the issuance of a new
building permit, a proposed grading plan for each individual lot shall be submitted to
the Municipal Engineer for review and approval. The individual grading plan shall
conform to the requirements for plot plans in Lawrence Township's Engineering
Standards, last edition. A lot grading and elevation plan shall also be required
pursuant to §541.E.2. A proposed grading plan may be required for any building
addition or swimming pool that would change existing grades or drainage patterns,
or if reasonably requested by the Municipal Engineer.
5. Location plans/property surveys. Prior to issuance of a construction permit for a
building addition, deck, shed and/or swimming pool, a location plan showing
property line offsets shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer for review. The
Zoning Officer and the Municipal Engineer shall determine if a grading plan is
required. If required, this grading plan shall include the proposed improvement
footprint, proposed ground elevations and contours, sufficient to indicate no adverse
impact to adjoining neighboring properties.
C. Specialized Zoning Permits.
1. Business occupancy permit. Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy or
Continuing Certificate of Occupancy within an existing building, each business
establishment shall apply for and receive an approval from the Zoning Officer for
the change of use, change in business entity if the same use, or expansion within the
same building. This requirement shall apply only to such business establishments
that are physically occupying space they had not previously occupied. The Zoning
Officer shall cause to be made the form and substance of the business occupancy
permit setting forth the type of information to be submitted.
2. Sign permit. An application for a sign regulated by this Ordinance shall be as set
forth in §535.C.
3. Development permit (flood hazard areas) [Ord. 2236-16, 5/17/16]. A Development
Permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins, including
placement of manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard as
established in Chapter 8A, Flood Damage Prevention, of the Code of the Township
of Lawrence. Application for a Development Permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the Department of Engineering and shall include at a minimum the
following:
a. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including
basement) of all structures;
b. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been
floodproofed.
c. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the
floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the
floodproofing criteria in §8A-15.B of the Code of the Township of
Lawrence; and,
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §1200 - 1205
442
d. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development.
e. In addition, the following information may be required by the Zoning
Officer:
i. Plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and elevations of the area in question;
ii. Existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials,
drainage facilities; and
iii. The location of the foregoing.
D. Issuance of Permit. A zoning permit granting the application, granting with conditions, or
denying the application shall be issued within ten (10) business days of receipt of the request.
Business days shall mean Monday through Friday, excluding legal holidays and furlough
days. Any zoning permit may be denied by the Zoning Officer, or any permit issued may be
suspended or revoked by the Zoning Officer for any of the following causes:
1. The lack of the submission of complete information as required herein or on any
duly adopted form.
2. The applicant has filed an application containing materially false information.
3. The applicant has failed to comply with the regulations within this Ordinance.
4. The applicant has been convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating
the regulations within this Ordinance.
§ 1203 Certificate of Occupancy Precedents.
A. Requirements Precedent to the Issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. Prior to the
issuance of a Temporary Certificate of Occupancy and Certificate of Occupancy, pursuant
to N.J.A.C. 5:23-2.6 and -2.23, the following site work components and as-built drawings,
as applicable, shall be completed and submitted as required by the Zoning Officer, if
needed:
1. Soil certification:
a. A soil certification must be obtained from the Municipal Engineer prior to
the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. An as-built plan of site
improvements shall be submitted for review when the soil certification is
requested. The as-built grading plan shall be prepared by a land surveyor
licensed in the State of New Jersey in accordance with the Engineering
Department's Standards.
a. If site conditions do not warrant issuance of a permanent soil certification,
a temporary soil certification may be issued at the discretion of the
Municipal Engineer. If a temporary soil certification is issued, a bond for
permanent stabilization shall be submitted in accordance with the fee
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §1200 - 1205
443
schedule established by the Municipal Engineer.
b. If stabilization of the soil is not completed in accordance with a schedule
as approved by the Municipal Engineer, the performance guarantee held to
ensure such stabilization shall be forfeited upon 30 days written notice
from the Municipal Engineer and the funds used to complete the required
work.
2. As-built plan requirements. As required by §910 of this Ordinance.
3. Lot grading and elevation plan. Following the completion of all work, the
Municipal Engineer shall conduct a final inspection and notify the Construction
Code Official, in writing, whether the completed construction is in compliance
with the approved grading plan and that a temporary certificate of occupancy or a
certificate of occupancy may be issued. The Construction Code Official shall issue
the temporary certificate of occupancy or certificate of occupancy only if all
conditions for the approved lot grading plan and elevation plan have been satisfied.
§ 1204 Violations.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, moved or converted;
or any building, structure or land is used in violation of, or contrary to, the provisions of this
Ordinance, the municipality may institute an action to enjoin or take any other appropriate action or
proceeding to prevent such erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion or use.
However, nothing is this Ordinance shall be construed to restrict the right of any party to obtain a
review by any court of competent jurisdiction according to law.
§ 1205 Penalties.
A. Fines.
1. Any person, firm or corporation that shall violate any provisions of this Ordinance
shall, upon conviction thereof by any court authorized by law to hear and
determine the matter, be fined such sum not exceeding $500.00, as such court in its
discretion may impose; or, if the party so convicted be a natural person, such
person may be imprisoned for such term not exceeding 90 days, as such court in its
discretion may impose; or be fined a sum not exceeding $500.00, as such court in
its discretion may impose; or such natural person may be both imprisoned and
fined not exceeding the maximum limits set forth herein, as such court in its
discretion may impose. Each day that such violation exists shall constitute a
separate and equal offense.
2. The owner of any building or structure, lot or land, or part thereof, and/or the
tenant or occupant of any building or structure, lot or land, or part thereof, where
anything in violation of this Ordinance shall be placed or shall exist or be suffered,
allowed or permitted to exist; and any architect, builder, developer, contractor,
agent, person or corporation engaged in connection therewith and who assists in
the commission of any such violation, shall each be guilty of a separate violation,
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §1200 - 1205
444
and upon conviction thereof shall each be liable to the fine or imprisonment, or
both, specified above.
B. Selling Land Before Final Subdivision Approval.
1. If, before final subdivision approval has been granted, any person as owner or
agent, transfers or sells or agrees to transfer or sell any land which forms a part of a
subdivision for which municipal approval is required in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance, except pursuant to an agreement expressly
conditioned on final subdivision approval, such person shall be subject to a penalty
not to exceed $1,000.00, and each lot disposition so made may be deemed a
separate violation.
2. In addition to the foregoing, the municipality may institute and maintain a civil
action:
a. For injunctive relief; and
b. To set aside and invalidate any conveyance made pursuant to such a
contract or sale if a certificate of compliance has not been issued in
accordance with N.J.S.A. 40:55D-56.
3. In any such action, the transferee, purchaser or grantee shall be entitled to a lien
upon the portion of the land from which the subdivision was made that remains in
the possession of the subdivider or his or her assigns or successors, to secure the
return of any deposit made or purchase price paid, and also a reasonable search fee,
survey expense and title closing expense, if any. Any such action must be brought
within two years after the date of the recording of the instrument of transfer, sale
conveyance of said land, or within six years if unrecorded.
Land Use Ordinance
Lawrence Township, Mercer County §1300 - 1304
445
ARTICLE XIII
AMENDMENT, SEVERABILITY,
INTERPRETATION REPEALER, AND ENACTMENT
§ 1300 Amendments.
This Ordinance may be amended from time to time by the governing body after the appropriate
referrals, notices, hearings and other requirements of law.
§ 1301 Severability of Ordinance
If any portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid by a court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of this Chapter as a whole, or any
other part thereof.
§ 1302 Interpretation.
If the terms of this Ordinance shall be in conflict with those of another Ordinance of the Code of the
Township of Lawrence, then the restriction which imposes the greater limitation shall be enforced.
§ 1303 Repealer.
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances of the Township of Lawrence which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency only.
§ 1304 Enactment.
This Ordinance shall take effect on January 28, 1998 and upon the filing thereof with the Mercer
County Planning Board after final passage, adoption, and publication by the Township Council of the
Township of Lawrence in the manner prescribed by law.

